    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                     1989 C NO. 5925
    QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

                                          Royal Courts of Justice,

                                          Tuesday, 27th February 1 9 9 0 .
B
                                   Before:

                             MR. JUSTICE STEYN



                               JOAN CHAPMAN
                     (Widow and Administratrix of the
                Estate of Raymond Thomas Chapman deceased)
                                                                Plaintiff

                                    and

         (1)   THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
         (2)       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
D        (3)               SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
         (4)   EASTWOOD & PARTNERS (Consulting Engineers, a firm)
                                                          Defendants
                                    and

         (1)       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
         (2)    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS (Consulting Engineers, a firm)
                                                       Third Parties

    AND IN THE MATTER OF                              1989 R No. 7039

                             LINDA MARY RIMMER
                     (Widow and Administratrix of the
                  Estate of David George Rimmer deceased)
                                                                Plaintiff

                                    and

         (1)   THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
         (2)       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
         (3)               SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
         (4)   EASTWOOD & PARTNERS (Consulting Engineers, a firm)
                                                          De fendants
                                    and

         (1)      SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
         (2)   EASTWOOD & PARTNERS (Consulting Engineers, a firm)
                                                        Third Parties



H

                                                                             6!
MR. W.C. WOODWARD Q.C. and MR. R. PAYNE  (instructed by Messrs.
     Hammond Suddards, Bradford) appeared on behalf of the
     First Defendant.

MR. E. GLASGOW Q.C. and MR. S. CATCHPOLE (instructed by Messrs.
     Davies Arnold Cooper, London EC4) appeared on behalf of the
     Second Defendant.

MR. R. TOULSON Q.C. and MR. J. FENWICK (instructed by Messrs.
     Reynolds Porter Chamberlain, London WC1) appeared on behalf
     of the Fourth Defendant.

THE THIRD DEFENDANT was not present and not represented.

THE PLAINTIFF was not present and not represented.




                      NOTES OF PROCEEDINGS
    A
         MR. WOODWARD:   My Lord, together with my learned friend Mr.
              Payne I appear on behalf of the first defendant, the Chief
              Constable.     My learned friends Mr. Glasgow and Mr.
              Catchpole appear on behalf of the second defendant, the
              Club.    My learned friends Mr. Toulson and Mr. Fenwick
              appear on behalf of the fourth defendant, Dr. Eastwood.
              The third defendants are not present and are not
    B         represented, nor are the plaintiffs here.

                   May I indicate, if it is convenient, how we propose to
              proceed to enable these matters to be dealt with as
              expeditiously as possible.

                   It is proposed that we, on behalf of the Chief
              Constable, should begin and set out what it is that we are
f   c         about.   Thereafter my learned friend Mr. Toulson will make
              his submissions on behalf of Dr. Eastwood,    and then Mr.
              Glasgow will make his submissions on behalf of the second
              defendant.     We hope that is a convenient way of
              proceeding,  notwithstanding that the summonses are not in
              that sequence.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I did not actually find the summonses.
    D         Perhaps they are amongst the papers here.   I have read
              the rest of the papers.

         MR. TOULSON:   They are in file 1, flag 5.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  Thank you.   It might be convenient for you
              to know what I have read and what I have not read. ' I
              have read the pleadings in the one action, the Chapman
    E         case.   I have looked at the earlier orders and read the
              affidavit of Mr. Metcalf.    I have also looked at that
              letter he wrote on 21st December, but do not assume I
              have read any other papers.

         MR. WOODWARD: We are most obliged, my Lord.     In effect,   if I
              can summarise the position, my Lord will be familiar in the
              circumstances with some of the structure of these
    F         proceedings.   What happened was that the first defendant
              issued contribution notices in each action. That is in
              the Chapman and the Rimmer actions.     Those contribution
              notices were issued seeking a contribution from the second
              and fourth defendants in respect of such damages as the
              first defendant might be obliged to pay to the plaintiffs.
              To all intents and purposes the Chapman and the Rimmer
              actions are the same.  There is no material distinction to
    G         be drawn, save that the deaths giving rise to those actions
              happened at different places.

                   The first defendant, the Chief Constable, has entered
              into an arrangement with the Steering Committee acting on
              behalf of many of the victims who were injured at the
              Hillsborough incident.   There have been submitted in
    fl

                                          1
                                                                             ON




         *
      excess of 900 claims.   Some 45 of those have already been
      paid out.  They continue to arrive, and in excess of
      £100,000 has been paid to date.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  So that I can complete my own chronology,
     could you tell me what the date of the acceptance of
     liability to the victims of the disaster was?

MR. WOODWARD:  My Lord, there was a letter of 15th December.
     If my Lord wishes to see the text of what was entered
     into, it is to be found at page 80 in the white folder.         It
     is one of the exhibits to Mr. Metcalf's affidavit.

MR.   JUSTICE STEYN:   I just want to   have the sequence in mind.

MR. WOODWARD:  It is in the light of that letter that the
     compensation is being dealt with on behalf of the Chief
     Constable with the victims.   It was not an admission of
     liability: it was an agreement to pay compensation.

MR.   JUSTICE STEYN: I am sorry, I put it the   wrong way.

MR.   WOODWARD: My Lord, the second paragraph indicates:
       "Accordingly, without a decision as to liability and
       subject to the terms below, all bona fide claims for
       compensation by those injured and the dependants of those
       who died at the ground will be paid on a common law basis
       to be agreed...."

           The effect of the Chapman and Rimmer proceedings was
      to produce that result, and it enabled before Christmas of
      1989 those victims to Know that they would no longer have
      to worry about litigation, and they were relieved of that
      anxiety.  They got certainty, so far as it could be
      provided,  and the Chief Constable has satisfied (as I
      have indicated) a number of those claims.     They are in
      the process of being dealt with.  My Lord, that was an
      initiative taken by the Chief Constable, and it was a
      positive step taken by him.  He was not supported or
      assisted in that by any of the other parties.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  So that I can understand the matter in the
     round, can I ask you this. These two cases, the Chapman
     and Rimmer cases, have been treated as lead cases as it
     were, but they have been selected by the Steering Committee
     as two possible lead cases,  or were they selected by
     agreement? How did it come about?

MR. WOODWARD:   My Lord, they were selected not by agreement but
     by the Steering Committee, no doubt as a result of
     discussion of points that may have been made.    The two
     actions represent claims by the individuals I have
     indicated in separate pens at the football stadium on the
     terracing.
                                                                          On




                                   2
MR. JUSTICE STEYN: The reason for the two actions is because
     there are different issues as to causation and also
     different issues as to nervous shock and so forth?

MR. WOODWARD: My Lord, there will be issues as to liability,
     or there would have been issues as to liability.    There
     would have been issues as to causation.  There would have
     been issues then,  when it came to apportionment, as to the
     equitability or the apportionment between the parties, and
     the results might have been different for those two
     plaintiffs.   If my Lord looks at the third party notices
     that were served — or the contribution notices that were
     served — that which is against the Club is at page 91.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:    Yes, I   have read   those.

MR.   WOODWARD: That was seeking    indemnity in respect of the
       plaintiffs' claim.     The two were in the same form against
       the co-defendants.     My Lord, in our submission — and I
       will deal with it as I come to it in the course of my
       address — to describe them as "lead actions" may have
       been convenient for the plaintiffs and may have been
       convenient for the Steering Committee.   It nay be a
       shorthand that all parties at one time or another have
       fallen into using in respect of those two actions,
       because they identified those that were going on.

           In my submission, and I will deal with this in perhaps
      greater detail depending 'on to what extent I develop it at
      this stage, to regard them as "lead actions" may be
      misleading and lead one into the risk of error.

           My Lord, the issues that attach to the determination
      of the responsibility for the victims may vary
      considerably although those events which gave rise to the
      claims occurred on the same day.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Are these the only two actions that have
     been instituted? Are these the only two writs that have
 *   been issued or have there been a mass of writs?

MR. WOODWARD: To the best of our knowledge there have been
     about 20 writs in all issued, but we do not know whether
     writs have been issued but have not been served.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:    So 20 have been served.

MR. WOODWARD:  Our estimate is of that order.    My Lord, they
     are not all by the same plaintiffs' solicitors and not
     all in respect of individuals who were injured in the
     pens.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  Leaving aside the merit of this particular
     application today, of course it would have been possible



                                   3
                                                                      6
     for the Chief Constable to have made an application at
     any time to add other actions in order to be more
     representative and so that more of the issues could be
     disposed of.

MR. WOODWARD:  Indeed.    It would have been possible for the
     Chief Constable to make those applications.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Thereby converting the totality of those
     actions to be heard; proper lead actions in the usual
     sense,  taking into account the interests of both parties
     in relation to the selection of cases.

MR. WOODWARD: My Lord, probably what is required here is not a
     "lead action" but a contemplation or, so far as one can do
     it, all those circumstances in respect of which plaintiffs
     or individuals are making claims; to identify the issues
     and have determination of the issues enabling those matters
     to be concluded,  and not simply issues of fact but issues
     of apportionment.   Blameworthiness and equitability are
     factors that would have to be taken into account in that
     matter.    So, my Lord, the determination for finality
     requires not only determination of issues of fact, but
     requires exercising judgment as to culpability in respect
     of the situation.

          Whilst   we are on the point, since my Lord raises it,
     it is proper to note that the second and fourth
     defendants themselves recognise that in truth what we are
     about are not in effect "lead actions" and are not in
     effect actions which will determine the issues or give
     finality.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   But they say it will clear a   lot of ground.

MR. WOODWARD:   It will enable those issues which are relevant
     to be determined.     But given the nature of the incident
     giving rise to these claims,    and the number of claims,
     to go at it    piecemeal (even if the pursuit of these two
     actions now    would enable a number of factors to be
     determined) would,    in our submission,   be unsatisfactory.
     The Chief Constable would have to be permanently updating
     the permutations and would have to be constantly making
     applications to the court if this matter were to proceed
     and the application that we now make were to be
     dismissed.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: May I just ask you this.    Are you saying
     that these two actions would not be a suitable vehicle for
     the court to determine the relative culpability, if any,
     of the engineers and the Club, in the sense that within
     the scope of those two actions and the expert evidence led
     and the lay evidence and the Taylor Report and all that,
     the court will not be able to take a fairly definitive
              view as to the relative culpability,   if   any, of either of
              these defendants?

        MR.   WOODWARD: With respect,   it would go part way along the
               road because it would enable certain decisions and facts
               to be determined.   Those issues, if determined upon the
               full evidence — that would be a qualification with
B             which we will deal —     to provide finality and certainty
               and issue estoppel on those matters; it would have to be
               that there were no circumstances which would invalidate
               those findings.   They would not necessarily apply for all
               cases, even if all cases did in fact give rise to the
               same circumstances where the evidence might be different.

        MR.   JUSTICE STEYN: If it is    not technically an issue of
               estoppel I suppose the question might arise whether courts
               would allow substantially similar issues to be relitigated
               in other cases.

        MR. WOODWARD:   My Lord, there is law on that.

        MR.   JUSTICE STEYN:   I also have in mind — and I would like
               you to comment on it later in your speech if you find it
D             convenient — what the Master of the Rolls said about the
               procedures that ought to be devised in multi-party complex
               litigation, and how procedures may have to be adapted.
               It may arise in relation    to these applications.

        MR.   WOODWARD: Of course the court has a broad power in its
               discretion.   Indeed, the court has an obligation under
               section 49 of the Supreme Court Act to achieve finality.
               Section 49(2) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 can be found
               in volume 2 of the White Book at page 1395.

                   "49(2) Every such court shall give the same effect as
              hitherto      and, subject to the provisions of this or any
              other Act, shall so exercise its jurisdiction in every
              cause or matter before it as to secure that, as far as
              possible, all matters in dispute between the parties are
              completely and finally determined, and all multiplicity of
              legal proceedings with respect to any of those matters is
              avoided."

                   My Lord, it may be that in certain circumstances a
              court may say that once it has tried an issue and someone
              else comes back or another brain comes to it in slightly
              different circumstances, the court should say "We are not
              going to have this litigated again."     My Lord, that
              would have to depend upon the circumstances of the case
              whether or not that should be done, because it would be a
              severe course to take not to allow the relitigation where
              the circumstances permitted it.


H
    j


                                         5                                  57
           What has to be pursued if at all possible in the right
      way is finality; finality without prejudice; finality with
      fairness and, my Lord, finality which, if it can be
      achieved,  is finality with the right result.   To have
      finality in itself, my Lord, is of no benefit if it
      produces the wrong result.

           My Lord, the Chief Constable (the first defendant)
      has no incentive not to get this matter determined with
      the necessary finality and according to the three points
      that I have identified.    He is paying out.  He is funding
      the plaintiffs,  whom he has not required to come to court
      and go through the technicalities.   A broadbrush stroke
      is plainly being taken, as can be seen from that letter.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: He considers — am I right in thinking —
     that there should be a logical progression here. I assume
     that the criminal proceedings come first.

MR. WOODWARD:   Yes.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: That is what he says.    Secondly, the
     disciplinary proceedings and,  thirdly, the Coroner's
     proceedings.  Would that be the right order?

MR. WOODWARD:   That would be the right order in our submission.

MR.   JUSTICE STEYN: Each phase has   to be completed before the
      next can be tackled.

MR. WOODWARD:  One would review the situation and bring on the
     matter as soon as it appeared that it could in fact be
     properly dealt with.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: As I understand it — and I am asking for
     clarification — what the Chief Constable is envisaging
     is certainly that the criminal proceedings will take place
     first and be completed.

MR. WOODWARD:   My Lord, that the criminal investigation should
     be completed and, if it lead^ to proceedings they should be
     completed.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: That is what I meant.    Thereafter the
     disciplinary proceedings would be tackled, if any.
     Either disciplinary proceedings will take place or they
     will be abandoned, and then the Coroner would deal with
     the matter.

MR. WOODWARD:   Yes.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:     That, I take it, might mean   a date in   1993
     or 1994.
    MR. WOODWARD:  It would mean a date as appropriate.    I cannot
         give a more accurate answer to that.   It might be those
         dates that my Lord has identified.   There is a factor that
         would hang over the Chief Constable, namely the
         limitation period.   The contribution proceedings must be
         begun within two years of the agreement in respect of which
         it is sought to have apportionment.   So in those cases
B        that have already settled, or where a figure has been
         agreed, time is running.    The Chief Constable cannot
         leave it too long.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  So the consequence may be that he will have
         to institute proceedings even before the criminal
         proceedings are complete on the matters?

    MR. WOODWARD:  The position would have to be    protected, but if
         the price of   finality, if the price of   no prejudice and if
         the price of   the right decision  is a    matter of a year or
         so, or two years,   it is not too much     of a price to pay
         for justice.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   I think that is most important.

D   MR. WOODWARD: Justice in all its respects, in relation to all
         the matters which arose out of that   incident; it  may
         not be appropriate to simply look at the interests of the
         parties here if one is trying to provide justice,  and if
         one is trying to provide consistency.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I am glad you have mentioned that because
         it is a point I wanted to mention to you.    I think the
         wider interests of the administration of justice generally
         is involved in this case, and also the good administration
         of business on the Northern Circuit, bearing in mind
         that you have mentioned to me that we have something of
         the order of 900 claims here.   I have in mind what the
         Master of the Rolls recently observed.

               I follow the points you have mentioned.   They are
         forceful points and entitled to very great weight, but
         against them must be weighed I suppose — before w e go to
         the technical aspects of the rules and leaving the even
         wider interests of the proper conduct of business on the
         Northern Circuit aside for the moment — the interests of
         the Club and the engineers in having litigation involving
         some 900 claims hanging over their heads for a large
         number of years, and the extent to which that will hamper
         them.

    MR. WOODWARD: My Lord, to have a claim hanging over one is a
         matter that can be understood and in itself a potent
         argument for saying "Let us get on with it."    But to have
         a number of claims hanging over one and the prospect of
         more coming, where the attempt to procure a result by
H


                                                                          69
         expedition in the early stages has not produced finality,
         may, with respect, be an ever greater burden because there
         will be the prospect (or at least the risk) of,  if I can
         use the vernacular, "having to go through the fire” or
         "through the hoop" on more than one occasion.

              If the endeavour that is made now to reach a
B        conclusion and to make an apportionment is an endeavour
         which, by reason of stances of privilege taken by
         individuals, by reason of the consequences and all the
         effects of criminal prosecutions being in the air,
         disciplinary proceedings,  or material   in the hands of
         those who are carrying out those procedures not being
         available, then my Lord those are the precise
         circumstances when there is a risk that the first
         conclusion may be flawed,  and a very real risk that it
         will be open to be relitigated.

              My Lord, that could not with respect be really in the
         interests of the Club.   It could not be in the interests
         of the fourth defendant.

              My Lord, may   it not be this; that in truth the
D        situation is that the second and fourth defendants
         perceive that the   first defendant is at a disadvantage and
         that they wish to   have the benefit of all the problems and
         all the difficulties that hamper and impede his proper
         presentation, even the investigation of his case.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: What I do' not quite understand — and I
         appreciate I do not know enough about the case — is
         this.  Let us assume that there is a trial this year within
         the scope of these two vehicles, the Rimmer and Chapman
         cases.  Assume that a lot of evidence is led; that the
         Taylor findings are looked at; that some more lay evidence
         is called; that experts are called.   Assume, for the sake
         of argument, that the court finds that neither the Club
         nor the engineers are at fault in any respect.        Just
         assume that hypothesis.   How realistic is it that there
         will be further proceedings then if they have been cleared?
         I suppose in other cases further allegations could be
         made, but it does seem to me not very likely.

    MR. WOODWARD: That is a problem. May we stand back a moment.
         They will say, "You have got the Taylor Report.   You had
         those weeks of the investigation very close afterwards at
         Sheffield. What more is needed?"

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   I am   not quite saying that.

    MR. WOODWARD:   Is it likely   that anything more is going to turn
         up?


H

                                      8
                                                                         70
    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I am assuming that more lay evidence is led
         because you may dispute some findings of the Taylor
         Inquiry, as I understand it.  I am assuming that expert
         evidence will be called; both evidence that was led then
         and also new evidence.   Having gone through a very
         searching Inquiry,  if the court were to vindicate the Club
         and engineers — this is just a hypothesis — how likely is
B        it that after that something really new is going to turn
         up in the other cases?    I could happen, I agree, but ----

    MR. WOODWARD:  My Lord, the answer with respect has got to be,
         it depends how complete the information was.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  You are going to marshall all your weapons.
         If it were to take place, you are certainly going to put
         forward the best case you have got and all the arguments
         you have got; overlook nothing and, of course, something
         may occur to you later on.   I do not think it would be
         very realistic, but maybe I do not see the full shape of
         the case here.

    MR. WOODWARD:  Your Lordship's observation, with respect       no
         doubt, is borne of the contention and reflects the
D        contention made by the defendants.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   I am hoping that I am   looking at both
         sides.

    MR. WOODWARD:   With respect, my Lord, it was not intended as a
         criticism.   The point is made on a number of occasions by
         the second and fourth defendants that we have had the
         Taylor Inquiry.   "You have had an investigation.  All the
         important material is there.      What else is likely to
         turn up that can alter the position?"   It is the very same
         point that my Lord makes.

              May we stand back and consider the Taylor Inquiry.
         That was conducted not by the parties calling witnesses,
         although they had the opportunity so to d o ‘and they were
         able, in a very generous manner, to make submissions or
         to make representations according to what witnesses were
         called.    My Lord, substantially the statements that were
         made, certainly by the police officers as we understand
         it, were statements made by those officers without their
         minds necessarily being directed to particular points; the
         sort of points they would be directed to in taking a
         proof for a civil action. My Lord, they were not taken by
         the Chief Constable.  They were handled by the West
         Midlands Police.

              My Lord, that   material was investigated in open forum
         and cross-examined   to.   The West Midlands Police have
         continued, and are   continuing, their investigations.   Their
         investigations are   not yet complete.  My Lord, if the point
H

                                      9
                                                                          71
A
              is made that there was sufficient at the time of Taylor to
              come to conclusions, it may be pertinent to consider what
              it is that has been exercising the West Midlands Police
              for all this time.   They certainly have been working very
              hard.    We are not privy to what they have done, but they
              have carried out considerable investigations and amassed
              considerable material.
B
        MR.   JUSTICE STEYN: May I ask you this on a point of
               information.  Rose J.'s order records that the transcript
               of Taylor L.J.'s Inquiry is to be admitted as a true record
               of what was said. That means that that report, although
               not binding on anybody, in so far as it records what was
               said at the Inquiry by various witnesses, will be part of
               the material before the judge.
C
        MR.   WOODWARD: No, my Lord.   That is not,with respect, as we
               understand it, what Rose J. ordered.    His order relates to
               the transcript.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:    I follow.

        MR. WOODWARD:  Not to the report.   The transcript: in other
D            words that those people said those things on that day,
             according to the transcript.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  That will be treated as part of the evidence
             which can be contradicted or challenged and so on, but it
             will be part of the material.

        MR. WOODWARD:  Yes, it could be used as the parties considered
E            lawful, but with respect it is not the report.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:    You are quite right.   I can see that.

        MR. WOODWARD:  It is the transcript.  It is rather like the
             depositions at a Coroner's inquest rather than what the
             jury decided at such an inquest.

F                  It is the case that the West Midlands Police do not
              expect to have finished their investigations, or be in a
              position to produce the final report to enable the Director
              to make a decision on criminal proceedings, until mid-Kay.

                   We are not sure whether it is in your Lordship's
              bundle.    It arrived after Mr. Metcalf had sworn his
              affidavit.   There is at page 119A a letter from the Crown
G             Prosecution Service where, unequivocally, there is
              expressed the view "that any civil trial at which
              liability is determined should be deferred until after the
              later of either a decision being reached that there be no
              criminal proceedings or at the conclusion of any criminal
              proceedings."      A firm view is there expressed.

H

                                           10                                 7
    1
                                                                                  rxj
          If one looks to the last part of the letter:   "We
     anticipate receiving the final police report in mid May
     and reaching a decision in a reasonable time thereafter.”

          My Lord,  in the meantime there will be no
     disclosure, no release of that material.  That is stated by
     Mr. Mervyn Jones, the Assistant Chief Constable of the
     West Midlands Police and who was carrying out the West
     Midlands investigation.  That is at page 114 in the bundle.
     That is with the concurrence of Taylor L.J.    It is a
     letter of 11th December 1989.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Yes.

MR WOODWARD:   My Lord, no material is released.     "Lord
     Justice Taylor and Her Majesty's Coroner are in agreement
     with this policy of non-release at this time which,   as you
     will appreciate, is what would normally apply in any
     criminal investigation.11  My Lord, there is nothing
     abnormal about what we are doing there.    Ordinarily those
     sort of considerations would lead to the determination or
     identification even of the issues in the civil action
     being put in abeyance.

           My Lord, the Coroner has in fact himself similarly so
     said.   He said it in a letter which is at page 130 dated
     26th October 1989.    The Coroner's present position is
     outlined most recently in a letter which is the last letter
     in the bundle, at page 133. Again that is not part of the
     original exhibit; it was received after Mr. Metcalf had
     sworn his affidavit.    That is what the Coroner said.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: This is the one saying that he cannot
     express a view at the moment.

MR. WOODWARD:  Cannot express any view.   we understand that he
     is considering his position.   My Lord, that is the stance
     that is taken by those individuals and by those bodies.
     If there are civil proceedings before those matters, in the
     event of there being a criminal prosecution, one must stand
     back and contemplate the consequences.

          In the very nature of this matter between the parties
     there will be considerable public attention, or is likely
     to be considerable public attention given to it.   The very
     issues which would have to be determined as between the
     parties here will involve, in certain instances — many
     instances perhaps — a close investigation of what a
     number of police officers did or did not do.   They, in
     order to be able to deal with the matter, ought to be able
     to answer the questions fully, fairly, freely and without
     the risk of incrimination.




                                11
           One ought to know if the determination is to be
      efficient what it is those individuals are likely to say.
      That requires close proofs to be taken, and the points that
      emerge from the pleadings to be canvassed with them.
      "Well, it is said here you did not do that.   What is your
      answer?"    If there is no answer, my Lord, then the Chief
      Constable may wish or may be advised to make admissions.

MR.   JUSTICE STEYN: I do not in fact have a stay application on
      the ground of criminal proceedings before roe at the moment.
      The answer may well be that the report may say that
      although there could be criticisms of the police in certain
      respects, there is not a sufficient prospect of criminal
      proceedings to warrant a prosecution.   One knows that the
      public interest can also be taken into account and there
      may be no criminal proceedings.

MR. WOODWARD:   Yes.   My Lord, one hopes that that is known soon.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:     In May at least   there will be a report.

MR. WOODWARD:  In May someone will be in the position to
     consider the material to make the decision.  With respect,
     my Lord,  in so far as we may, if contrary to our primary
     contention, need leave to discontinue, these are all
     important matters germane to that question.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  It will always be open of course, if
     criminal proceedings are launched, to make an application
     in that regard for a stay.

MR. WOODWARD:  My Lord, with respect, at this juncture it is
     already affecting what the parties can and cannot do.     It
     does not have to wait until the matter is listed or there
     is imminent the question of whether or not there is oral
     evidence going to be given.   It is already affecting the
     parties.   It is already affecting the Chief Constable.

           My Lord, on the point of finality I did refer your
      Lordship to a stance that was taken by the parties, by the
      second and fourth defendants.  I did not give your Lordship
      sum, chapter and verse for it.

            The stance, for example, of the second defendants is
      illustrated by the letter which is found at page 29 in Mr.
      Metcalf's bundle, where there is contemplated an ongoing
      case by case analysis.     It is a letter of 12th January
      1990.   It says many things.

           On page 29 (the second page) it says:  "It may be
      sensible to attempt to achieve agreement on the resolution
      of liability on a case by case basis in relation to any
      death or injury suffered other than in pens 3 and 4.
      Indeed, prosecution of the Third Party Notices or the



                                   12                              7
     determination of those issues raised by the Notices is
     likely to lead to an agreement on the resolution of
     liability in all other cases.  One suggestion would be to
     meet at regular intervals to discuss such claims when
     representatives of the parties will attempt to reach
     agreement on whether a particular claim should be
     determined by the finding of liability in either Chapman or
     Rimmer; any cases where such agreement could not be reached
     could then be dealt with by means of a test case brought by
     your clients, although we hope this would prove
     unnecessary." My Lord, they contemplate it.

          By coincidence a letter of the same date from the
     fourth defendants is to be found at page 60 in the bundle.
     It begins at page 59. That is a letter of 12th January.
     There were two letters of that date.   It is important
     perhaps to note in the third paragraph of that letter
     that there the fourth defendants are inviting our attention
     to requests numbered 5, 33 and 27 in the Chapman action.
     My Lord, those requests relate to where Mr. Chapman was;
     how was the barrier causative of his death; and was the
     removal of the barrier causative.  I paraphrase the
     request.

          My Lord, if one goes over the page, we had invited the
     second and fourth defendants to deal with the matter on a
     broadbrush basis.   We were prepared to do that ----

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Treating them as conclusive.

MR. WOODWARD:   Yes, in order to get the matter disposed of.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Justice could be done provided that formula
     is adopted.

MR. WOODWARD: My Lord, may I, without appearing to be
     critical, take your Lordship up on the point that justice
     could be done.   A result would be achieved that would be
     acceptable to the parties.   One would not have to concern
     oneself or consider whether or not justice had been done.

          My Lord, it might not be justice because it would be a
     result roughly arrived at. On page 60 the second
     defendants, in their letter of 12th January, say:  "We
     certainly have no wish to complicate or delay the
     resolution of these disputes and confirm that we continue
     to regard the trial of lead cases as an eminently sensible
     way of disposing of all or most of the issues in this
     litigation.  However, we simply cannot agree that the
     outcome of 2 actions should be determinative of all the
     remainder automatically and without consideration of
     differences in the relevant facts, especially when we do
     not even yet know how your clients' case is to be put in
     these 2 actions."



                                 13                                75
              My Lord, they have all the Taylor papers. They have
         no less information than the chief Constable. They have
         access to their client.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Yes, but they want to know how you are
         going to criticise them.  You may criticise them on wider
         grounds than Lord Justice Taylor did.
B
    MR. WOODWARD: There is no criticism of the request "Tell us how
         you put your case".  If one is striving for rough justice
         one is able to take stock of what one has and say, "Well we
         have not got enough on that but it seems fair.  We will not
         argue about that point." They have not taken that
         position.   The Chief Constable was prepared to do it.

              My Lord, we would submit that being prepared to take
         that stance should not be taken against the interests of
         the Chief Constable when, if that stance is not capable of
         being taken or that result is not capable of being taken by
         agreement, he says "Well, if you will not take it then we
         must litigate the issues.  We must have it decided
         properly."   It is not an inconsistent position to take.

D             We would wish, if it is to be litigated, to be in
         control of the action, as indeed to a certain extent we are
         in the Chapman and Rimmer cases.

              My Lord, the prospect of finality not being reached is
         appreciated by the other parties.    I have launched into a
         number of points and takfen the matter out of the sequence
         in which I intended to deal with   it.    I hope it is not
         unhelpful and I am grateful for your Lordship's indication.

              My Lord, we would submit that it would be
         unsatisactory in this list, as is presently constituted,
         and series of applications by adding bits on, tacking on
         circumstances that emerge in relation to a particular
         claimant or a particular number of claimants to pursue a
         course which raises the real prospect of prejudice or the
         necessity for applications to adjourn.  My Lord, that
         cannot ‘be right.

              My Lord, the application by the first defendant is
         two-fold.   It is put in the alternative.   It is for a
         declaration in fact that the notice of discontinuance is
         proper and does not require leave.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Can I just turn that up.

    MR. WOODWARD:  It is pages 264 and 265.   The notices of
         discontinuance served by the first defendant were
         effective; or if they were not effective that we be given
         leave to discontinue.

H

                                     14
    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  That application you make will be applicable
         to this 21 or 16 or whatever.   I appreciate what your
         primary case is, but the alternative is an application
         under Order 21 or alternatively under Order 16.

    MR. WOODWARD:  My Lord, yes.   May I take your Lordship, I hope
         briefly, to and through those matters.    It is Order 21
B        rule 3.  Discontinuance is governed by the provisions of
         Order 21 at page 367 in the White Book.   Rule 2:   "(1)
         Subject to paragraph (2A), the plaintiff in an action begun
         by writ may, without the leave of the Court, discontinue
         the action...."    So the question there is,  is this third
         party within that category? On the face of it, one might
         say it was a third party notice; it was not a writ.   Where
         does that get you?      My Lord, may we follow it through.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  Can we pause there.   There may be an impact
         of other provisions — I fully see that — but on a first
         reading, on the ordinary language of the vord, can you
         bring your case within Order 21/2?

    MR. WOODWARD:  We would try to.    Can I deal with it quickly
         and present the argument.    In order to pursue the
D        contribution the first defendant might issue a writ and
         start fresh proceedings.    Where there are proceedings in
         train he may issue against his co-defendants, if there are
         co-defendants against whom he is seeking contribution, a
         notice.   May I call it a third party notice for
         convenience.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  This is the first defendant issuing a writ
         in separate proceedings.  You are postulating that.

    MR. WOODWARD:  No.   My Lord, the courses open to the first
         defendant were two.   One would have been t o issue a writ
         and proceed according thereto.   Where there were
         proceedings in train he might also issue either a third
         party notice or a notice requiring contribution from his
         co-defendants if that seemed appropriate.

              My Lord, since* the objective is the same and there is
         no prejudice to the defendants which course is adopted, we
         would submit that there should be no disadvantage or
         detriment attached to whichever course was taken.    They
         are means of procuring the same end.

                At the time that the contribution proceedings were
         begun the Chapman and Rimmer actions were already in being.
         No agreement had been made concerning how the matter
         should be dealt with, and one did not know what was likely
         to happen.    But, my Lord,  there were already proceedings
         th en .


H

                                    15
                                                                       77
             My Lord, the decision was made to proceed by way of
        Order 16.  By virtue of Order 16, rule 8 at page 247 in the
        White Book, the defendant has that course open to him where
        he has given notice of intention to defend or he can claim
        against a person who is already a party to the action any
        contribution or indemnity.    My Lord, that must relate to
        the plaintiff's claim.   " (b) claims against such a person
    B   any relief or remedy relating to or connected with the
        original subject-matter of the action...." My Lord, again
        parasitic in effect on the action.    "(c) requires that any
        question or issue relating to or connected with the
        original subject-matter of the action should be determined
        not only as between the plaintiff and himself but also as
        between either or both of them and some other person who
        is already a party to the action".

             My Lord, he can proceed by serving a notice.    He
        issues the notice and serves it.

             Whilst we are looking at that rule, may we look at
        sub-rule (3): "No acknowledgment of service of such a
        notice shall be necessary if the person on whom it is
        served has acknowledged service of the writ or
    D   originating summons in the action or is a plaintiff
        therein,  and the same procedure shall be adopted for the
        determination between the defendant by whom, and the person
        on whom, such a notice is served of the claim,      question
I       or issue stated in the notice as would be appropriate under
        this Order if the person served with the notice were a
        third party...."     My Lbrd, that moves us into third  party
        proceedings and we look at that.
I
             Third party proceedings are governed by the provisions
        of Order 16.   The provisions of Order 13, rule 3 provide
I       for the issue, service and acknowledgment of third party
        notice.  That is page 239 in the White Book.

             One goes to Order 16/3(4):    "Subject to the
        foregoing provisions of this rule,   the following
        provisions of these rules, namely, Order 6, rule 7(3) and
        (5)...."   My Lord, 7(3) is place*of issue.     7(5) is
        leaving the copy of the writ, and Order 10   relates to the
        service of the writ. Order 11 relates to the service of the
        writ out of the jurisdiction and Order 12 relates to
        acknowledgment of the writ.  Order 75, rule 4 relates to
        serving out of jurisdiction in admiralty proceedings.

             My Lord, those prescribe the formality that attaches
        to the third party notice, and treating the third party
        notice as if it were a writ.  " --- shall apply in relation
        to a third party notice and to the proceedings begun
        thereby as if (a) the third party notice were a writ and
        the proceedings begun thereby an action; and (b) the
        defendant issuing the third party notice were a plaintiff
    H

                                    16
             and the person against whom it is issued a defendant in
             that action” .    My Lord, it requires it to be treated as if
             it were a writ.

                  My Lord, those rules which I have referred to all
             relate to the commencement of an action by a writ, so if
             it is to be treated as a writ, we say then it is a writ for
    B        those purposes.

                  It is in   those circumstances then an action which is
             begun by that which is to be treated as a writ, as if it
             were a writ.    That, my Lord, is what we say it should be
             treated as.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  Can I come back to Order 21/2.   Leave aside
             the argument you have just put forward to me on the basis
             of Order 16.  If we look at the terms of Order 21/2 and 3
             and read through those, on the face of it and applying the
             ordinary meaning of the language,  I take it it is
             tolerably clear that it would not be applicable because it
I            expressly refers to a writ so you have to invoke the
             provisions of Order 16/3/4.   That is the point.

        MR. WOODWARD:  That is it, yes.  It is not a writ but it is to
1   D
             be treated as if it were in those circumstances.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  Yes, I follow that.    If that were wrong
1            then the answer would be 16/6. That would be the only way
             of curing the lacuna in the rules.

1       MR. WOODWARD:   Yes.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I am only testing it because I want to see
             the shape of the case.    If you were wrong on the
I            construction of that, then it would follow that the right
             course for you to adopt would be to ask for a setting aside
             of your contribution proceedings, which are equated with
             third party proceedings under 16/6.

        MR. WOODWARD:      If our construction was wrong and our approach
             was w r o n g                                      1

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:     I   am not saying it is wrong.

        MR. WOODWARD:  But     if itwere wrong, we would submit that 21/3
             would apply.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I follow.   ".... may not discontinue an
             action     ” Can I ask you about that alternative.   Is
             that on the face of the wording of 21/3 or by reason of an
             impact on it of any other orders?

        MR. WOODWARD:   That is by reason of the language of Order 21/3.

    H

                                            17
                                                                             79
    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  But I take it that hypothetically if you
         were wrong about that, you would still say that as a second
         alteranative or a fall-back position under 16/6 you can at
         any time ask for that to be set aside, as indeed the other
         party could, and one would have to look at the matter on
         what is fair and just.

B   MR. WOODWARD:  My Lord, the court itself could do it without an
         application.     Whether there is any significance in the
         distinction between the words "discontinued" and "setting
         aside", we would submit that to all intents and purposes it
         would probably have the same result.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  It is just a much wider power.    A court
         might simply say, "Well, it is convenient that now we can
         hear for administrative reasons the main action but we
         cannot hear it and set it aside."

    MR. WOODWARD:  Yes, for administrative reasons, or the court
         says, "Look, there are a number of these cases with
         different plaintiffs." It may cross it out, go back and see
         what the consequences are.

D             My Lord,  if we were wrong in relation to the
         provisions of Order 21 there, then Order 16/6 would enable
         that course to be taken.

              My Lord, we would submit that in     effect the intention
         evinced b y the rules anti the practice   is to regard third
         party proceedings generally as if the     defendant had brought
         a separate action.      An observation    to that effect has
         been made in the case of Johnson v.       Ribbins (1977) 1 All
         ER 806.

              At page 811 Goff L.J. said at letters B/C:
         "Generally, we think it will be found, and certainly so in
         this case, that the defendant and the third party stand in
         relation to one another as if the defendant had brought a
         separate action against the third party..... "

              My Lord, I do not think with respect that there is
         any submission that the matter between the defendants is
         not an action.   That is not suggested.

              My Lord, it is difficult trawling through the White
         Book to find a lot of support in relation to this
         situation.    It seems to be contemplated by the learned
         editors of the White Book —   and this is but a small point
         that one might make trawling through the White Book — in
         relation to discontinuance that a third party can do it.
         I refer your Lordship with respect to the notes to Order
         62, rule 5 at page 954.


H

                                     18
                                                                           80
    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   A very diligent trawl has obviously been
        undertaken.

    MR. WOODWARD: With respect to the learned editor, it is sometimes
        rather disappointing if one then goes to look at the authority
        or the matter which is quoted for it.   One's juniors have
        been very busy in this matter.  Order 62/5/1 "This rule does
        not appear to apply to third party proceedings".  That is
B       cases where no order for costs is required.  "If a defendant
        discontinues" — so the editors are contemplating that a
        defendant can discontinue — "third party proceedings it would
        seem that the third party must obtain an order for his costs".
        That might be a little like the curate's egg, that particular
        observation, for our purposes.   In our submission, it
        indicates a contemplation by the editors of the White Book
        that a third party can discontinue.   If one goes on to read
        the rest of the sentence it is difficult to explain what the
        editors are thinking about because it says, "and a plaintiff
        can discontinue against a third party only by summons and not
        by notice of discontinuance".   So much for trawling.

               If your Lordship is against us on the primary
        submission then we would seek leave to discontinue.    If it
        were your Lordship's view that a third party could not
D       discontinue we would seek an order under the provisions of
        Order 62 rule 6 for the court to make the direction.   It is
        not suggested, as we understand the skeleton arguments for the
        second and fourth defendants, that a third party could not in
        the appropriate circumstances have leave to discontinue.
        They challenge, most strongly, the construction we put upon
        the writ bit and they say leave should not be given.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  A point I need not concern myself about, I
        think, is this.   If it were all to go against you,
        technically you would be free to commence third party
        proceedings in other cases at the time of your choosing
        instituted within the limitation period.   But I think that
        would not be very realistic because if I or the Court of
        Appeal said you were wrong on all these points and you should
        not have leave and it should not be set aside and the actions
        were to continue, the Chief Constable would have to decide
        whether he wants to fight them or not.   If he fought them and
        lost them, even if it is not an issue estoppel I would have
        thought it would have very great relevance in relation to any
        future third party proceedings.   They could in a broad sense
        be treated as an abuse of the process.    This is something
        that does not concern me at all today, does it?    I just want
        to see the shape of the case as a whole.

    MR. WOODWARD:  In our submission the Chief Constable would be free
        to issue proceedings every time he settled a claim.   Let us
        look at what that might involve.   It plainly may involve


H                                 19


                                                                         81
        issues of fact being raised where one of the parties may say,
        "There is nothing fresh here. That issue has been
        determined".   It would not be an abuse of the process unless
        all the issues had been determined.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  But a court might, by whatever means possible,
        restrain a relitigation of issues that have been fully
        considered.
B
    MR. WOODWARD:  With respect that must be right.   Unless there are
        particular circumstances where the issues have been
        determined, it will be very difficult to relitigate them
        without fresh evidence or without evidence that was not
        available at the time.   In support of an application for
        leave to discontinue or to ask the court to dismiss, we would
        make the points that are set out in Mr. Metcalf's affidavit.
        You will be familiar with a number of those points.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   I have read his affidavit in detail.

    MR. WOODWARD:  I am grateful.   Perhaps I can take the matter
        comparatively shortly.    Whether or not we should be
        permitted, as it were, to call a halt to these proceedings
        requires consideration of the merits and an exercise of
D       discretion by the court in all the circumstances.     The court
        might not grant leave where a significant advantage had been
        procured by a party.    He would then be able to cry, "Snap"
        and go off with such benefits as he had got and be able to use
        at a later stage.    For example, an interim payment;    for
        example, a significant 'admission;  for example, answers to
        interrogatories; evidence that he might have procured.       One
        can list a number of examples, but where there was a
        significant advantage the court might say "No" or the court
        might say "Even though it might be an abuse, we can still
        grant the application".

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   The   third parties in this particular case
        have taken no steps,   other than the request for further and
        better particulars.    Leaving that aside, they have taken no
        steps of any kind in   the third party proceedings.  Is that
        right?

    MR. WOODWARD:   That is right, with respect.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  Presumably they have all instructed solicitors
        and there may have been a bit of correspondence, but that is
        all that has happened.

    MR. WOODWARD:  There would have been some of the instructions and
        some of the correspondence that in part may have related to
        third party proceedings.   It would be but a fragment of their
        endeavour;   the substantial endeavour being their response to


H                                   20


                                                                        8?
        the plaintiff's action.   It does not appear to be suggested
        in the skeleton arguments that they have been disadvantaged or
        would be disadvantaged or that the Chief Constable has
        procured some advantage which he ought not to have.    This is
        not the case where, as one looks at some of the older cases,
        one sees plaintiffs applying for a non-suit after the case has
        been opened to the jury.   It is not done at any late stage.

B   MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  But it is a direct response to the way I set
        the timetable which, of course, did not appeal to the first
        defendant and I can understand he has reasons for that.   It
        is a direct response to that.   If I had set the timetable and
        said December 1991 he would not be applying for a
        discontinuance because that is just about the time when
        limitation comes up.

    MR. WOODWARD:  There is a correlation in terms of time and the
        sequence of events that has occurred.  With respect, it would
        be, in our respectful submission, perhaps an error to consider
        it was solely a direct response to that timetable.   It may be
        an appreciation of what it is that, if the trial takes place
        in October, may not in fact be achieved. That is as indicated
        for example by the correspondence to which I have just
        referred from the second and fourth defendants saying, "There
D       will be other issues and we cannot see this will necessarily
        determine all of them” . As the claims come in, as my Lord put
        it, the Chief Constable could add, he could modify and ask for
        directions and specific questions would be determined.  We
        submit far better to prepare the matter for trial when one
        knows what all the issues in the cases are going to be and not
        do it raggety bobbety by adding bits on.   The Chief Constable
        is not seeking to use the phrase from one of the cases "to
        escape by a side door".   He wants the matter to be determined
        and we intend, if at all possible, to have it determined.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  Nobody is suggesting that the Chief Constable
        is acting improperly or wrongly in some way.   It is simply a
        question of the court deciding, first of all, what the law is
        on the construction of the rules and, secondly, what is the
        desirable course to adopt.  That is all.

    MR. WOODWARD:  Perhaps to a certain extent the Chief Constable may
        have brought this difficulty upon himself by dint of having
        entered into a compromise agreement relating to so many other
        claims.   One has to contemplate the apportionment in the case
        appropriate to the apportionment in relation to the other
        claims, not just Chapman and Rimmer. To decide fault in those
        cases, in our submission, will not necessarily be helpful on
        apportionment — although it may help a little bit in relation
        to some of the peripheral issues — but it will not help in
        relation to apportionment because that will not have been
        decided.   It might be difficult for a court if it were a


H                                 21



                                                                   87
      different court considering the apportionment question in the
      light of facts determined by another court.   Really to
      determine the matter fairly and equitably one would have to
      have the flavour of the whole thing.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   I anticipate one judge will be appointed to
    hear all the cases.

MR.    WOODWARD: Yes. It ought to be one case, if possible.     One
      judge and one case.    According to the notes in the White Book
      generally leave to discontinue should be given.    That appears
      at page 372 in the notes 21/2 - 5/11, application for leave.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: The trouble about that notice is that
    generally speaking the plaintiff or the party who is
    discontinuing is not contemplating suing again.  The unique
    feature here is the       party who says ----

MR.    WOODWARD: Yes. "I am jolly well going to go on with this    one
      way or another".   With respect it is perhaps difficult to
      identify the justice of allowing someone who is not really
      going to go on at all to discontinue and saying to someone   who
      really wants to get it right — and that is the reason for    his
      seeking to discontinue — "You must litigate it as it is".     If
      the party is not happy or if the party genuinely perceives
      real difficulties, he should not be constrained, in the
      absence of other matters, against a course which he wishes   to
      take.

MR.   JUSTICE STEYN: One thing I can accept and that is the Chief
      Constable knows what his case is against the engineers and
      against the club, otherwise it would not have been pleaded.

MR. WOODWARD:  That is right, but one has to look at that rather
    carefully.   What in fact has happened is there has not been a
    full pleading by the Chief Constable.   He has adopted — and
    that may not be the clearest way of identifying the Chief
    Constable's case -----

HER. JUSTICE STEYN:  But you are not saying to me today that the
     Chief Constable does not know whether he has a case; he wants
     to investigate first and take advice.  That is not a position
     that you put to me.

MR.   WOODWARD: No, but the Chief Constable in order to know and to
      be advised must know not only what the club did or did not do
      or think he knows what the club did or did not do, but also
      wants to be able to know what his officers did or did not do
      and what they are going to say about it.   If the stance of
      the Chief Constable in making agreement with the committee is
      indicative of his attitude, if there are written admissions to
      be made they will be made but not to have the material to


                                22



                                                                   84
                                              >.
        enable one to know whether or not to make admissions will lead
        to continuing and excessive litigation and a waste of time
        which is inappropriate.   The reasons and the arguments are
        outlined in Hr. Metcalf's affidavit and the letter he exhibits
        thereto.   When the matter was argued before my Lord in
        application in relation to the dates, your attention was not
        drawn specifically to the provisions of section 49(2) of the
        Supreme Court Act.   We did not have the letter in respect of
B       prosecutions, 119A.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  If your point is I must consider it de novo
        you are pushing at an open door.   It is perfectly clear I
        must look at this matter entirely afresh today.  I need no
        persuasion on that point.

    MR. WOODWARD: We are most grateful for that indication.     One
        must look at the matter afresh and one must look at the
        circumstances.

              May I quickly deal with the finality point because that
        is the first matter Mr. Metcalf deals with in his affidavit.
        I have touched upon that already.   If there is a prospect of
        finality not being reached that is a reason for not persisting
        with this exercise.   If there is to be prejudice or
D       unfairness that is a reason for not persisting and it would be
        a reason for positively saying, "Do not go on with it".    If
        the prospect was that whilst finality might be achieved at the
        risk of some prejudice which produced a result which was not
        the right result, that would be a reason for not going on.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  If the two third parties here had not taken
        the precaution of issuing their own writs asking for
        non-declarations of liability which they could have done;   if
        they had done that I suppose the approach of the court would
        have been identical because there you would have applied for a
        stay of those proceedings and similar considerations would
        have been considered.

    MR. WOODWARD: Many of the considerations would have been the
        same.    No such steps have been taken, apart from that which
        has already be‘en identified.   On the prejudice point, the
        prejudice may be three-fold.    Prejudice to individuals. We
        have in mind police officers by dint of the effect of the
        civil proceedings, by reason of the position of those officers
        and their reluctance, refusal or declination to comply and to
        co-operate. The second prejudice, prejudice to the parties
        and, thirdly, prejudice to the result.    The result might not
        be the right result, given those circumstances.   To a certain
        extent many of these arguments touch upon each other and
        overlap.    It does not appear to be denied by the second
        defendants and the fourth defendants that there is a risk of
        prejudice to the police officers, the subject of


H                                 23


                                                                      85
                investigations in respect of whom it would appear there is a
                view that some night hold that prosecution might be warranted.
                Not only is it not suggested there is no prejudice, it is
                specifically recognised, in the letters to which w e have drawn
                your attention (that last letter, 119A) from the Director
                asking there should not be determination of the civil
                liability until after those matters have been heard.   That is
                the letter of the 16th February 1990.
    B
                      The prejudice to those officers may occur in a number of
                ways.  It make occur if they were required to go into the
                witness box to give evidence.    But quite apart from that the
                prejudice to those officers particularly given the amount of
                attention — a fortiori given the amount of attention — that
                these proceedings are likely to attract may also arise from
                the manner in which the Chief Constable might be advised to
    C           conduct his case.   I intend by that, for exacple, the making
(
\               of admissions or even the advancing of an argument, because,
                given the interest and concern that the Hillsborough matter
                generates, it is inconceivable there would not be very full
                reporting certainly of the primary stances of the parties and
                what they were saying and urging.

    D       MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I was surprised that there were n o affidavits
                in this case from the engineers or from the club to set out
                what prejudice they say would arise in this case.   There are
                no such affidavits.

            MR. WOODWARD:  There are no affidavits but the club and the
                engineers put in skeleton arguments.

    E       MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Yes, and I am grateful for that.   For example,
                I do not whether there are a very large number of club
                employees who were witnesses at the Taylor inquiry.    I have
                not read the report.  I do not know so I do not actually know
                in any graphic detail what the features of prejudice are that
                are relied on by the club other than the skeleton arguments
                that I have.  There is no information on that?

    F       MR. WOODWARD:  We must speculate about it in the light of what we
                believe we know ourselves.   There is no evidence.  That is
                the position.

            MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  Do you know how many club employees gave
                evidence before the Taylor inquiry, even roughly?   It may
                have been one or two or 50.
    G       MR. WOODWARD:  It was not 50.  It was several. My learned friend,
                Mr. Glasgow, who has these matters closer to him, indicates to
                the best of his recollection (and they were gatemen and a few
                stewards) it was one or two handfuls;  about 20.    I am sorry
                we cannot be more precise than that.   Even the presentation


    H                                      24
                                                                          n

        i
of the argument may be prejudicial to the police officers.
The amount of work that the West Midlands police have done is
said by their correspondence to be considerable.    Not only
are they interviewing people, but page 104, the letter of 8th
November 1989 from the Assistant Chief Constable of the West
Midlands police force says, "You are quite right, a
considerable amount of work has followed on this aspect since
the conclusion of the Taylor inquiry".

      One needs to go back to the letter of 3rd November 1989
to see what that is a reference to.    That is at page 99, our
instructing solicitor's letter, third paragraph, "The question
of precisely where fatalities and serious injuries occurred
will be highly material evidence on this issue.   Certain
evidence on this point was presented to the Taylor inquiry,
but considerable further progress in investigations will no
doubt have been made by the West Midlands Police".   That is
confirmed by Mr. Mervyn Jones.    In December 1989, the letter
at page 114, "That investigation is continuing with maximum
possible speed".    No material to be released.   They will not
be ready until May.    They will not have finished their work.
That material, considerable as we believe it to be, will not
be available.    If I touch upon a point already made in
relation to the Taylor inquiry, it is said there was an
inquiry which was very full and an awful lot has been going on
and investigated since then.   It would be inappropriate, in
our submission, for the civil proceedings to proceed without
taking that into account. It would be likely to be
prejudicial and inhibit the proper presentation of the case;
the presentation of the'case with the best chance of leading
to the correct result.    That is what we aspire to. The
presentation of the case that has the best chance of leading
to the correct result.

       The third matter of prejudice is that if the matter
were to proceed and some conclusion reached upon a result that
was not correct that would b e a monstrous event.    If the
trial were to proceed without consideration of that material
and without it being available and without the policemen
giving evidence, that diminishes the prospect of there being
issue estoppel in relation to those matters.     If the
conclusions were arrived at without material matters that
would be a reason for there not being issue estoppel.      In our
submission, in the circumstances so far adumbrated, the Chief
Constable should be allowed the course he asks to be taken.

      Those substantially are our submissions on the points.
If the matter were to be set aside we would invite the court
for clarity's sake, lest there be technical arguments as to
what the court intended, given the nature of the arguments
advanced, that that setting aside should be without prejudice
to the right of the first defendant to commence further
A           proceedings.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Yes.   Thank you.

        MR. TOULSON:  My Lord, you were kind enough to indicate in the           i
            course of argument that you have read our skeleton arguments.        1
        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:     Yes, I have.      Thank you very much.
B
        MR. TOULSON:   Our summons   appears in your bundle at page 237.
            There are like summonses in the two actions.  Paragraphs 1 and
            3 deal with the matters with which my learned friend has been
            dealing, that is to say the validity of the notice of
            discontinuance and, if invalid, whether the action should be
            set aside or discontinued or other and, if so, on what terms.
            Paragraph 2 deals with our outstanding request for
C           particulars.  I am happy to tell you that that is not
            contentious.  If you would substitute 28 for 14 days in line 4
            or paragraph 2 I understand the police are content to submit
            to an order that they deliver those particulars within 28
            days. The same applies to the other action.

                 May I mention one small matter in passing.  When one
           looks at the request for particulars, because of the way in
D          which the pleadings are presently structured, which is that
           the police are adopting the plaintiff's allegations in a
           number of questions, the question is in the form stated
           whether it is the plaintiff's case, where that is the form of
           the request it meant the plaintiff in the contribution
           proceedings i.e. the police.   There is no ambiguity about
           that.
E
                  May I, having dealt with that matter and before going
           through my skeleton and developing it so far as ma y be
           necessary, come straight to the heart of the Batter.    On the
           first page of our skeleton argument we set out the background
           in the bottom half of page 1.   What has happened since then
           is that the police invited us to agree that the Chapman and
           Rimmer actions should be decisive in relation to all victims
F          in pens 3 and 4. It is our declining to, give that which has
           led to the matter being before you today.    As you have seen,
           the stance of the police has been that had those proposals
           been assented to then, for all the points they make about
           other matters, they were content for the matter to go to trial
           in October.   Therefore the real nub of the matter, on the
           footing that they were so content, is:    does that declinature
           of those proposals cast an entirely different light on the
G          action as it now stands?

                  May we just consider that for a moment.   The first
            amplification of the point I was just making about the
            police's stance for reference purposes is paragraph 5.3 of his


H                                       26

    i
    !
    i                                                                       88
affidavit on page 7, and in the correspondence, one letter in
the exhibit at page 67 to Metcalf, DCM 1 of the correspondence
bundle, the opening part of second paragraph, "Our letter of
21st December constituted a binding undertaking to proceed
with the Chapman and Rimmer contribution actions if the
assurances requested were there given.  Those assurances were
given by the club and were given by Sheffield City council so
that, if they had also been given by your clients, we would
have been contractually bound to proceed.   We adopted this
attitude in deference to the strongly expressed views of Mr.
Justice Steyn and contrary to the view of ourselves and our
Counsel, who consider that our clients will be handicapped in
fairly presenting their case if a trial takes place before any
decision is reached by the DPP and/or the Police Complaints
Authority following the West Midlands inquiry and before the
conclusion of the inquest.   "In the light of the views
expressed by Mr. Justice Steyn, we would have been prepared to
accept that element of unfairness, in the interests of a
speedy trial, if we could have been assured of finality” .
They then develop the finality point.   The background to that
is this.   On the last occasion when the matter was before
your Lordship it was not only recognised but indeed the point
was made by the police in the course of their argument that
Rimmer and Chapman Bight not be determinative of all issues,
particularly on causation.

      It was particularly put in file 1 page 221, if I may
refer to a short passage in the transcript just below letter
C, "The kind of thing which will be relevant to the
contribution proceedings, we anticipate, is what was the cause
of one death or batch of deaths or all deaths, because it is
not necessarily going to follow that if one party can be
blamed for having caused or contributed to a particular death,
that would necessarily follow in the case of others.   These
are points which we think are going to have to be adjudicated
upon in the absence of agreement, and we do not know what our
case is going to be, of course, because we do not have access
to the information in the hands of the Coroner and the
investigating officer, so we ourselves do not know the
whereabouts or whether it is possible to establish the
whereabouts of significant numbers of people who died.   This
is going to be a relevant issue in the litigation on the
question of the failure of the barrier and the question of
provision of means of escape in the pens, and we are quite
sure that the Chapaan and Rimmer actions will not provide a
sufficient vehicle to enable the points to be decided on the
question of apportionment1*.

      Just to take forward one matter of fact there raised,
the position that the police are presently unable to obtain
information about is the positions of victims.  The latest
position on that is there has been a letter from the Coroner
subsequent to any of those in the bundle received by those
instructing me yesterday in which the Coroner indicates that
it is his intention to open the inquest for the purpose of
evidence being given as to the position of victims and medical
causes of death.    I am not sure whether you have been given a
copy or not. The second paragraph refers.      (Same handed).
You will note in the underlying paragraph that the intention
is there should be a review and that is going to be on the 6th
March.   So we are talking of a week or so hence. On the face
of it there is reasonable ground to expect that the
information available to the Coroner will be available to the
parties.    Really two questions might arise from that.    One
is:  is the position which my clients have adopted in relation
to the proposals an unreasonable one and, secondly, are the
police now in a position that these proceedings ought not to
proceed, either because somehow they are put in a worse
position than they were before, that they are prejudiced in
their presentation of the Chapman and Rimmer case or because
the whole exercise will b e pointless and futile.    The first
point I can touch on extremely shortly because when my learned
friend read from the letter from those instructing me in which
they said, "While supporting the idea that these 2 actions
proceed as lead actions" did not feel able, without knowing
how the case against them was pleaded on causation, to accept
that they should be necessarily automatically determinative of
all issues.   He was gracious enough and clear enough to say he
did not in any way stigmatise that as an unreasonable
attitude.

      May I therefore dome to the two important points:   does
the fact that the Chapman and Rinmer actions at the moment
while lead actions are not more than that mean that the police
are in a more difficult position in prosecuting those actions
than they otherwise would have been?   Two, is the whole
exercise futile?   As to point 1, the answer with great
respect is a self-evident "no".   They would have to prove
precisely the same in the Chapman and Rimmer actions whether
they are merely, in form, determinative of Chapman and Rimmer
or whether people are agreed that they should have a wider
effect. They will have to prove, in relation to Chapman and
Rimmer, that there was negligence on the part of the fourth
defendant and that was causative of the death, in the one case
of Chapman and in the other case of Rimmer.   Indeed they
accept that it was their bounden duty and it was then agreed
to provide particulars that go to that issue.   The task on
them is no greater or lesser in proving their case on Chapman
and Rimmer, whether it merely stands as a lead action or
whether everybody agrees it should be decisive of other types
of action.  If we had said, "We are quite happy, before even
knowing your case on causation, to accept that you would be
bound in relation to all victims", that would not have
obviated the need to prove causation in relation to Chapman.


                          28

                                                            op
                                                            /




     X
          That leaves the question are the whole proceedings
    rendered futile?   In that respect we part company from my
    learned friend in his understanding of what a lead action is
    and in the notion that if this action is fought out and all
    the lay evidence is called and the Taylor inquiry evidence is
    called and experts called and issues in that action are
    determined that would have no effect whatever either on the
    minds of the parties (in the real world) or upon the powers of
    the court if one party decided in a subsequent action to say,
    "Let us ignore what has happened. We will re-argue the
    matter” .   Both premises are mistaken.  Once the kernel
    questions have been decided obviously all the parties are
    going to consider their position very carefully in the light
    of that.

          Your Lordship put the matter to my learned friend in
    argument:  are you seriously suggesting that if you fail
    altogether in your allegations against the engineers you are
    likely start all over again? I am not sure your Lordship
    receives an altogether clear reply but one is entitled, in
    common sense, to think it is most unlikely.  Equally your
    Lordship is entitled to put the same question the other way
    round against me.   If we fail and if it is found that we were
    negligent in each of the nine respects pleaded in the
    particulars, would we seek to have another trial in which one
    put those same matters all in issue again.  It is not how
    people behave in the real world.

HR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I follow that but what I was going to ask you,
    and assume in the Chapman and Rimmer case the court came to a
    conclusion that as to apportionment there is 30 per cent blame
    on your clients, in what circumstances could there be an
    argument as to whether that apportionment is a fair one,
    bearing in mind the circumstances of other cases?

MR. TOULSON:  Only if somebody was able to show that the other
    cases were materially different.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: And materially different in the sense that
    such blame as was apportioned to the engineers was
    non-operative in other cases.

MR. TOULSON:  Precisely.  Can I go straight to the very heart of
    this and why this particularly affects my clients.  Two of the
    allegations made against my clients led to specific points in
    the pen.  Many of the allegations made against my clients are
    of general application, wIt was your responsibility” — say
    the police — "not ours, to make sure the pens did not get
    overfilled".  One can well see if they were to succeed and the
    pens were overfilled and people died, that is a point which is
    likely to apply equally to anyone who was killed in an


                              29

                                                            91
 overfilled pen.

      When one looks at the case as it is pleaded against my
 clients, two of the matters which were stressed were these:
 one is that criticism was made of the removal of barrier 144 a
 year or so before this occurrence.     Obviously negligence is
 strongly in issue on that as on other matters, but just
 considering the question of causation:    what effect did the
 removal of a particular section of rail have?     Did it affect
 everybody in the pen in like fashion or did it have some local
 effect?   Secondly, there is a criticism made of us that the
 gates on to the pitch were narrower than the Green Guide
 recommendation.    The Green Guide recommended 1.1 metre and
 the perimeter gate in pen 3 was 0.85 of a metre.     The
 question is: what causative effect, if negligence is proved,
 does the difference of that 0.25 of a metre make?     This is
 why it is so   important for us to know what the case on
 causation against us is.

        Your Lordship sees the argument.     Supposing, for the
  sake of argument, Mr. Chapman was standing just within the
  gate.   It might be the case would be made that he was
  sufficiently close to the gate that he would have got out. I
  now answer — and I apologise for this rather roundabout route
  — your Lordship's question as to how far the decisions in the
  first action would bite on others.      That would depend,
  firstly, on how the case formulated by the police who are the
  claimants in these proceedings and, secondly, by the findings
  of fact which the learned judge makes.     If the learned judge
  on trying the first action were to find as a fact, having
  heard all the expert evidence, that if the perimeter gates had
  been 0.25 of a metre wider the entire occupants of pen 3 would
  have got out    unharmed then, upon that finding of fact, the
  same would apply to all the victims in the pen.     If the
  learned judge were to find as a fact in the first trial that
  the widening of the perimeter gates would have had a
  negligible effect, but it might have or would have had a very
  local effect and that those who were within a radius of 4
  yards would have got out, and that included Mr. Chapman, then
< they succeed in the Chapman action but the effect of that on
  other claimants would be exceedingly limited.

       Therefore to what extent the Chapman and Rimmer actions
 would be determinative either simply attributing to parties'
 common sense or through the mechanism of the court's ability
 to strike out a subsequent claim or defence as an abuse of
 process, will depend (1 ) on how the police's claim is
 formulated and (2 ) on what findings of fact the court makes.
 It is, as you have already postulated in argument, always open
 to claimants, if they decide that a particular victim is not
 going to enable the court sufficiently to determine the
 matters at issue between the parties, to have another one too.
          We have two in this case, one in pen 3 and one in pen 4.   It
          would be open to them, if they want to d o so and if their
          evidence was going to be when they had heard the Coroner's
          evidence about movement, if their case on Chapman is that he
          was standing within 1.5 metres of the gate and might have got
          out, to select another victim too who was 15 metres away.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:        Chapman was in which pen?
B
    MR. TOULSON: He was in pen 3 and Rimmer was in pen 4.    The same
        points by parity of reasoning apply to the allegations made
        against us in relation to barrier 144.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:        Does anybody object to m e looking at the
        Taylor report?

    MR. TOULSON:      No, my Lord.

    MR. GLASGOW:      No, my Lord.

    MR. WOODWARD:   No.   My Lord is a member of the public and,with
        respect, can say MI want to read it ” .

    MR.   JUSTICE     STEYN:    Could I borrow a          copy of theTaylor report
D         until I give judgment.   (Same handed).

    MR. WOODWARD:      Is that the interim or final report?

    MR.   JUSTICE     STEYN:      This is the one dated 15th April.

    MR.   TOULSON:    That is the interim report.

    MR.   JUSTICE     STEYN:    I am not interested inmatters of culpability;
          I want to    see roughly what the facts were.

    MR. WOODWARD:     It may be helpful to look at the finalreport        as
        well.   (Same handed) .

    MR.   JUSTICE     STEYN:      Thank you very much.
                          (
    MR. TOULSON: Would you like my assistance on any point in
        relation to the interim report now?

    MR.   JUSTICE     STEYN:    No, thank you. I just want to incorporate
          into my judgment an intelligible description, just by way of
          introduction.

    MR. TOULSON: My Lord, there are certain issues which are clearly
        going to arise in any claim made against Dr. Eastwood.  To
        take barrier 144, whether its removal was causative or not may
        differ from victim to victim. Whether there was negligence on
        the part of Dr. Eastwood in not advising against its removal


H                                       31
    is another matter. That issue is clearly raised on these
    pleadings and will be determined.    One can go through each of
    the allegations of negligence.   The matters there, in so far
    as they are put as being causative in the general application,
    then Chapman and Rimmer will be indistinguishable from any
    other case.  In so far as the issue is made, "You were
    negligent" then that question arises fair square for
    determination in this case.    It is only in so far as the
    point is sought to be made that some item of alleged
    negligence which does not, ex facie, necessarily apply to all
    victims equally nevertheless was causative that they will have
    to consider whether they wish to have different victims as
    were represented and the parties will have to consider the
    implications of the findings of fact made set within the
    framework of their case when they pleaded it on causation.
    But to say that in those circumstances that these proceedings
    in their present form are futile is wrong.    That is why we,
    with care, say in our skeleton argument that they can
    reasonably be expected either to dispose of the whole or go a
    very long way to disposing of the issues between the parties.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  In any event in so far as they have not
    entirely disposed of the issues it would be amazing if the
    judgment of the court is not of very great assistance in the
    settlement of that.

MR. TOULSON: Absolutely.    On the point of law whether if a party
    in a second set of proceedings sought to challenge directly
    some finding of fact made which had been made after argument
    in the first proceedings ----

MR. TOULSON:       between different parties, whether in those
    circumstances the court would have power to strike that out as
    abuse of process, there is authority, yes, they would. The
    judgment of Mr. Justice Drake in the recent case of Binnie &
    Partners.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Do you have a copy?

MR. TOULSON: Yes, but we have the report only in the Independent.
    I am told by Mr. Payne that it is also in the New Law Journal.
    I am afraid I had not picked that up. He put it first and
    foremost on grounds of inherent jurisdiction and secondly and
    alternatively on issue estoppel.

MR. WOODWARD:    My Lord there is the New Law Journal which is even
    fuller.     (Same handed).

MR. TOULSON: This would be an a fortiori case because the parties
    to these proceedings would be the same parties.   It would be
    the police claiming contribution from the engineers.  That the
    court has power to strike out, whether or not an estoppel


                               32


                                                               U
        arises under the technical rules, one party's seeking to raise
        an issue of fact which has been determined by a court of
        competent jurisdiction between the same parties, is no novel
        proposition.   It goes back at least into the last century.
        There is authority for that in Stephenson v. Garnett (1898) 1
        QB page 677.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: I do not know I need trouble you very much
B       about that aspect.  Subject to anything submitted to me I vill
        be working on the assumption that the court has broad
        jurisdiction.

    MR. TOULSON:  I have taken my submissions in this order
        deliberately because if we are in this position that the
        Chapman and Rimmer actions stand constituted in exactly the
        same way as they did when your Lordship fixed the date for
        trial and indeed at the time when it was Mr. Justice Rose
        whose recommendation was that they should proceed as lead
        actions, so the police had no more to prove than they ever had
        to prove ----

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   What did Mr. Justice Rose suggest?

D   MR. TOULSON:  That those two actions proceed as lead actions.     It
        is in the orders bundle at page 116 file 1.    The order starts
        on page 110 , the first interlocutory hearing in these
        proceedings in July 1989.    On page 114 it is recorded as part
        of the order that you made the following observations: M (ii)
        In the light of the indication given b y Plaintiff's Counsel
        that the Defendants were likely to admit that the present
        action concerned a fatality in Pen 3 and that it was the
        intention that proceedings be issued and a Statement of Claim
        be served as soon as possible in two further lead actions, one
        concerning a fatality in Pen 4 and the other a Plaintiff
        physically injured outside the Stadium, the provisional viev
        of the Judge was that a stay should be granted in all other
        similar proceedings pending the outcome of the 3 lead actions,
        but that such stay should not take effect until close of
        pleadings in such actions'*. De facto that is how the parties
        have proceeded in the sense that we have had full pleadings in
        these actions and although other writs have been issued and
        served there have been no further procedures taken in them.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: The only difference being that so far there
        have been two lead actions and not three.   That is without
        prejudice to the argument that the phrase "lead action" is
        inappropriate.

    MR. TOULSON:  Yes.  I hope we all know what we mean.   One can
        have, on the one hand, representative actions where somebody
        sues on behalf of a class of people and that actually creates,
        as a matter of law, a determination which affects all


H                                  33


                                                                           0
    interested parties.  In the case under the rules as they
    presently stand and subject to any change of procedures of the
    kind referred to by your Lordship in argument, the way the
    courts have to date grappled with the case where you have got
    a disaster which results in multiple claimants who may or may
    not all fall into the same category, is that somebody has the
    good sense to start one or more cases which they intend shall
    be typical of the categories concerned, leaving it to the good
    sense of the parties and the power of the court to strike out
    abusive proceedings or defences, to see what the effect of
    that is when the case has been fought out.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Following the procedures outlined by Mr.
    Justice Hirst.   I have read that judgment and respectfully
    agree with it.

MR. TOULSON: We are left with this position, that if the burden
    on the police in prosecuting Rinaner and Chapman is no greater
    than it has been at any time in this action and if the
    determination of the Chapman and the Rimmer actions will be,
    to put it at its lowest, of the greatest utility and if they
    would have been content to proceed with these actions to trial
    in October, had we been willing to say "Regardless of what
    case you may make on causation it shall be determinative on
    all of them” is the reluctance on our part to give that
    assurance before the case has been pleaded, such that it
    changes everything and the action ought not to proceed.
    On that matter we respectfully submit there is only one answer
    and that is that the matter should proceed.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Would you mind outlining for me what you say
    the disadvantage of prejudice is.   It has been stressed on
    the other side how the police would be disadvantaged in their
    countervailing considerations.  You side is, perhaps relying
    on the fact that I was in their favour last time around,
    taking the course of not filing an affidavit.   To some extent
    you will have to tell me what you say is manifest and obvious
    anyway.

MR. TOULSON:  I heard your Lordship's observations and expression
    of surprise that we had not filed an affidavit.   The
    affidavit we got last week.  I took the considered view that
    we had no need for an affidavit in reply.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   If the points are obvious ----

MR. TOULSON:   As a matter of fact Dr. Eastwood is out of the
    country until next week and could not have sworn an affidavit
    but I cannot with candour say that that was my reason for
    suggesting there should not be an affidavit.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Is he a sole practitioner?


                               34

                                                              96
A
    MR. TOULSON:  No.  It is a small partnership.  His son is a
        partner and they have one office in Sheffield.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   So it is Dr. Eastwood and his son?

    MR. TOULSON:  The position is this, as far as he is concerned.   I
        am not likely in this case to make an application to dismiss
B       for want of prosecution but I do observe that in cases where
        people ask to dismiss for want of prosecution this court and
        the Court of Appeal habitually takes it as read that a
        professional man against whom allegations are made, does
        suffer a prejudice and there is plenty of authority that that
        is something the court is entitled to take into account and
        does not require an affidavit from the affected professional
        man to say "I am under such prejudice".

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  Let us just see what the prejudice is.   It is
        the hanging over his head of allegations which may inhibit
        people going to him.

    MR. TOULSON:   Can we take this in stages.  Firstly the allegations
        made against him are very large in amount.   This is not just
        the small case where there is an argument as to whether the
        final design was adequate. Nobody much is going to know about
        it and the sums involved are relatively small.    This is a
        claim on a massive scale both in terms of the scale of the
        tragedy, the money potentially involved — a point which has
        been stressed by Mr. Woodward but which concerns equally Dr.
        Eastwood — the publicity the matter has already occasioned
        plus, in this instance the fact that we have already had the
        Taylor inquiry at which Dr. Eastwood gave evidence was
        cross-examined and was in the witness-box longer than any
        other witness in the inquiry?   12 hours spanned over three
        days.    There is going to be a re-run run of that and m y
        learned friend will be able to cross-examine him. When he
        knows that is a matter he is facing and he has had one taste
        of it already, and it is a matter in the public eye and which


                                                                            -^*jtie
        is going to continue, both from the point of view of the
        firms' professional repute and standing and the point of view
        of him as an individual — he is in his 60s — the idea of it
        looming years into the future, "There is always going to be
        Hillsborough and some year, whether 1993 or 1994, I am going
        to be cross-examined again and people are going to be saying
        'Four years ago in the inquiry on Day 2 of your evidence you
        said this, let me contrast your evidence on this occasion with
        what you say now'", one can see a very real prejudice to a
        professional man who faces that sort of scenario.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: The reason why I asked about an affidavit is
        it is possible that apart from speculation that the fact of
        this hanging over his head has had an impact, for it to give


H                                 35


                                                                       97
    you an illustration that it has made his position with
    liability insurers much more difficult.  One does not know.

MR. TOULSON:  I cannot ask the court to speculate about that.
    What I can say of course is that anybody in that situation
    never knows how much work h e has not got because of the
    allegations still coming.    No professional engineer wants to
    have his name popping up and down in the professional journals
    in connection with a tragedy of this kind.      The sooner it is
    over and finished one way or the o t h e r ----

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   What is Dr. Eastwood's age?

MR. TOULSON: He is 65, my Lord.   Eastwood & Partners, although a
    partnership, is in fact an unlimited company with eight
    directors.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   There are two engineers practising.

MR. TOULSON: There are more than two who are qualified engineers.
    May I give to you a copy of a letter on headed notepaper.
    (Same handed) .

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   There are eight partners.

MR. TOULSON:   They are actually directors.      It is an unlimited
    liability company.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   They are all practising engineers?

MR. TOULSON:  Yes.   In addition, as you have seen, are the
    assertions made by Mr. Metcalf and to which we took particular
    exception in the final paragraph of our skeleton argument.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I would not worry about that. It is not going
    to influence me. The prejudice points are not going to go
    anywhere.

MR. TOULSON: No. The points o f substance is this.      There are
    some cases where what a professional man is alleged to have
    done or not to have done m a y well not have a bearing on the
    wider reputation. But this is a case where the contentions
    being made by the police are when these proceedings finally
    come to trial there is no chance, they assert, of him getting
    out without what they term, slightly colourfully, as a stain
    on his character and a clear reputation.     One might have
    expected the argument to be "This is not going to affect a
    man's professional reputation because this may have happened
    but it is not going to have any wider bearing on him
    professionally".    On the contrary, they are asserting quite
    the reverse. They are saying these are matters which do.



                               36
    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: What you are saying is it is going it blight
        the final years of his professional career as an engineer and
        his seven partners which we now know about.

    MR. TOULSON:  You have the point.    May I come to the procedural
        points.   You know our argument on the rules because you have
        been effectively putting the points to my learned friend as he
        has developed his argument.    Therefore I can deal with it
B       briefly.  It is conceded by my learned friend that Order 21
        does not, on its face, apply to third party proceedings except
        that he maintained that Order 21 rule 3 does.    We do not
        follow that.    Order 21 rule 3 appears to follow on from Order
        21 rules 1 and 2 and it expressly applies to claims and
        counterclaims but has nothing at all about third party
        proceedings.    So to go the Order 21 route he has to rely on
        incorporation either by the wording of Order 16 or by general
        principles and when he relied on the wording in Order 16 he
        relied on Order 16 rule 3/4.   But that point is with respect
        against him because that provides:         the following
        provisions of these rules" — and then they are identified
        specifically — "shall apply in relation to a third party
        notice and to the proceedings begun thereby as if —   (a)....
        (b)          He seeks to read (a) and (b) as if they were
        separate sub-paragraphs which have, as it were, a life of
D       their own and therefore on which he can say, "That brings in
        order 21 r.l, 2 and 3 as well".    That, on ordinary reading,
        will not run;   (a) and (b) are applicable only in relation to
        the rules specifically enumerated above.    But the absence of
        reference to Order 21 from 3/4 is significant because had it
        been the intention that the provisions of Order 21 should be
        applicable to third party proceedings one would have expected
        that to be in Order 16 r.3/4.    Equally it makes difficult his
        contention that really there is a general principle that all
        other rules apply by adoption to third party proceedings when
        the third party rule is itself identified by those that are to
        apply by adoption.    You have our lacuna point.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:    Yes.

    MR. TOULSON: Johnson v. Ribbins is a different case in point.
        There the court was considering whether the costs of a
        successful third party should be borne by the defendant or by
        the plaintiff.   They, in effect, said "Who brought you in?
        The defendant brought you in, the defendant is responsible for
        your costs".   It does not assist on this point.

               If we are wrong on that point and if by incorporation
        the provisions of Order 21 do apply then that is subject to
        the court's overriding discretion in the matter recognised by
        the House of Lords in Castanho v. Brown & Root.

                         (Adjourned for a short time)


H                                   37

                                                                  Q/ Q/
MR. TOULSON:   My Lord, I was about to cite the decision of the
     House of Lords in Castanho (1981) A.C. 557.   Perhaps I
     might be permitted to abbreviate the facts.  It was a
     personal injury action where the plaintiff sued first in
     England, obtained an interim payment and then sought to
     discontinue the English proceedings in order to proceed in
     the United States in the hope of higher damages.   One of
     the issues was whether the court had any power to control
     his purported exercise of his power to discontinue, which
     he had done within the requisite number of days after
     service of defence.

         Lord Scarman deals with that issue at page 571 at B:
    "The first issue is whether the notice of discontinuance
    can be struck out,  and, if it can, whether it should be.
    It is accepted that under the Rules of the Supreme Court as
    they were in 1979 .... the plaintiff,   notwithstanding the
    two interim payments and the admission of liability, could
    discontinue without leave, if he did so not later than 14
    days after service of defence.   Lord Denning M.R. was,
    however, prepared to hold that our courts can, by the
    device of statutory interpretation, repair the omission in
    the unamended R.S.C.... to provide for the case in which
    interim payments had been ordered and made before the
    expiry of the time limit.   'I fear', he said, 'that the
    draftsmen of interim payments forgot all about notices of
    discontinuance.  Interim payments are quite inconsistent
    with a right to discontinue without leave'. Interim
    payments were made possible by the Administration of
    Justice Act 1969, section 20, and introduced into the law
    in 1970 by R.S.C      Like Lord Denning M.R., I have no
    doubt that the failure to amend the rule relating to
    notice of discontinuance was a casus omissus.   But I do
    not agree that it is an omission which the courts can make
    good by reading into the rule a provision that leave is
    needed when the rule expressly said it was not.   Unless,
    therefore, it is possible to treat a notice of
    discontinuance without leave which complies with the Rules
    of the Supreme Court as an abuse of process (which is
    what Parker J. did), the notice cannot be struck out.

         "In the Court of Appeal, Lord Denning M.R. was
    prepared so to hold.     Brandon L.J. expressed no opinion.
    Shaw L.J . , however, held that it was not possible.   It
    seemed to him 'an inversion of logic to speak of an act
    which purports to terminatte a process as being an abuse of
    that process.'     I am not sensitive to the logical
    difficulty.     Even if it be illogical (and I do not think
    it is) to treat the termination of legal process as an
    act which can be an abuse of that process, principle
    requires that the illogicality be overridden, if justice
    requires."     That, we submit is the ratio of the
    principle.




                               38                                 ji
                                                                  i
                                                                        1




          "The court has inherent power to prevent a party from
     obtaining by the use of its process a collateral advantage
     which it would be unjust for him to retain: and
     termination of process can, like any other step in the
     process, be so used.  I agree, therefore,  with Parker J.
     and Lord Denning M.R. that service of a notice of
     discontinuance without leave,   though it complies with the
B   rules, can be an abuse of the process of the court."

         We, as I say, submit that the principle there is that
    the court can "treat the termination of legal process as an
    .... abuse... if justice requires."     The particular
    point in that case was where the plaintiff had obtained an
    advantage by litigation.

          The question is whether in this case, if there was a
     power to discontinue, it is a case where justice requires
     the court to exercise its overriding jurisdiction, and how
     do we say that it is an abuse of the process.   I will come
     to the question of prejudice in just a moment, but subject
     to the prejudice points which the police raise as
     justifying their desire not to have these proceedings
     continuing in accordance with the time limit laid down by
0   your Lordship, may one just consider the stage which this
     action has reached.

         My Lord, it started as an action against the first
    and second defendants alone.    At an early stage third
    party proceedings were contemplated against   the third and
    fourth defendants, and to shortcircuit that process leave
    was given on the first interlocutory hearing before your
    Lordship last July to the plaintiff to amend their
    statement of claim so as effectively to bring into the
    statement of claim what were in reality in the nature of
    third party allegations.

         My Lord, for reference purposes that order is at page
    110. When the matter next came before your brother, Rose
    J. (page 116)  no order was made in the third party
    proceedings; that because the third party proceedings had,
    as it were, been subsumed in anticipation within the main
    action and full defences had been served in the main
    action.

         It was only therefore upon termination of the main
    action that separate directions needed to be given in
    relation to those third party proceedings.   Those
    directions were given by your Lordship on the last summons
    (page 207) when your Lordship laid down a full timetable
    for the prosecution of those third party claims; ordered
    that the defences served in the main action should stand as
    defences in the third party proceedings; and gave
    consequential directions in relation to discovery,
    inspection and so forth up to and including fixing the date
H

                                39
                                                                  101
     of the trial.     So from the word go these third party
     proceedings were subsumed, so to speak, within the main
     part of the proceedings.  Also, as a matter of form by
     virtue of the last order, we are procedurally well advanced
     in these third party proceedings up to and including the
     date of the trial, and we for our part have been working
     to these directions.

          It is at that stage, that is to say after a date for
     trial has been fixed, that the aggrieved party — in this
     instance the police — having sought and been refused leave
     to appeal against the order fixing date of trial now say
     to your Lordship, with candour, "We do not like your
     decision on the date of fixture.    Therefore please let us
     terminate these proceedings in order to enable us to
     bring further proceedings in the very same time at a time
     of our own choosing."

         We submit that it   is an abuse of the   process of the
    court once proceedings    have been begun, once they have
    reached the stage (as     they have reached    in this case) of
    the court determining all procedural matters up to and
    including date of trial, for one party simply because it
    does not like a particular part of the order, and not
    having pursued the appellant process or having been
    refused leave — either way —      then to say "Well,
    effectively we will get round the court's decision in
    another way", which is what it comes to.

         It cannot be right,  in my submission, for a
    plaintiff whose trial has been fixed, because he does not
    like the date of fixture,   to say, "Never mind, I am
    prepared to pay all the costs and start the thing over
    again at a time of our own choosing." We submit that
    would b e an abuse of the process and falls within the
    principle to which Lord Scarman referred.

         There is, we would further submit in this,   not
    merely the private interest of the parties (the litigants)
    but a public interest as well in the orderly and timely
    disposal of litigation.      It is the case that the
    plaintiff in the first instance can choose, once he
    initiates, when to initiate his claim.  If the police had
    never served third party proceedings they could have done
    so at any time they liked up until the limitation of
    power.    But once the process of the court has been
    invoked, then there is a public interest in the proper
    disposal of that litigation.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: I think there can be very little scope for
     the concept of dominus litis in relation to multi-party
     litigation.  Case management techniques are what are
     needed.




                                40
        MR. TOULSON:   My Lord, I think it remains to deal with the
             prejudice argument advanced by the police.  It really comes
             to this.    They say that the effect of the criminal
             process — and I use that phrase wide enough to include
             investigation prior to a decision whether any charges are
             to be brought — is such that there cannot be a fair trial
             until it is concluded.
B
                   If that were right then I have  to       concede that that
              would be a compelling reason to vacate        the date.   Before
              one considers the arguments which have        been put forward
              in relation to that there is a decision       of the Court of
              Appeal which deals with the question of       when civil
              proceedings should be stayed because of       criminal
              proceedings.

        MR.   JUSTICE STEYN:     Is that Sir John   Megaw's judgment?

        MR.   TOULSON:    Yes,   it is.   If your   Lordship is familiar with
               i t ----

        MR.   JUSTICE STEYN: Perhaps you would just give roe the
              reference.
d   ;
        MR. TOULSON:      It is Jefferson Ltd. v. Bhetcha (1979) 2 All ER,
             1108.

        MR,   JUSTICE STEYN:   Is there not a fairly recent judgment of
               Millett J. on the same subject? I am not dealing with    a
               stay application of course, but some of the considerations
               are equally applicable.

        MR. TOULSON:   My Lord, I ought to know it and I do not.         I
             think Mr. Woodward perhaps does.

                   My Lord, without therefore citing the case can I
              merely indicate what I say one derives from it.   In the
              first place there is no general rule that merely because
              there are criminal proceedings, civil proceedings should be
              shelved or stayed.   Reliance has been placed on a view
              expressed by the Crown Prosecution Service that the civil
              proceedings should be stayed.  No reasons are advanced in
              the letter why that was the view of the Crown Prosecution
              Solicitor, and therefore it perhaps does not assist your
              Lordship that somebody has an opinion for reasons I have
              expressed.   If and in so far as his thinking it was a
              general principle, it has certainly not been long
              recognised in the courts.

                   Secondly, if there is some particular reason why some
              particular civil proceedings ought to be stayed, then the
              person seeking the stay should make clear his grounds with
              some specificity, and indicate what was the particular
              prejudice.  Mere generality will not suffice.   That was a
Hi

                                               41                                1 03
case where the lady in question who had been dismissed from
her employment, was being sued for conversion of cheques
and also being prosecuted and was saying in answer to Order
14, “If I am compelled to contest the Order 14 proceedings
now I should have to disclose my defence, and I have an
unchallenged right to silence which is effectively going to
be overridden."    That is the broad prejudice, and I need
not condescend into particulars.

     When one therefore comes to this case, of course this
is slightly reverse to the norm because here the claimants
in the civil proceedings (the police) are seeking to defer
those civil proceedings.  It is not a person who is on the
receiving end both of a civil claim and a criminal claim,
saying "I want to postpone one".  It is the claimants in
the civil action who are wanting to postpone it, in
circumstances where they have indicated candidly in answer
to your Lordship that they know perfectly well what their
case against the third party is, and where that case
against the third party is not, so far as one knows, in any
way the subject of the criminal investigation.   At any
rate, if it is the third party is not seeking to be free
from having to disclose the defence in the civil
proceedings; they are quite happy to do so.

      What is also significant, we respectfully submit, is
this.    With two possible exceptions (to which I shall
come) it has not been suggested, either in argument this
morning or in the affidavit of Mr. Metcalf, that there is
any allegation of negligence made against my client, or any
other part of their case against my client, which it is
more difficult for them to pursue because of the criminal
proceedings.   They know their case against my client.  They
are not saying that the prejudice which we complain of is
prejudice in presenting that case against you.

     Essentially what they are saying is that the prejudice
we complain of really relates to defending our own conduct;
not in pressing a claim against the engineers.
                                <
     The two possible exceptions to that, not advanced in
Mr. Metcalf's affidavit, are in paragraphs 4.5 and 9.3.
May I therefore just touch on each very shortly.

     So far as 4.5 is concerned, which is on page 6 of the
affidavit, he speaks there of the evidential problem which
they faced because the Coroner has the information about
the location of people killed.   That is met by the letter
from the Coroner.

      The other is at 9.3 on page 14 of the affidavit, where
they deal with the question of the collapse of barrier
124A.   They say:  "... it is the case of the first
defendant that a significant cause of death and injury in



                           42
                                                            10 4
Pen 3 was the collapse of a barrier known as Barrier 124A."
Then having quoted from what Mr. Andrew Collins Q.C. had
said at the Inquiry, it then goes on to say: "However two
issues were not explored at the enquiry, namely (1) did
barrier 124A collapse because of overcrowding or because it
was not as strong as it ought to have been; (2) to what
extent was the collapse causative of the death and injury
which occurred.  The evidence in the possession of H.M.
Coroner is directly material to the second of these
issues."

     The points I simply make about that are these.   First,
there is the question about the position of victims.
Shortly the Coroner will reveal what he has. That would of
itself be sufficient to dispose of this, but I ought to go
further.   To say that the first issue — whether barrier
124A collapsed because it was inherently not strong enough
or because it was subjected to overcrowding — was not
addressed at the Inquiry, with respect, is plainly wrong.
It was one of the principal issues of fact which Lord
Justice Taylor did address.  The evidence was all one way
on it.   The barrier was up to both design load and test
load. There was evidence from the Health & Safety
Executive.  There was evidence from Dr. Eastwood on that.
There was no contrary evidence, and your Lordship will find
it dealt with in the interim report at paragraph 124.
Certainly there was a chapter where Taylor L.J. deals with
the collapse of 124A.

     There is no assertion in the pleadings, as yet, that
it failed because it was under strength.  There may be when
we get the answers to the particulars, but that is not
something the investigation of which is in any way hampered
by the criminal prosecution because sections of the ramp
have been made available to the police experts and
everybody else.

      That, of course, is the fundamental question here, and
I say that for this reason.    They are going to have to
establish that it collapsed because it w a s < understrength,
as we see it, for this to become a live issue in their
claim against the engineers.    If, as the evidence
suggests, it collapsed because there was too great a
pressure, then one cannot see that it matters very much
whether the cause of death was simple overcrowding or
overcrowding causing the collapse of the barrier causing
death.   Either way it is overcrowding.    If, of course, the
thing is understrength, then that may give rise to some
deaths but unless and until they are going to assert a
primary case not so far asserted and not so far covered by
any evidence, one cannot actually see the relevance of all
this.    So to say that on this ground these proceedings
should be put off is extremely hypothetical.      It is
assuming that they may yet assert a case which they have
not asserted, and they may then find themselves in
evidential difficulty.

     Those are the only parts in the affidavit, as I read
it, where there is any suggestion that because of the
consequences directly or indirectly of the inquest or the
police proceedings they are in any way hampered in their
preparation and presentation of the case against us.

     For the rest, their assertions are "We are prejudiced
in two general senses. Firstly, there is prejudice to the
police and to individual police officers and, secondly,
there is a refusal of co-operation by those police
officers."

     There has been no attempt to go from the general to
the particular and to indicate in what particular respects
any particular officer's unwillingness to co-operate has
hampered them in their preparation of the case against my
clients.  Frankly one finds it difficult to understand how
they could.  If one just starts at the top, and I shall not
go through the list, and take Chief Superintendent
Duttonwood, would it really be the case that they would
ever be contemplating calling him in order to set up a
contribution claim against the engineers.  It is only when
one starts going from that general assertion of "Oh well,
we are prejudiced" to see how it ties in with the
particular claims they are seeking to advance that one can
test whether there is suph prejudice.  No attempt has been
made to do that.

     It has further to be borne in mind that unlike the
case where there has been no inquiry, the inquiry in fact
has had this additional further element.   Everybody knows
what the police have said, and for that matter Dr.
Eastwood, about these things. We are, if you like,
analogous to the American litigation where you have had
pre-trial depositions and interrogation of witnesses and
all the rest. They have said what they have written and
they have been cross-examined; it is in the evidence.

     My Lord, this is not an application to vacate a
fixture because of a specific difficulty and to substitute
another date.  What they are seeking is effectively a
general stay of the civil proceedings but by another route.
Even if they were in some particular evidential difficulty
because of some area of their case, it would not justify
the remedy which they seek.   They might have to come to
court between now and October and say, "We have run into
this particular difficulty", and then obviously everyone
would do their best to try to overcome that difficulty
because the consequences of putting off a trial because of
some evidential problem would be one everybody would seek
to avoid.  But to say that because of these general
         allegations of prejudice therefore the whole thing should
         be put out is to seek a remedy which outweighs the
         grievance in any event.

              My Lord, we would submit that if there is to be
         discontinuance in the circumstances where an appropriate
         forum for determining the issues between the parties has
B        already been laid down by the court, it should be on terms
         not only that they bear the costs but that they should
         bring no other proceedings arising out of the same matters;
         i.e. the events that happened at Hillsborough on the day in
         question.  We would set out the terms we seek in our
         summons.  We say that for this reason ----

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN;  Pausing there, you say I must exact an
         undertaking not open to the parties in these proceedings,
         but also an undertaking in respect of other proceedings —
         people who have not commenced actions yet.   I do not see
         that there is any need for that because if I impose the
         undertaking presumably that would be unacceptable to them
         and what would in practice happen is — subject to appeals
         obviously — that the action would proceed and the police
         will either have to admit liability or contest it.  If they
D        contest it there will be a judgment against them, and I do
         not see why I therefore have to exact an undertaking from
         them relevant to other cases.

    MR. TOULSON:   I suppose only for this reason.  Supposing they
         were to take another course and say, "All right, we shall
         not pursue any contribution claim in relation to the
         victims Chapman and Rimmer, but we shall at a later date of
         our own choosing seek to claim contribution in respect of
         the amounts which we have paid to all other victims." They
         would say that the undertaking here was only an undertaking
         not to seek contribution against Rimmer and Chapman.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I think you are asking me for too much.  You
         are asking me to pass judgment on the validity of the point
         whether any decision in the Chapman and Rimmer cases will
         be relevant in other cases.  That is a matter that will
         have to be argued out.  It depends to what extent it
         overlaps with subsequent litigation or relitigation. At the
         moment you have not persuaded me that I should ask for that
         undertaking.

    MR. TOULSON:   My Lord, may I just try one further shot and then
         leave the point, because if your Lordship is against me I
         do not want to -----

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  In practice I think the undertaking relative
         to the Chapman and Rimmer cases is good enough, if you
         win.  I think that is good enough.


H
                                                                     CD




                                    45
    MR. TOULSON:   My Lord, we hope that is the case.   We are, in
         my submission, in this position.  Chapman and Rimmer, on
         any showing, is going to determine what I might call the
         primary matters.  Was there negligence on the part of my
         clients as alleged?   Any matters which might be left over
         would be in a relatively small compass, which would be
         whether, if negligence was proved in some particular
B        respect, that was causative in relation to a particular
         victim.

              It is open to the police, even in these proceedings,
         to seek to have that point covered by seeking rejoinder or
         seeking to enlarge the claim to cover another appropriate
         victim.  Since they have the power within their disposal to
         determine the heart of the matter if not the whole matter,
         it would be an abuse for them at a later stage to have the
         opportunity even of trying to raise substantially the same
         matters through a different procedure.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  But you have eloquently set about persuading
         me that it could not be reasonably expected of you to agree
         to treat Chapman and Rimmer as conclusive, and you said to
         me that there could be other unforeseen imponderables that
D        we do not know about. The police would say exactly the
         same, and that is the answer for giving only a general
         undertaking.

    MR. TOULSON:   I have one final answer to that.  They know what
         their case is on those matters and we do not. W e have
         refused to answer their questions because it would be open
         to them — and I know I am taking an extreme example — to
         choose a victim who was very close to a gate and then say
         "that is typical of all of them".  If it does not suit them
         they will recognise it is too limited in its scope. They
         have the power within the management of this action which
         has been laid down to add other cases which would cover it;
         we do not. We merely defend their claim. We are not
         responsible for its formulation.  I cannot take the matter
         beyond that.

               My final point is simply this.  I know, because my
         learned friend Mr. Woodward has been kind enough to mention
         it to me, that he will be putting before your Lordship
         another case on issue estoppel — a landlord and tenant
         case.   Rather than seek to get up later and refer to a case
         which has been cited for the first time in reply, may I
         therefore merely in anticipation say this.

              That was a case where the court was not concerned with
         the court's power under Order 18 or 19 or under its
         inherent jurisdiction to strike out for abuse of process.
         It was concerned solely with the use of estoppel. But
         that, even if I am wrong in the submissions that I have
         been making on the Binney line of authority, and even if
H
                                    46
                                                                        ! uo
         contrary to my argument or even if it be the case that it
         would be open to some party to seek to relitigate the
         matters, if they could show that something quite unexpected
         had turned up, it is a quite insufficient basis for asking
         your Lordship to exercise your jurisdiction today to assume
         that that is a likely occurrence.

B             My Lord, may I mention that I have handed up to your
         clerk, with the agreement of my friends, page 1 of the
         statement of Dr. Eastwood to the Inquiry which gives some
         personal details.  I apologise for the form in which it
         appears and am grateful to my friends at being happy for me
         to admit it without a verifying affidavit.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  No doubt you did so with an express
         reservation of privilege.

    MR. GLASGOW:    My Lord, we thought it right that I should go
         last.   Your Lordship has very kindly indicated that you
         have already read the skeleton.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Yes, thank you, it was very helpful.

D   MR. GLASGOW:    I was not fishing: it was only to say that we
         are very much cast in the role of supporters on this
         occasion.  As your Lordship will appreciate, we were not
         directly concerned in the question of the conclusive
         quality of any judgment that there might be in the lead
         actions.   Without undermining the position of either of my
         friends, or interfering in an argument that is not our's,
         may I just say that we have made our position quite plain
         at the earliest stage.  We believe that all the real issues
         between the parties fall to be resolved by these lead
         actions.

              May I say again, without any criticism of anybody,
         that if they do not it is the parties' fault, not the
         court's. With the very greatest respect, section 49(2) of
         the 1981 Act is not a new thing.   Your Lordship would have
        <had that in mind — perhaps not the section number if your
         Lordship does not sleep with it by the bed — and would
         have been aware of the principle.   The court is always
         concerned that finality should be achieved.   One has it in
         every action that one raises.    Where there are continuing
         points hanging on it the judge will always say, "Well, let
         us have that resolved now. We do not want that hanging over
         for some indeterminate time in the future."    My Lord,
         section 49(2) — and this is perhaps an important point —
         does not recast the function of the court as an
         inquisitorial one with some supervisory jurisdiction to
         ensure that all matters are raised.   That is still up to
         the parties.  We do say, with the very greatest respect,
         that those who wish to come before the court cast in the
         clothing of a plaintiff and say — as Mr. Metcalf very
H

                                     47
                                                                    Iff
candidly does in his affidavit — "we now fulfil the role
of plaintiff", then it is for the plaintiff (the defendant
who is bringing these proceedings against us, as
defendants) to ensure that his pleadings do raise those
issues in respect of which he now seeks relief, the relief
being an adequate indemnity to cover him against all claims
which he can reasonably foresee.

     Of course, my Lord, we accept that there is a
possibility — and I am not rude when I say theoretical
because we genuinely believe it is theoretical — that some
extraordinary event may occur and an individual plaintiff
or an individual pocket of plaintiffs may not adequately be
dealt with by the ambit of the present proceedings.

      If that is a real risk as against a speculative one,
then the sooner the pleadings are clarified in accordance
with the requests that have been made, and everybody knows
what their true ambit is, the better.   But it lies ill,
however eloquently it is done — it always is by my friend
Mr. Woodward — in the mouth of the party seeking to appear
as a plaintiff to remind the court that the court has some
obligation to ensure that there is finality.    I say that
acutely conscious of the fact that we, of all parties, had
pointed out at an early stage that we believed that the
ambit of the present proceedings does bring about finality,
and therefore the point is a theoretical one and not one
which should be of real concern to your Lordship. We would
respectfully pray in aid. the fact that neither of the
parties seeks to advance a real case for an alternative
that is not covered, and when asked to do so there is a
resounding silence because none of us seriously has one in
mind.

     My Lord, the arguments against this matter going off
for any length of time have been advanced far more
eloquently than I can and expanded in a better argument
than the one that I have produced.  It does not help if I
repeat it as a sort of echo.

     Can I just address myself to the points that I have
not covered and which have been helpfully raised by my
friend Mr. Woodward during the course of the morning.

     I apprehend that it is not now disputed that the
discretion is your Lordship's.  I say that because it was
an important matter of principle to which we addressed
ourselves in the argument because we had thought — I hope
mistakenly and I think it is clear now — that following
our contested hearing before your Lordship, when you fitted
us in very kindly at Manchester on an earlier occasion,
that what had happened was that the police entirely bona
fide (there is no attack on the Chief Constable's bona
fides here), frustrated by your Lordship's order and for
 understandable reasons of concern about possible risks set
 about through lawyers finding a legitimate tactic to
 pre-empt the argument for the exercise of the discretion by
 saying "well, there is a rule that enables me to take a
 certain tactical position and it is beyond argument."

     My Lord, it was only for that reason that your
Lordship was kind enough to indicate that you had already
read the correspondence, but you would have seen that the
only point in courteous and careful correspondence which
there has been throughout that Davies Arnold were taking on
behalf of its client was, "If that line is going to be
taken and if you are going to simply pre-empt the matter by
serving a notice of discontinuance, we do think that in
some way or another between us we ought to bring this
matter before the learned judge. We should not seek to do
it by simply a 'you are not taking roe' type argument under
the rules."   That was all we ever wanted; to return it so
that the matter could be judged upon by your Lordship.
Issues of fairness and prejudice of the litigation should
not be pre-empted by taking points on rules.   That was the
matter of principle which appeared to us to come loud and
clear, and unarguably, from Castanho v. Brown & Ro o t .

     My Lord, that is the only complaint, and perhaps
comforted by the fact that it was no less a person than
Lord Diplock who made the decision, what we were
complaining of was a misuse, not an abuse.      It is a misuse
of Order 21, rule 2, which cannot conceivably apply, in our
respectful submission, to say, "Well, there we are. Now we
are going to get our adjournment because we will simply
serve notice of discontinuance and begin again." We
thought that to use the rule for that purpose was a misuse
in every sense.    (1) It did not apply and (2) even if it
arguably did, it could not be a proper way of, if there is
such a thing, retrospectively pre-empting without appeal
the exercise of the court . * s discretion on a matter which
had already been heard.

       My Lord, having‘said that may I apologise for the fact
 that there is no affidavit. The responsibility for that is
 mine.   I say that personally.  It is not my solicitor's or
 my junior's -----

JUSTICE STEYN:   I am probably wrong ----

GLASGOW:   My Lord, it is not a question of being right or
 wrong: it is a question of being courteous to the court.
 If we had thought that it was remotely helpful or courteous
 to your Lordship I would have exercised my judgment
 differently.   But in the circumstances which presented
 themselves last week, as I say it was a conscious decision
 and not an oversight. We thought that the affidavit,
 helpful though it was, which substantially deposed to
              argument, was not one that really called for a reply.  In
              so far as it raised guestions of prejudice, we accept that
              they are bona fide.  We believe, with respect, that they
              are misconceived but that nobody has ever sought to suggest
              that the arguments on prejudice which we advanced to your
              Lordship on the last occasion and which have gone wholly
              uncontradicted or criticised or commented on were anything
    B         other than equally bona fide.

                   If I might respectfully remind your Lordship of them


         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I have not read the transcript of the last
              proceedings.  I thought it would not be a particularly
              enjoyable exercise, so do not assume that.  I would rather
              be reminded of what the points are.

         MR. GLASGOW:   My Lord, the transcript of the last has provided
              more entertainment and admiration from those of us on this
              side of the court than anything else we have got.  That was
              the whole point.  It is having it that we decided not to
              put any further evidence in.

    £>            Your Lordship may just remember, and I must stress we
             were not seeking to say that a specific individual is
             prejudiced in some particular way.  If the Chairman of the
I            Club had a nervous breakdown or if, as your Lordship
             suggested might be a possibility, there had been difficulty
             with obtaining an overdraft, those would be matters for
             affidavit.
I
                  What w e sought to rely upon were the matters which
             your Lordship would have notice of in any event, where you
I            have a very public business — the Club.     Heaven knows, it
             is an odd use of the word "Club" because, of course, it is
             a limited company protected by insurance and one does not
             want to be disingenuous about this.    But it is a business
I            that is extremely public.   It lias a large number of
             employees confronting their members, as members of the
             public, who are at risk and who are very confcerned about
             this action on a weekly, if not a daily, basis.    Certainly
             every week the public are coming through the gates, and
             they are confronting and being confronted by the stewards
             wearing the armbands and the gatemen who are shutting gates
             in people's faces and still trying to co-operate with the
             police, as they have done ever since April of last year.
             Of course it is not through the summer season, but one is
             concerned with the realities of a football season that is
             going on; a club that is living with a deserted terrace and
             with men who have already given evidence or proofs of
             evidence who are — and I say this in no patronising sense
             — ordinary, football-supporting men who work on a Saturday
             for the club which they like and where they think they are
             doing a good job, and with the directors and the more
    H

                                         50
                                                                      1 12
senior staff who have been directly criticised and named as
being responsible for the deaths of a large number of
people.

     My Lord, it is against that background that we are —
and I say so without any hostility — offended by the
suggestion in paragraph 11 of Mr. Metcalf's helpful
affidavit, that in some way we have already had the issue
judged against us and found wanting, so really our concern
about our reputation cannot be a real one.  My Lord, it is
a very real one.  The only criticism prayed in aid out of
the whole of Lord Justice Taylor's report is the suggestion
that despite the fact that we acted upon the counsel of Dr.
Eastwood's advice, the removal of a barrier was our
responsibility.  In so far as that was a contributory
factor, that was the one passage which he cited.

     Of course, there are other criticisms of us. We have
always accepted that and we did so publicly.  Our signing
is not as good as it ought to be and things like that.   My
Lord, if it is to be pursued (and we now know it is) on the
basis that we are responsible as individuals and as a club
for the deaths that happened in pens 3 and 4, that is a
terribly serious matter to have hanging indefinitely over
the heads of men at all levels of employment and service
within that club.

     My Lord, all that we seek to do is to maintain the
timetable, without putting the blame on your Lordship which
would be grossly impertinent.  It was a timetable that you
with our assent — and I mean all of us, my Lord — gave in
June of last year, giving us a year in which to prepare for
trial, subsequently extended to October.   That is the date
which is the principle which we seek to maintain.

     My Lord, in doing that we do not seek to pre-empt any
real argument that there may be about prejudice because if
there is — and I use the word again with emphasis — a
real argument about prejudice, however much we may dislike
it and however much the public may be surprised (and the
press will undoubtedly comment that this trial should go
off), if it is quite clear that, for example, an individual
police officer (one or more) is charged with a criminal
offence and my learned friend Mr. Woodward comes back, he
need not bring an affidavit because we would accept it from
him, as he knows.  If he says, ’’That is an officer upon
whose evidence the police had intended to rely" — in other
words, ”he is an officer who we can honestly say we would
have put into the witness-box as somebody who was going to
assist the court and whose evidence was relevant to the
attacks which we, the police, make upon the Club and the
engineer" — we would have no alternative (I hope I do not
undermine anything that has already been said but I
apprehend it has got to be said in any event) but to agree


                                                          1i
                           51
to the matter being stayed for the period of time that was
appropriate for that criminal procedure to be conducted.

     My Lord, that is not the position and with the
greatest respect we are overwhelmingly confident that it
never will be the position that an individual is going to
be charged in this way.

     At the moment there is no claim of present unfairness
to anybody.  What there is is legitimate and bona fide
expressions of concern that things may happen which will
interrupt the timetable. We go ahead with our eyes open,
and by that I mean your Lordship and we.  We know that
events could conceivably happen that will throw this matter
into disarray and cause us to be adjourned yet again.  My
Lord, of course it could.  Tragedies of all sorts occur.
But until they are real, as distinct from spectres, there
is a very substantial interest both in the parties and in
the public generally to have these matters resolved in so
far as they may fairly and properly be done in accordance
with the timetable that has already been fixed.

     My Lord, there are a very large number of people who
are interested, and I mean that in the proper sense of the
word, in the outcome.    It is not just from the point of
view of making copy for newspapers; there is a public
interest in the widest possible sense. The issues between
the clubs and the police who police clubs is something that
is being grappled with — it is probably an inappropriate
word — every Saturday up and down the country.    We really
do need to know because we have already missed one season,
although we have had the benefit of Taylor L.J.'s report of
course.   What is this contractual position, and with what
propriety can the police who police grounds, when they make
mistakes (as undoubtedly they must now concede they did)
seek to blame the unpaid part-time officials for those
mistakes.    In any way to shelter behind procedural rules
to say "We wish to come back with a recast case at some
future date of indeterminate distance into the future” is
something which is going to be viewed both inside this
court, and outside by the public, as a matter of very real
concern.

     My Lord, the last matter is that I would like to
correct the impression that your Lordship may have that
whatever may have been going on in the action, which has
now mercifully — and that is a proper word to use at this
time — been disposed of; that there has not been anything
done in the third party proceedings, and therefore the
third parties have got no right to conplain.

     The only issues between us for the past year since
these proceedings were started have been the issues between
     the three of us, and the counsel who are not before your
     Lordship today.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: What I meant is in a formal sense no steps
     other than filing a request for further and better
     particulars took place.   I accept that the solicitors
     would have been taking statements ----

MR. GLASGOW:   No, my Lord.  Forgive me for interrupting, but
     the formal statements were taken care of by your Lordship
     in ordering, as you did, a recognition of the reality of
     the position that the defences in the action should stand
     as the defences in the third party proceedings.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Yes, of course.

MR. GLASGOW:   So we have joined issue in both a real and a
     technical sense.  I think it is in your Lordship's bundle
     at page 209.  Your Lordship ordered on 20th December — the
     last occasion we were before you — that the defences of
     each party to the amended statements of claim should stand
     as defences to the third party claims.

          Again, it only acknowledges what your Lordship was
     really saying we all knew; that the issues had been joined
     between those who were alleging that one another was
     responsible.  This is not a case in which there was ever an
     issue that any of us had with the plaintiffs. The issue
     has always been between the defendants.  That is why we —
     and the blame if it is blame, or the praise if by chance it
     should be should be given to us — when these proceedings
     first started sought the co-operation which we obtained
     from all parties to ensure that people were joined as
     defendants and that the action was not delayed or
     threatened by the need for delay through third party
     proceedings.

          When the claim was first served as my learned friend
     Mr. Toulson has just told you, it was served just on the
     Club and the police.  Your Lordship may remember that we
     said, "If we now start third party proceedings on the local
     council and on Dr. Eastwood, that will involve a
     proliferation of work; it will involve necessary delays and
     that is to be avoided at all costs."   With the helpful
     guidance of Rose J. on that occasion my learned friends
     very properly agreed that they would not even amend their
     statement of claim but, at our request, they would take it
     away and serve it in a substituted form so that all the
     parties were joined from the start.

          The whole benefit of that exercise is now threatened
     by the speculative argument of a spectre that does not
     exist.  We have been working towards the trial of those
     issues ever since.  My Lord, what we wanted to avoid is now


                                                                 A
                                 53                                I
             tearing up however many months' work it is.  It is tearing
             up that we are talking about.  My learned friend is not
             asking for a stay; he is not asking to vacate a date.   He
             is asking to abandon these proceedings and begin again in a
             new form.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I just want to follow the chronology.    The
    B        amended statement of claim was granted, you say, by me.

        MR. GLASGOW:   Yes, that is page 110.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Yes, I follow.

        MR. GLASGOW:   That was the way it worked. My Lord, the only
             other matter which we would respectfully ask your Lordship
             to bear in mind when considering the reality or the
             speculative quality of the threat — because it is a matter
             that really concerns us — is this.   If in fact we have got
             the case of an officer charged, or of a real threat to the
             administration of justice, neither of us would have been on
             our feet.  It would not have been necessary to appear
             before your Lordship.

    D             One of the factors we would ask you to bear in mind is
             the very full letter which the police solicitors sent round
             to people trying to resolve the matter — for ease of
             reference it is page 22 of the exhibit bundle, 21st
             December when the argument was set out — setting out the
             suggestion that we should all agree that these test lead
             actions should proceed.   We thought it was sensible to
             agree.  Dr. Eastwood's advisers took a more cautious line
             because they were concerned about the possibility that
             until the matter was fully pleaded against them it would be
             irresponsible to agree.   We respect their position
             although we did not think it necessary to take it
             ourselves.

                  The important thing, with respect, is that that letter
             never suggested that there was some unfairness or threat to
             the fair administration of justice.  Of course it took the
             point that the Chief Constable was unhappy with the
             timetable.  We knew that.  We had just come from an unhappy
             occasion before your Lordship — so far as anything in this
             case is ever unhappy — when the Chief Constable and those
             advising him were concerned that they were being kept to a
             timetable that they were unhappy with.

                  My Lord, we do pray this in aid, knowing the quality
             of the representation that they have.  If those responsible
             lawyers had been in the slightest bit concerned that there
             was an imminent threat to the fairness of the trial, they
             would never have dreamt of writing to us and saying, "If
             you agree to treat the lead actions as conclusive then we
             are happy to go ahead with the proceedings."   Really it is
    H

                                         54



I
              most unfortunate — although one understands the spirit in
              which it was done — to write to the defendants to the
              third party proceedings (contribution proceedings) and to
              say, "If you will agree to these issues all being resolved
              one with another then we will go ahead", without any
              indication that to go ahead would involve unfairness or
              prejudice to individual officers.    In all seriousness, if
    B         there really was a case — and we apprehend that there is
              not — of immediate risk of unfairness or prejudice, it
              really ought to have been put before you at the time when
              we were being invited to consent to a course which is now
              said to involve prejudice and unfairness.    If it did not
              involve   it on 21st December it does not involve it today.

                   My   Lord, I think that anything further that I said
    C         would be repetitive of an argument that has been more
(
\
              skilfully advanced ----

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  There is one point I wanted to ask you
             about.   On the hypothesis that I hold that the notice of
             discontinuance is ineffective and that in relation to
             whether it be 21/3 or alternatively 16/6 I wish to exact an
             undertaking not to recommence proceedings, what is being
    D        suggested to me is the point about the width of that
             undertaking.   I have in mind that such an undertaking
             ought not to be wider than the two immediate formal
             parties, although its indirect bearing could be greater.
             What Mr. Toulson suggests is that I should apply it to all
             the litigation, but that-seems to me to be taking a view on
             all sorts of matters where the Chief Constable may want to
             raise different arguments.

        MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, whatever I agree      with with my friend Mr.
             Toulson,    that argument would not be open to me and it would
             be disingenuous of me to seek to support it. We believe
             that the ambit has to be the issues raised by this
             litigation. As your Lordship knows, it is our case that
             everything of reality is already covered. Therefore if
             there is a genuine matter not caught by that net, that is
             the risk that we must take; but we do not believe it <
             exists.

                   My Lord, it seems a very curt and short answer to such
              careful argument by others, but it is only because of the
              care and better quality of those arguments that I do not
              wish to repeat or waste any more of your time.

        MR.   JUSTICE STEYN:   Thank you very much indeed, Mr. Glasgow.

        MR.   WOODWARD: My Lord, may I deal generally with a couple of
               matters.  My Lord asked whether there was a decision by
               Millett J. on the question of staying the import of
               criminal proceedings.    It may be that your Lordship had
               in mind DPR Futures Ltd. (1989) 1 WLH, 778.    Indeed, it is
    H

                                           55
                                                                            117
         a case that is referred to in the correspondence because I
         think that the Director asked that it should be drawn to
         Rose J.'s attention.

    HR. JUSTICE STEYN:  Millett J. took a different course there.
         The point of that case was that he said he was allowing
         pleadings and discovery at interlocutories and the time for
B        a statement comes later.

    MR. WOODWARD:  That is right. He found that there was a real
         risk of prejudice on the material before him, but he said,
         "I will not hold up the action.  I will let it go on. The
         moment it becomes likely that oral evidence..." etc.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  I think he was following the
         Vice-Chancellor.

    MR. WOODWARD:  Yes.  He also indicated that other steps could be
         taken by undertakings, for example, not to disclose
         material.   That was where one of the parties was being
         prejudiced.

                 My Lord, there is a more recent decision on this
D       matter and we have not been able to get a useful
        transcript, or the determination of it.      Your Lordship may
        recall the publicity that was given to a certain libel
        action involving a boxer. It is the matter of Warren v.
        M a r s h , a decision of Michael Davies J. We have not got a
        useful transcript of it. Our understanding is that on the
        application of one of the parties, notwithstanding that the
        other was quite happy to go on, the matter was held in
        abeyance pending the determination of the criminal matters.

             As we understand it, the very issues that would be
        determined, or some of the issues that would be determined
        in the libel action would have to be considered in the
        criminal proceedings.  That was quite recent.

              In relation to my learned friend Mr. Toulson's point
         about the Coroner's difficulties which arose from the
         Coroner's involvement, it may be that the proposals that
         the Coroner would make to a certain degree might relieve
         the difficulties.   We think with respect it is bold to
         suggest that it will, and that there will be no
         difficulties in the light of what he proposes to do.    We
         refer to the letter which is before the court dated 26th
         February 1990.    It might alleviate the situation, but my
         Lord that must be a hope rather than an inevitability.




H

                                    56
      In relation to my learned friend Mr. Glasgow's point
concerning the spectre of prosecutions, the language is
illuminating because that spectre is plainly something more
than figment of the imagination of the Director of Public
Prosecutions because if it were so unlikely a prospect it is a
matter of some concern so much time is being spent upon it.
That the parties might be affected is put by my learned friend
Mr. Glasgow as something that is unlikely.   It is not likely
charges are going to arise out of that.    We would hope that
that is the right view.

      However, that is not the view that those very close to
those matters have themselves taken and there is already an
indication that that spectre is having its effect — real or
imagined.   There are individuals who, at this moment and for
sometime have found themselves unable to co-operate with the
first defendant.    May I draw your attention to the letters.
It is part of the exhibits to Mr. Metcalf's affidavit.    There
is the letter of 24th October 1989 at page 125 from Messrs.
Russell Jones and Walker dated 24th October 1989, in response
to an inquiry by those instructing on behalf of the Chief
Constable:   HWe do not to this date know which Officers are to
be seen .... It is unlikely to become clear until a much later
date.    You will appreciate that there are many Officers who
were on duty on the date of the Disaster, whose actions will
not be scrutinised by the West Midlands Inquiry Team.   Bearing
in mind, however, toe uncertainty at this particular stage, we
must take the view that all Officers are at risk in the
Inquiry.    We must therefore express the view, at this stage,
that we would be firmly in opposition to any Officers of
Federated Rank providing written statements for disclosure in
civil proceedings.    Our views in this regard will not change
until such time as the Inquiry is completed, which we
anticipate will be some considerable time yetH .

      At the bottom of the page, "It seems logical that the
Inquiry should be completed and the Inquest disposed of before
Officers tender statements to your goodselves in connection
with the pending civil claims. That was the Police
Federation.   It did not only occur to them.    My learned
friend Mr. Toulson on behalf of Dr. Eastwood has referred to
Mr. Duckenfield.   With respect the manner in which the case
on behalf of the argument, to a certain extent, on behalf of
Dr. Eastwood is presented seems to miss the point as to what
these proceedings are about and I will come to that in a
moment.   But in relation to Mr. Duckenfield may I draw
attention to the response to an inquiry by those acting on
behalf of the Chief Constable.   It is in a telephone
memorandum attendance note, page 126.    The letter to which
that was a response is at page 121, a letter from Messrs.
Hammond Suddards of 16th October 1989 and the reply is 27th
November 1989 at page 126.    "Attending Mr. Coughlin of


                          57

                                                    •    ! T9
        Hepworth & Chadwick on telephone.  He referred to the letter
        which I had sent prior to the directions hearing and confirmed
        that, at present, his advice to Mr. Duckenfield would be not
        to co-operate simply because of the danger of prejudice to the
        criminal proceedings” .

              So much for the spectre there.  It is also a spectre
        which is operating on the mind of the Director of Public
B       Prosecution and we refer again to the letter at page 119A.
        With respect to my learned friend Mr. Glasgow's submissions
        that is not to recognise the reality at least of some of the
        evidence.

               May I deal with the indication that this defendant fell
        in with and was party to the third party directions that were
        given.    Indeed he was party to the third party directions
        that were given and that was a result of discussions.   But it
        is breaking no secrets and no confidences to disclose that
        when those discussions were taking place throughout the Chief
        Constable was making it plain it was in his mind to
        discontinue.   What happened then was not on the basis that
        this discontinuance was not then in contemplation.    It had
        been mentioned to my Lord in argument that morning.    That is
        why it was necessary to fix a date for deemed service of the
D       proceedings.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:     You did it by one day.

    MR. WOODWARD:   Yes.   A weekend fell in.       It was done.

               May I come back to the point — and I hope I do not
        make it unfairly — in relation to the manner in which the
        arguments are put for Dr. Eastwood in particular and the
        suggestion that there is no likelihood whatsoever that Mr.
        Duckenfield would be giving evidence.  That seems to be the
        suggestion.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: The point that is made is that his evidence
        might be relevant to the culpability and degree of culpability
        or lesser degree of culpability of the police but it is not
        likely to have very much effect on the claim in negligence
        against the engineers.  I am not saying it is right but that
        is how I understood it.

    MR. WOODWARD:  If that is how it is put then we accept that what
        Mr. Duckenfield may say or may not say is unlikely to affect
        the primary liability — if there is primary liability —
        resting on Dr. Eastwood.   He must answer for what he did and
        not what Mr. Duckenfield did or did not do.

              That is not what these proceedings are about.   This is
        not solely causation.  This is not solely an exercise into the


H                                    58


                                                                   120
                                                                                   \




            investigation of facts.   May I draw your attention to the
            provisions of the Civil Liability and Contribution Act 1978.
            I touched upon it in opening this matter.   It is paragraph
            5900 in Volume 2 of the White Book.   That Act begins at page
            1565.   Section 2 deals with Assessment of Contribution.
            Assessment of contribution requires certain findings of fact
            to be made.   Section 2(1):  "Subject to subsection (3) below,
            in any proceedings for contribution under section 1 above the
     B      amount of the contribution recoverable from any person shall
            be such as may be found by the court to be just and equitable
            having regard to the extent of that person's responsibility
            for the damage in question".    It is reiterating very much
            the language and effect of the provisions in the law Reform
            (Contributory Negligence) Act and the authority on the
            construction of the meaning of the phrase "having regard to
            the plaintiff's share and responsibility for the damage is
     C      Davies v. Swan Motors. I venture to submit this is not
(.          contentious at all between the parties.   What is involved
            amongst other things is a consideration not only of the
            causative potency of a particular factor but also the
            blameworthiness.

                  It is not inconceivable that there may be individuals
            whom the Chief Constable would wish to call as witnesses, even
     D      though — if it were the case — they had been at fault
            nevertheless to demonstrate the blameworthiness that should
            attach to that conduct.   Unless that evidence has been given
            it is our submission the conclusion and assessment required
            might be in peril of not being properly made.

                  May I give an extreme example without indicating a
     E      particular officer.   If there was an officer on the perimeter
            fence who had his   mind focused on crowd      behaviour rather than
            crowd control and   safety and was intent on directing his
            attention to the pitch, if that were reprehensible in one
            context it might be entirely excusable in another and whilst
(           if it was a breach of duty nevertheless have no or very little
            blameworthiness attached to it. Of course the
            blameworthiness, that element, may vary according to plaintiff
     F      or victim.   Thus the relative proportions of blameworthiness:
            30 per cent, 10 per cent, 15 per cent, may depend on where the
            victim happened to be injured because in relation to each
            victim the time may be different, the place may be different
            and the circumstances may be different.     Those matters would
            have to be looked at and without looking at them the objective
            of the contribution notice before the court could not be
            satisfied.   We would not get to the answer and that is why it
     G      is necessary to look at what the police did and contemplate
            that many of them will have to give evidence.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   They can of course be called.  It is true
             that they will not give any further co-operation but


     H
      presumably most: of them testified before the Taylor inquiry
      and they can be asked to testify at the court proceedings and,
      if necessary, under subpoena.   In relation to their own
      conduct they would have been questioned in detail at the
      inquiry.   That is the distinction that Hr. Toulson makes with
      police evidence being primarily relevant to their conduct.
      That would have been explored before and their evidence is not
      likely to be very important in relation to whether an engineer
      should or should not have given advice about a barrier.

HR. WOODWARD:    It cannot impinge upon what the engineer's duties
    were.   But apportionment of the blame against the engineer,
    if the engineer is performing his duty and his duty is
    causative, will evolve apportionment of blame amongst the
    police -----

HR. STEYN:    Absolutely.

HR.   WOODWARD:    It cannot be one without the other.

MR.    JUSTICE STEYN: Absolutely. The only point I was   making is I
      accept that you are hindered in the sense that these police
      officers do not, understandably at the moment, want to give
      further statements, but in relation (leave aside the
      engineer's conduct) to police conduct on that day they have
      already testified and given quite detailed statements.

HR. WOODWARD:     Yes, they have.

MR.    JUSTICE STEYN: Not only do you have the transcripts and their
      statements but they will be available at the civil trial too.
      You are nevertheless, I accept, handicapped in the sense that
      there may be supplementary things that you want to ask them
      which you cannot ask them between now and the trial.

HR. WOODWARD:    In an ideal when coming to a trial one would want
    to be able to make admissions.    One would want to make
    concessions.    One would want, so far as possible to tune the
    attention of all upon what was considered to be the likely
    real kernel, the real material matter.

HR. JUSTICE STEYN:  You are making a valid point which I do not
    question for one moment.   I have to balance it and weigh it.

HR. WOODWARD:      Yes.     May I turn to the balancing and then I will
    sit down.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:        I am not hurrying you.   Take all the time you
    need.

MR. WOODWARD:   The point is made concerning the importance of
    this matter to Dr. Eastwood.  The point is made of the


                                    60
                                                                                1




             importance of this matter to the club. We would seek to make
             the point those policemen have no less a valid point and no
             less the prospect of prejudice than the club or Dr. Eastwood
             and perhaps a greater degree or prospect of prejudice.   Some
             of them may be in jeopardy but the prejudice in our
             submission, the weighing of the importance, may be said to be
             at least equal and we would submit perhaps greater on the part
             of the police. What can be more important? I do not seek to
     B       belittle the points made, whilst accepting them on behalf of
             club and Dr. Eastwood, but what can be more important than the
             integrity and standing of police officers?

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:     I do not know the ordinary police officers
             would like this matter to be delayed.     I suspect it is highly
             likely, assuming there are no criminal proceedings — and
             there may not be any, it is not a matter upon which I can
             comment— but if there are not any I suspect the ordinary
ft
             police officers, leaving aside the police force as an entity,
             the ordinary men and women of the police who did duty there
             that day m a y be delighted to have this matter behind them as
I            soon as possible.

         MR. WOODWARD:   Everybody would be delighted and would wish to
I    D       have this matter disposed of and resolved. It is in nobody's
             interest for it to go on.  The overriding interest is not in
             finality although that is important.   If the question was
             put: would you rather get it right or have it decided in
I            October? there could only be one answer.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Yes, I see that.
I        MR. WOODWARD:   The police themselves did want it delayed;   the

I            Russell Jones Walker letter to which I have referred.

                   Those are our submissions.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Thank you very much indeed. I am grateful to
I            you all for your very helpful arguments.   The matter is of
             considerable importance.   I want to consider it.  J will give
             judgment on Tuesday at 10 o'clock.




     H                                  61
