                                                  14

                                                                       P.   HOPSON


                     Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do you know anything about the
                          Tannoy system that was in operation that day, or did you have
                          anything to do with that? - A. No, it was nothing to do with
                          me.

                     Q. Mr. Sanderson would you wait a moment.  There may be another
                        question.  If you would just wait a moment-
                 B                   POLICE CONSTABLE PHILIP HOPSON Called

                                           Examined bv MR. PHILLIPS:

                     Q. You are Police Constable Philip Hooson?    Is that right? - A.
                        That is correct, sir.

                     <j. There are one or two matters out of your statement I want to
                         ask you about, mr. Hooson.  You were on duty at the match, and
                         part of your duty was to go to the Midland Station, was it
                         not? - A. That is correct, sir.

                     Q. With a serial of other Officers to meet supporters off the
                        trains? - A. That is correct.

                     0. These would be the ordinary service trains at the Midland
                        Station, and they were supporters from both Liverpool and
                        NQttrrvghatt "Forest?-.--*'- A., That is. correct, yes.; *-

                     0.   When the supporters came off the trains at the station did you
                          and the rest of your serial have some method of searching and
                          filtering the fans? - A. We did, sir, yes.

                     Q. What did you do with regard to the football supporters? How
                        did you filter them? - A. What do you mean? How, physically
                        or how did the arrangement work?

                     0 . Yes. - A. How would you like me to explain it to you?    What I
                         am trying to say is when they arrived at the exit it was like
                         a matter of depending on the identification with whatever
                         scarf they were wearing or what ticket they had on them.   The
                         Nottingham Forest went down to the bottom end of the train
                         station and the Liverpool fans went to the top side.

                     Q. So you separated them into two groups effectively at the
                        ticket barrier? - A. More or less, yes, sir.

                     0. When you got them into the appropriate group what did you
                        do? Did you search each one? - A. No.  My serial did not
                        search each one.

                     Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    How did you get them into the same
                          group?   I can see it if they are obviously wearing colours of
                          the club, but otherwise what do you do? Liverpool on the
                          left, Nottingham on the right? How did you separate them off?
                          - A.   That is basically it, sir.  British Transport Police,
                          they have all the information as regards what trains what fans
                 H        were using and which platform they were going to arrive at,
                          and they basically did the segregation prior to them arriving

L. Harpham Ltd
                               15

                                                       P. HOOSON


     to us.  We just continued it, ensuring that the Nottingham
     Forest fans went down to their collection point and the
     Liverpool fans went to theirs, basically speaking.

G.        MR. PHILLIPS:    So the Liverpool trains and the
     Nottingham trains arrived at different times, did they? - A.
     As far as I am aware.

Q. And you would get a batch of supporters all from the Liverpool
   train and another batch from the Nottingham train? - A. That
   is right, sir.

Q. Were you concerned to know whether the people who came through
   the barriers had tickets for the match? - A. What we did. when
   they came through and if we had identified them as football
   supporters, we asked them where they were going.  Our
   instructions were not to allow them into the city centre.   So
   we searched them for a ticket, and if they had a ticket,
   dependent whether they came from Liverpool or Nottingham,
   determined which end of the platform we sent them to.

Q. You say you searched them for a ticket.  Does that mean you
   searched everyone who appeared to be a football supporter for
   a ticket? - A. Basically, yes, sir.

                                     -That .really meai*%
     c a m e without tickets had the advantage of going into :theritbwn''"
     that those who came with tickets did not have? - A. That is
     it, basically, sir.

Ol        MR. PHILLIPS:     And it was only those with tickets you
     sent along to the buses that were going to the ground? - A.
     That is it, sir.   As far as I can remember, yes.

0. So if a person had said to you he was going to the match but
   had not got a ticket with him you would not let him get on the
   bus? - A. If a person what, sir?

Q. Said that he was going to the football match but did not have
   a ticket with him when you searched him, you would not let him
   go to the appropriate bus to go to the ground? - A. I d o n ’t
   know, sir.  I did not particularly come across that problem
   that I can remember.

Q.   All of those who came....      - A. As far as I can recollect, yes.

0.    Then I think you and your serial went off to the ground after
     you had finished dealing with the arrival of supporters at the
     station? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. And the bus you went on travelled along Middlewood Road, past
   Hillsborough Park and down Leppings Lane from the Catch Bar
   Lane end? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. I think you had a journey along Leppings Lane.  What time
   would it be when you were going down Leppings Lane? - A.
   Roughly speaking it would be 20-to-3, quarter-to-3, roughly.
                                  16

                                                         P . HOOSON



Q. About quarter-to-3? - A. Roughly speaking, yes.

Q. And how was your journey down Leppings Lane? - A. it was very
   slow because there were quite a lot of people down there.

Q. What sort of bus was it you were in? - A. A double decker.

Q. A South Yorkshire Transport bus? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Had that bus been held up at the Catch Bar Lane end for any
   time? - A. What do you mean by the Catch Bar Lane end?

Q. At the Catch Bar Lane end of Leppings Lane.   We have heard
   some evidence that there was a line of three buses held up by
   a Police serial, and was eventually let down Leppings Lane? -
   A. It did stop, sir, but the exact location I am not sure.
   It was in Leppings Lane.

Q.   Had you previously attended at football Semi-Finals at this
     ground? - A. Yes, one or two over the years.

Q. How did you consider the people in Leppings Lane?

           MR. WOODWARD:     Sir, I do apologise for rising and
     Ifntefr^'pi^ing^ but-i%is-;in ^relation to lir. .Sapde^on... The ^ .
     purpose or calling him f irst this morniiii“5i'^''chAtf''his"''v ' - ‘X . '
     attendance is required urgently elsewhere in relation to soiiie
     matters that are happening in Barnsley.       Might he be released..

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I was about to take an opportunity
     of saying that, because I have found what I wanted, which was
     something which confirmed what he had to say.   So I d o n ’t
     think I need to ask him anything further about it.

          MR. WOODWARD:   He will be available should later
     information be required from him, but his attendance is
     required urgently elsewhere, sir.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Yes, he is free to go.

Q.        MR. PHILLIPS:   Did the situation in Leppings Lane seem
     to you to be unusual? - A. It did inasmuch that there were
     quite a lot of people there which I thought for that time of
     day.

Q.   And your bus had some trouble getting down Leppings Lane,            did
     it? - A. We did, sir.  We had to travel very slowly.

Q. Were    the fans out on the road then as well as on the pavement?
   - A.    From the Leppings Lane they were both sides, but in the
   main    at the Leppings Lane turnstiles,   but they were walking
   down    the road towards the turnstiles.

Q.   I think you went to the gymnasium as you were expected            to do
     and got there at about 5-minutes-to-3? - A. That would           be
     approximately.
                                                                    17

                                                                                              P . HOOSON



                         G. And you were to be kept in reserve in the gymnasium? - A. That
                            is right, sir.

                         G. For further >.duties if required. You then got orders to go to
                            the Leppings Lane stand? - A. To the West Stand, yes, sir.

                         Q. And did you go in fact on the pitch side or at the back of                          the
                 B          North Stand? - A. We went on the pitch side, sir, on the
                            track.

                         Q. What did you see as you were walking towards the stand? - A.
                            As I was walking up towards it I saw the ground was full, and
                            we neared the West Stand I could see that the West Stand was
                            quite full, but the section to the right as you walk towards
                            it did not seem quite as full.

                         Q. When talking about the West Stand I think we should say the
                            terraces, the Leppings Lane terraces, rather than the Stand.
                            The section to the extreme right you say was not very full? -
                            A. It did not appear to be so.

                         Q. Where did you see the biggest concentration of people? - A.
                            The most of the stadium appeared full, but to direct it
                 D          straight at the Leppings Lane end, the full face of the
                             ».^iJeppa;ngsist.Laise4:®ndv ssagnied.. t©., be, rq-.u,i.te .f

                         Q. Did you come to gate 4?                          I did, sir, yes.

                         Q      Was that gate open or closed when you got there?                         A. It was
                              l closed, sir.


                         G. What did you see.

                                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                 Have you the time when this was
                                 going on?

                         q   .        MR. PHILLIPS:   What time was it when you got to or were
                                 approaching gate 4? - A. I would not be quite sure to give you
                                 an exact time.  As far as i can remember it was before 3
                                 o'clock, before the kick-off, because the players were warming
                                 up on the pitch as we walked into the stadium.

                         Q. Did you see anything that happened on the pitch after you got
                            to the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. On the pitch, sir?

                         G.      Yes? - A. No,            not on the pitch.

                         G.      You don't know whether the game had started or how long                       it
                                 went on? - A. Absolutely no idea, sir.

                         G.      You say gate 4 was closed?                - A. That is right,    sir.

                         G.      What did you see in pen 4? - A. I saw that there wasquite a
                                 number of people crushed up to the fencing.   They seemed to be
                     H           in quite a desperate situation.



J . L. Harpham ltd
                                     18

                                                         P.   HOOSON




Q. And you were to be kept in reserve in the gymnasium? - A. That
   is right, sir.

0. For further duties- if required.  You then-got orders to go to
   the Leppings Lane stand? - A. To the West Stand, yes, sir.

G.        And   did you go in fact on the pitch side or at the back ofthe
         North Stand? - A. We went on the pitch side, sir, on the
         track.

0. What did you see as you were walking towards the stand? - A.
   As I was walking up towards it I saw the ground was full, and
   we neared the West Stand I could see that the West Stand was
   quite full, but the section to the right as youwalktowards
   it did not seem quite as full.

Q. When talking about the West Stand I think we should say the
   terraces, the Leppings Lane terraces, rather than the Stand.
   The section to the extreme right you say was not very full? -
   A. It did not appear to be so.

Q.     Where did you see the biggest concentration of people? - A.
       The most of the stadium appeared full, but to direct it
       straight at the Leppings Lane end, the full face of the
'"r.5 •-Leppl«g§‘*L&feef-,,^hd.^s%fe)^d:>lsy .be

Q.       Did you come to gate 4? - A. I did, sir, yes.

Q.,Was that gate open or closed when you got there? - A.               It was
 /closed, sir.

Q. What did you see.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Have you the time when this was
         going on?

q    .         MR. PHILLIPS:   What time was it when you got to or were
         approaching gate 4? - A. I would not be quite sure to give you
         an exact time.   As far as i can remember it was before 3
         o ’clock, before the kick-off, because the players were warming
         up on the pitch as we walked into the stadium.

Q. Did you see anything that happened on the pitch after you got
   to the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. On the pitch, sir?

Q.        Yes? - A. No, not on the pitch.

Q.        You d o n ’t know whether the game had started or how long it
         went on? - A. Absolutely no idea, sir.

G.        You say gate   n   was closed? - A. That is right, sir.

Q.        What did you see in pen 4? - a .i saw that there wasquite a
         number of people crushed up to the fencing.    They seemed to be
         in quite a desperate situation.
                                                  19

                                                                         P. HOOSON


                    Q. Thar, of course, would be the first of the two centre pens you
                       came to? - A. That is right, sir.

                    Q. Were there other Officers on duty outside pen A? - a . a s I
                       walked on the track as I can remember there were three Police
                       Officers standing on the track.

                    Q. Were they conscious or appear to be conscious of what was
               B       going on in pen a ? - A. I can't say, sir. I really don't
                       know.

                    Q.   Were they   looking towards pen 4 or out towards the pitch? - A.
                         As far as   I can remember they were not looking towards the
                         pitch.

                    G. When you got to pen n you found the gate closed, you saw
                       people crushed up against the fence.  Did you take the
                       opportunity of looking along towards pen 3? -A. Not that I can
                       remember, sir.

                    G.   You can't say whether No. 3 gate was open or not? - A. What        I
                         can say to you, when I walked on that track towards pen 4
                         there were no gates open.
                D   G. None at all? - A. None at all, sir.

                    G. Were there- s-peata-tors on the perimeter -track? - A-. ’n ® s i r , ..

                    G.    None at all? - A. None at all, sir.

                    G.'What did you do then when you saw what you did see in pen 4? -
                       A. What I did, 1 realised there was something desperately
                       wrong, and of course understanding that the orders are that
                       nobody goes on to the track, I had to decide to open the gate.
                       I told the Police Officer there - I have no idea who he is -
                       to inform the control room that we will need some assistance
                       and we would open the gate, and then I went and opened the
                       gate.

                    G.     I think you debated a bit with yourself, did you, before doing
                         so? - A. I think so. sir, yes.

                    G. And we have the views or the thoughts you had in your
                       statement? - A. That is right, sir.

                    G.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    What was the thought? - A. I
                         think, "If I ’m wrong I'm going to get a right bollocking for
                         this” .

                    G.        MR. PHILLIPS:   That tends to suggest that you had had it
                         clearly drummed into you not to open these gates.  Is that
                         right? - A. It is, sir.  Over the years of attending football
                         matches the practice is that nobody goes on to the track
                         except in exceptional circumstances, i.e. they are under
                         arrest or they are ill or in the wrong part of the football
                H        stadium and consequently would be escorted to where they
                         wanted to go or taken to the Police room or whatever.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                              20



                                                     P. HOOSON


   Basically they are not allowed freedom of movement on to the
   pitch.

Q. Was that something that had been told to you that very day or
   something you had heard previously? - A . It is something that
   you know which is drummed into you, as you suggested, over the
   years.   It is not something I was aware of-being told on that
   day.   It is just something I know as a Police Officer.

Q. The person you spoke to you say he had a radio - did he have a
   radio? - A. He did, sir, yes.

Q. Did he appear to give the message you wanted him to give? - A.
   I d o n ’t know, sir. I did not necessarily wait for him.

Q. We   heard evidence from a Constable Illingworth who said that
   he   was the one who opened gate 4. Could you comment cn that.
   Do   you know him? - A. I have no idea, sir.  I don't know who
   he   is.

Q. He would have been in position already before you arrived? -
   A. I have no idea, sir.  I don't know who he is.

Q. You did open the gate, did you? - A. I did, sir, yes.

- 0•
   . What idid' y-ou--dcr? <..fdWkat ;-was^-the-. effect                 ^
     A.- I ‘
           o pened .the gate :and the people who were ,behind..did not
     move.    They were squashed and crushed, so much so that they
     could not move.

 Q./They could not get out through the gateway? - A. That is
    right, sir.




                                   /Q. When you opened the gate.
                                         21




                                                                         P. HOOSON

Q. When you opened the gate did you have any difficulty
   opening it? - A. No, I had no difficulty.

Q. It did not spring open?- A. I mean, not that I can
   remember.  I just grabbed the gate, opened the gate,
   pulled it open and that is it. Whether there was any
   pressure behind it or not I did not recognrise it as
   such.

Q. Were you able to get any of the people out of the pen?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And did that seem to do any good? - A. Well, as soon as you
   pulled one out there was another one to take their place.
   It did not matter - it seemed at the time, initially, no
   matter how many you pulled out, and each one took a great
   deal of effort, there was another one to take their place.

Q. The people you pulled out, did they appear to be to you
   either injured or in physical distress? - A. Oh, yes, sir,
   they were very distressed.

Q. Did they appear to be injured? - A. There were some app­
   eared to be injured.

•        JJhe LOit€3:,cyO'U;.tools-?©$t,we r e;<abl§v(.to .walk^o*ic«:otic e**y
          extxactedv them: from the gateway, were...they?: -;A
          Some ran off.

Q. Some ran off.     You of course had other Officers with you,
  .■ did not you? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. How many of you altogether do you think there were trying
   to get people out? - A. Well, initially there would be
   myself, P.C. Akred and Sergeant Swift, as far as I can
   remember. I was not taking particular notice at the time
   who was there.  Of course, as time went by ....

    Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Sorry.    There   was yourself,
          P.C. Akred and .... - A ....... Sergeant Swift, sir.

    Q.Swift. - A. And consequently we were joined by other
       Officers as time went by.

    Q.         MR. PHILLIPS:   And you three, I suppose, would be all
          busily engaged at the gateway itself?- A. Initially, sir,
          yes.

    Q. There would not really be much room for other Officers to
       help there, would there? - A. No,  sir.

    Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Were you all part                    of   the same
          serial? - A. That is correct.

    Q.           MR. PHILLIPS:        Were other efforts being made to get
                                               22




                                                                                 P. 'HOOSON

       people out of that pen that you were aware of? - A. As
       time went by, from what I can recollect, Police Officers
       were trying to pull the fencing down with their hands and
       drag people out as best they could.

 Q. You were not one of those? - A. No, sir.

 Q. You stayed at the gateway, did you, for some time? - A. I
    s tayed there.

 Q. Can I iust go back to one matter that I should have asked
    you about? When you got to the pen in the first place did
    you hear anything from the crowd itself? - A. Well,
    initially, it was just a lot of noise, a real lot of
    noise, that is not unusual for a match this size, you do
    not particularly take notice of, not knowing anything was
    wrong at this time.  But as I neared pen 4 it became
    apparent these people were shouting and screaming and
    they were screaming for help.

  Q. For help? - A. That is right, sir.

  Q.    Can you remember anything that was said or is                             it impossible?
       - A. It is difficult, sir.  It is difficult.

i,.Q.K; . T . h e y i V £ . t f t a E i § G . g e ^ t   -out :Gjf --where-o&ey.v**e-»e$   4oy&*.**•
       Clearly.

  Q. And then I think you- have given us in your statement some
      examples of particular people that you helped to get out
    .
    - of the pen.   I think there was   one person with a broken
      arm, was there? - A. That is right, sir.

  Q. This was a young boy? - A. About 16 I think he was.

  Q. How did you manage to get him out? - A. He seemed to have
     managed to pull himself up above other people and he was
     shouting to us.  We leaned over, just grabbed over and
     dragged him out.

  0. When you say leaned over do you mean over the top of the
     fence or through the gateway? - A. No, through the gateway.
     Had to hold on to the side of the gate to grab hold of
     him ....

  Q. Were the people then in the gateway standing up or were
     they on the ground? - A. They were standing up, sir, well,
     in a fashion.  They were not erect, as such, but standing,
     sir.

  Q. From your position which was perhaps the closest into the
     pen that we have seen did you see any people on the ground?
     - A. There were some on the ground in front of the gate,
     sir.
                                                     23


                                                                              P. HOOSON

                        Q. In front of the gate?- A. Yes.

                        Q.   They would of course be difficult to see when you were at
                             first taking people out, would not they? - A. They would,
                             sir, yes.

                        Q.   Did you get to them eventually? - A.   We did,   sir.

                    B   Q.   Can you give us any idea how many people there were like
                             that? - A. On the ground?

                        Q. Yes. - A. From what I can remember, probably four or five.

                        Q. Four or five. - A. Yes.    They were, kind of, stuck at the
                           gate.

                        Q. Stuck at the gate. - A. On the floor, yes.

                        Q. All in the close proximity of the gate? - A. At that time,
                           yes  sir.

                        Q. Did you see any way in which the pressure on these people
                           at the front could be relieved? -A. The only way I could
                           see it at that time was to perhaps get a serial into the
                    D      back of this stand to start pulling people out from the
                           back to make the people at the front or near the front
                           move back and relieve 'pressure                  ;■ l ^-7^

                        Q.Did you do anything about that? - A. From    what I can
                           remember, there was an Inspector present   but at      t h e .....
                           time everything was very confused and I    cannot remember
                         ' who it was.   No idea who it was.  And I   asked him to get
                           a serial in the back and do this.

                        Q. Yes.  Were you able to observe from where you were any
                           Officers getting into the back of the terrace? - A. Yes,
                           sir.

                        Q. Did they go into the back of the terrace? - A. From what
                           I can remember, they did go in the back end of the
                           terrace eventually.

                        Q. And did that relieve some of the pressure that there was
                           at the front? - A. Eventually it did, when they had to work
                           their way through these people.

                        Q.   How long do you say it was really before the pressure was
                             relieved sufficiently for people to get out under their own
                             steam?- A. It is hard to say.  Could be 20 minutes.

                        0. As long as 20 minutes? - A. It is hard to say, sir.        Could
                           be totally incorrect on my estimation.

                        0. And that is starting from just before the match kicked off?
                           - A. That is right, sir.
                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                           24


                                                                                    P. HOOSON

Q. Yes.  And then I think you went away from the gate and did
   a lot to help those who had been taken out on to the pitch?
   - A. That is right, sir.

Q. To see if you could assist, along with many other people?
   - A. That is right, sir.

             MR. PHILLIPS:              Yes.       Thank you very much.

                         Cross-examined by MR. HYTNER:

Q.     Inview of the thoughts you had to yourself on the day I
      can keep my questions very short.   The reason that you
      thought you might get a bollocking if you made a mistake
      is that the whole of your training was to the effect that
      those gates were meant for Police use, to get somebody out
      who was under arrest or to allow a Policeman into the
      terrace to make an arrest or do something of that sort.
      - A. That is right, is it? - A. That is the basic under­
      standing, sir.

Q. Yes.  The one thing you were never trained in relation
   to the gates was that they might be for use to get fans
   out who were under pressure through crowd trouble, through
   crowd pressure?- A. Well, it is not a matter of training.
      It-      ;ra » tte i? ,5 a E g f .mtthxsitog- J   ^   h   a   t   t   .   y    o   u   -   v   -
      sir.

Q.     Common sense.        That is what you did. - A. Yes.

Q.- It was not due to anything that you had been taught? -A.
   No, sir, it is common sense.

Q. The next thing is this.  Going back in time, if I may.
   Coming up Leppings Lane from Catch Bar Lane you were in
   a prime position to see the back of the crowd that was
   pressing into the turnstile area? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. You skirted the               back of that crowd?- A. That is right, sir.

Q. And there were still people coming down and up Leppings Lane
   to join that throng?   - A. That is right, sir.

Q. And all you saw, the   impression that you had, having your
   bus skirting just the edge of that mob or press, was of a
   press of people, a mass of people, simply trying to get
   into a football ground?- A. That is basically it, sir.

0.     Nothing more.          Nothing less? - A. That is it, sir.

0..    And coming forward in time again, can you tell us because
      it may be important when you made your statement that we
      are now going from?    Do you remember how soon    after the
      incident?- A. It would be - the disaster happened on the
                                                                  P. HOOSON

Saturday, returned to work on the Monday, returned on nights
- it would be some time during that week.

You see, the importance is this, that many things that are said
 now about what the Police should have done it may be said,
 well, this is all with the benefit of hindsight.       It was
 at the very time of this tragedy that you appreciated that
 it was no good asking people at the front of the terrace
 to push back, you needed a serial at the back to pull
 people backwards at the back? - A. That is how I saw it.

You    actually made that suggestion to a Superior Officer at
the    time? - A. That is correct, sir.

       MR. HYTNER:         Thank you.

                 Cross-examined by MR. JACKSON:

Two matters, Mr. Hooson.             Would you look at this photo­
graph, please?

       MR. JACKSON:        My Lord,     it is not one that is before
you:

 Perhaps before I ask you questions would you hand it to
-My Lord,. p.l«^e2,.^,J^.r4 ues.tiDn?„I...aia. go.ing^.to „a?k--.<^ELC.e,pj,-™.
 the !t i m e ^ M r S ^ i ^ t h e -gates' that ire' o p e n e d ; 3 , 4 "and -5:,:1 ■"
 and the observation that you have as to the relative
 densities of pens 6 and 7 and pens 3 and 4.                      —           .

     MR. JACKSON:   This is the first witness, My Lord,
who has come from that side of the ground.  All the
others have come ....  Each of my friends has seen the
photograph.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                Sorry.     This is the first
witness who has come from?

       MR. JACKSON:          Has   approached it that way round.

       MR. COLLINS:        That is not correct.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:             I do not think that is right.

      MR. COLLINS:   We have had about half-a-dozen who
 came from that ....

       MR. JACKSON:          Since I had the photograph.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:              Since you had the photograph.

       MR. COLLINS:          Oh, since you had the photograph.

       MR. JACKSON:          I understand each of my friends has
                               26


                                                           P. HOOSON

     seen the photograph.

          HR. COLLINS:      I have not.

          MR. WOODWARD:      Thatis not right.        I have notseen it

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I will pass it to you in a
     moment, Mr. Woodward.  Is this, by any chance, one of a
     series that appeared in the Liverpool evening paper?

          MR. JACKSON:      Yes.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I remember seeing.         Taken by a
     fan in the stand, is that right?

          MR. JACKSON:   I understand it to be from the paper
     itself.  There are a number of other amateur photographers.
     I understand this is the Liverpool evening paper.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Yes, I see.

          MR. JACKSON:      I am told it is The Echo.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       That is an evening paper, is it

          MR. JACKSON:     I understand so.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Was that on the Friday after? ■

          MR. JACKSON:   I am receiving, as it were, information
     from my side.  I have the sequence. This is the earliest.
     I apologise to those of my learned friends who have not
     seen it.  I did think the ....

          LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:   There is only one copy, is there

          MR.   JACKSON: At this stage there are negatives         and
     smaller copies available.

          MR. COLLINS:      Does not appear to be timed.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       It is.   2.59.

          MR.   COLLINS:    I did not see that./

          MR.   JACKSON:   Yes. As far as we can gather the match
     kicked off some 25 seconds before 3 o'clock.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Just see the goalkeeper on the
     left edge.

Q.        MR. JACKSON:   Mr. Hooson, I want to ask you three
     questions about that.  You told us when you arrived that
     there weie n0 people on the track.
                            27


                                                       P. HOOSON

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry.  Just forgive me a moment.
     Has everybody not seen it?  I think it should go along the
     line just before you go any further.  Then hope to get
     another copy.   (Photograph shown)   I do not think either
     of the Assessors have had a chance to see it yet either.

          HR. WOODWARD:   There is a timing on it, sir.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Yes.     If I remember there is     a
     whole series with the time on.

Q.        HR. JACKSON:   Hr. Hooson, clearly, looking at things
     from different angles can give different impressions, but
     there we see a photograph that rather strikingly reveals
     the difference in density between the pens on the extreme
     right and the pens in the centre.Having seen what you
     saw. does that photograph reflect the difference that you
     perceived? - A. Basically ....

Q. In fairness to all other witnesses, does that exaggerate
   that which you saw or does it reflect pretty accurately
   the difference between the two? - A. Well, when you are
   stood on the ground you are looking at it from different
   angles.  You obviously get a different impression.

Q; That is;why I asked the question. - A. What I perceived
   When. 1 approached tfre-West Stand was s''imply.-^a£-.-the3ks:
   side pens did not seem as full as the centre pens.

Q. Hay I then move on to the     next point?

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR.:  I just wonder whether, because
     we have seen something of the same on these photographs,
     looking at these photographs one wondered whether part
     of the visual effect may be due to shadow and sun on the
     front part and shadow further back but I am not sure.   I
     merely*raise that point for consideration.




                                  / MR. JACKSON:     Sir, my
                                                                   28
 SBD
 FI
                                                                                           P. HOOSON

                                    MR. JACKSON: Sir, my u n d e r s t an di ng of the photograph
                                and my c on s i d e r a t i o n of it came to the conclusion that the
                                shades between the front and the rear half of the fence was
                                not to be taken into c on sideration.           That seemed to me to
                                be the sum of it but that is only my assessment of it.             I
                                was relying only on the clear spaces in pen six and seven.

                                      LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:    Yes.

                    B               MR. JACKSON: May I next ask you about your evidence
                                when you said when you first arrived on the track there did
                                not appear to be any people.  Clearly on any track there are
                                a number of people, Police Officers. A. The usual personnel
                                Police O f f i c e r s .

                                If we look at that photo gr ap h we see it timed at 1459 and
                                perhaps i mp o r t a n t l y we see gates three, four, and five, are
                                all open.    That means you must have arrived on the track
                                before that. A. Yes, Sir.

                                So that we can       time your arrival            prior    to 2.49.   A. Yes,
                                Sir .

                                And    your abil it y    to see what you saw.             A. Yes,   Sir.
                    D           May
                                         cr-
                                       I noV move back some         four or five hours          to the railway
                        !                                                               by^e^hfrjB.izi^v^
                                cr iticize at- -all bu't I wonder why people ar e :prevented f r o m : :c::
                                going where they want to go and with what power.        If someone
                                takes an early train to S he ffield with a match ticket and
                                arrives in Sheffield at about 11 o'clock with what power do
                                you compel him to go to the ground? A. I am unable to answer
                                that.

                            Q   Is it the position that he is taken to the area of the ground
                                and released? A. That is it.

                            Q   I use the word d el iberately.       Is he in fact in police
                                custody e f f e c ti ve ly from his arrival at the station to the
                                ground? A. That is a strong word to use but basically I
                                would say that.         He is under our control and direction.

                                May I say that events in the past have well justified a
                                great deal of control being extended.          In the future there
                                may be r ec om me nd at io ns , I merely want to ask what went on
                                and not to criticize.          It is the position, for very good
                                reason, that these young men are effectively in custody?
                                A. That is right.

                                Ironically, as my Lord pointed out, if you claim to have no
                                ticket you could go into S heffield centre. A. Basically,
                                yes .

                            Q   What    time   did the    first    train arrive?          A. I have no idea.

                            Q   Approximately      around    11?        A.   It would    be around that roughly.
                H

J. I, Harpham Ltd
                                                                 29
        SBD
        F2 ..
                                                                                          P. HOOSON

                                 C r o s s- ex am in ed   by MR.      MULLER
                    A
                        Q.   Two minor matters, officer.     I want you to see if you can
                             help us a little about the position at gate four when you
                             had opened the gates, do you follow?     I think that you said
                             in your s ta tement that e ventually you assisted in hundred^
                             of people being taken out. A. That is right, Sir.

                        Q.   You cannot put a more precise                  figure on it than that?
                    B        A. There was a lot, Sir.

                        Q.   It may be very d ifficult for you to recall precisely but
                             you mentioned that there were four or five people on
                             the floor at the gate. A. That is right, Sir.

                        Q.   I ask you about that because in your statement you refer
                             spe ci fi ca ll y to two men being on the floor. A. Yes, Sir.

                        Q.   What is the position, is it two, or what is the position,
                             can you help us? A. This is like over a period of time.

                        Q.   When you first got there. A. When we first got there I
                             did not par ti cu la rl y look. I just saw what was in front
                             of me but what I can rec ol le ct is during the time that we
                    D        stood at the gate whilst we managed to pull people out
                             from the bottom -- you see sometimes some people crawled

                             to the g a t e . That is the best why I can explain to you
                             and so they w ould appear all the time.    They would not
                             be there all at once.

                        Q.   It would not be a question of people jamming the bottom
                             of the gate, it was a q ue stion of people crawling to that
                             position? A. They would appear there and we would take
                             them out as best we could, Sir.

                                    Cross-examined        by MR.      G L A SG OW

                        Q.   Do you kno w that the sit ua ti on that we see in the photograph
                             at  1459 occurred before you arrived? A. You are saying that
                             that occurred before I arrived?

                        Q.   I am asking      you.         No,     Sir,    it did not      occur before I
                             arrived.

                        Q.   At the time when you arri ve d you had the impression that
                             there were no spectators on the perimeter area. A. That
                             is right, on the track.

                        Q.   But there were some police                officers, were there? A. That
                             is right, three as best as                I can recall.

                        Q.   You are quite        sure    that     all the gates were shut? A. I am
                             sure,    Sir.

                             Have    you seen     the video        that    has      been compiled?
                    H   Q.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                           30
         SBD
         F3‘
                                                                             P. HOOSON


                 A        A.   I have   seen a video,      Sir.

                     Q.   One that shows a c om p i l a t i o n of different shots from different
                          angles, some in black and white and some in colour? A. That
                          is the one.

                     Q.   I think that there is probably only one of those.        We can
                          see, and perhaps I can remind you, that at the time when
                 B        this p h ot og ra ph was taken to the closest minute, at 1459,
                          we can see a stream of orderly people walking along the
                           pe rimeter and being shown into gate one. A. That is probably
                          how it was to begin with.        I cannot say, I was not looking
                           at people, basically.

                     Q.   No, but the first people who were allowed     out of the gates
                           we know wa lk ed perfectly normally along the front of the
                           perimeter gates and were shown into gate one. A. I do not
                           know where they went, Sir, but they did walk.

                     Q.   It a ppears that there must have come a time when all those
                           three gates that we see there open were sut again.    Can you
                           help us on that? A. No, Sir, I cannot.    All I can say to you
                           is that when I went on that track, which was before three
                           o'clock, all the gates were closed and there was no-one on
                 D         the track.    When I opened the gate I stayed there until
                           the|>6iv\waS';empty-]: or thereabouts..       ....

                     Q.   When you opened the gate there was no question of people
                          walking our n or mally and in an orderly stream A. No.

                     Q.   By that stage they were           already in acute distress    A. That
                          is right.

                     Q.   T hank you very much.

                                Cross-examined       by MR.     TOUL SQ N

                     Q.   One matter only, officer.      Do I understand that as soon
                          as you cane in sight of the West Terrace you took in at
                          a glance that the centre was full but there was room at
                          the ends? A. It was not at a glance as such, it was as I
                          was w a l ki ng along past the North Stand.

                     Q.   That did not require any d et ailed observation, it was
                          obvious to your eyes.  A. It appeared to be full, yes.

                     Q.   In the centre?      A.    Yes.

                     Q.   W ith room at the        ends?   A.   In the corner ends it did not seem
                          as f u l l .

                                Cross-examined       by MR.     WOODWARD

                     Q.   Mr.   Hooson,   when     you made     your way along the front of

                 H

L. Harpham Ltd
                                                               31
         SBD
         F4
                                                                               P. HOOSON

                                 the North S t a n d ,because that was the route you took,
                                 were you first in line or were other officers preceding
                                 you? A. T here was P.C. Packer in front of me and I think
                                 Se rgeant Swift was in front of me as well at that time.

                            Q.   You think?   A.   That   is right.

                            Q.   W here were you going, what was your destination?       A. To
                        B        the track in front of the West Stand.

                            Q.   At that time were the team already       out on   the pitch? A. They
                                 were out on the pitch w a rm in g up.

                            Q.   This would be the second warm-up, the immediately before
                                 kic k- off warm-up, would it? A. Possibly, I do not know.

                            Q.   The goal area at each end is an area where photographers
                                 gather? A. Usually at a football match.

                            Q.   There are a number of i nd iv id ua ls that one might expect to
                                 be b etween the perimeter fence and the back of the goal?
                                 A. That is right, Sir.

                            Q.   C er t ai nl y at that sort of time.      As you walked towards the
                                 West Stand end where          were you when you first appreciated
                                  that som et hi ng might      not be right? A. Actually walking on
                                  the t ra ck i n ' 'fron't of the Wes t Stand itself," ^'.V.-.1--        n':,r

                            Q.   It was not until you got up to the West Stand that anything
                                  struck you? A. That is right.

                            Q. • In the course of the events of that afternoon is it right
                                 that there was a time when minutes hung and seemed like hours
                                 and other times when you looked at your watch and time had
                                 sped by? A. I did not look at my watch at all.

                            Q.   Did you have an i m p r e s s i o n that times became confused? A. I
                                 have no concept of time whilst I was there.           It was only when
                                 we had been r el ieved and sat down that we appreciated
                                 that time had passed.

                            Q.   T he re were already o ff icers in the area of the gate that you
                                 have des cr ib ed opening? A. Yes, Sir.    There were three
                                 o f fi ce rs who were spread out on the track as far as I can
                                 remember.

                            Q.   You cannot recall who they were,        you do not know them?
                                 A. No, Sir, I do not know them.

                            Q.   You are quite clear,      are you, that you opened the gate?
                                  A. Sir, with respect     that gate was shut and I opened that
                                  gate .

                            Q.   So me one must have caused it to be opned      but in the evidence
                                  that we have heard in this Inquiry, for       example in relation
                    H

J. I. Harpham Ltd
                                                       P. HOOSON


to the tunnel a number of officers have said that they were
the first down there, they were the only ones who were
doing things.  Do you follow? A. I know, Sir.

But your r ec ol l e c t i o n   is clear of opening the gate?
A. Absolutely.

That   is before       the k ick-off?      A. Before   the kick-off,   Sir..

From the moment that you opened it would it be right to say
that you were more or less by it? A. That is right.

Until you had got out of that               pen as many people as you
could help? A. That is right.

That would extend from some time before the kick-off to some
long time after the game had stopped? A. Yes.

Is it your r ec ol l e c t i o n that throughout that time the gate
in q ue stion remained open? A. It did, yes.

As you had been walking along in front of the North Stand to
the West Stand are you aware of whether there had been
or were any s pectators walk in g along the front of the West
Stand to go towards gate one? A. We were not aware of that,
iio.    ■      ■      ■       ;• ;                    ■    ......

You are not saying that was not happening? A. I am not saying
that was not the case.  I am simply saying I do not remember
seeing anyone.

And if your e vi dence is correct and you have done your best
to recall it from the moment that you perceived any problem
you gave help by opening the gate and did all that you
could until the prob le m in the pen had been resolved? A. That
is right, Sir.

When  you opened the gate first of all it is right,                    is it,
that people did not come flooding out of it? A. No,                    Sir,
they could n o t .

They were       just   jammed     there?   A. That   is right.

What   you     had   to do was     to get? A. Physically     pull them out.

To drag      them out? A.        Yes.

And     that    is what   you then occupied yourself         in doing for
the     rest    of that   period? A. That is right.

If what you say is right as you approached the West Stand
you  did not see any gate open until you actually opened
gate four? A. That is right.

                            /Q.     You were the first,     so far as
                                    33



                                                          P.    HOOSON



Q.   You were the   first, so far as you recall                 it,   to open any
     gate?   A.     That's right, sir.

Q.   Can you help as to whether or not there was anybody by
     Gate 3 at that time or do you just not recall?   A.    When
     I got to ---   As far as I can remember, when I got to
     Gate 3 ---

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Gate 3?   A. Gate 4, I am sorry.
     P.C. Packer would be in front of me.    I    understand that
     he went to Gate 3.    I couldn't say whether it was open or
     closed.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:           It would seem,   from  what you have
     described, by the time you got to Gate 4 Mr. Swift and
     Mr. Packer had already gone ahead of you.          A.    No, sir.
     P.C. Packer had.       Sergeant Swift was by this time behind
     me and I was a c c o m p a n i e d by P.C. Akred.

Q.   If we look at P h ot og ra ph DB 17/14 in the South Yorkshire
     Composite 2, there is a photograph fourth in the bundle
     and in the b ac kg r o u n d one can see the advertising hoardings
     for Henry Boots and Howarth Timber and a gate open - bottom
     right foreground.          A.   That's right, sir.

■U   r
     Awd'^ t      &r e tw m "Of-ficeFs -at- -lea 61.;:Iff                                  :rs
     can be seen to the right.           Is that Sergeant Swift?                    -
     A.     That is Sergeant Swift.

Q.   Do you rec og ni se    anybody      else   there?         A.     And myself.

Q.   Which one is you, because ---    A.   I am bending                    down,    sir.
     My hair was s li ghtly longer than it is now.

Q.   You are   bending     down?      A.        I am bending down at that point,
     there.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE       TAYLOR:    Just in front of the               figure    in
     the corner?   A.         That's right, sir.

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:     You r ecognise you: helmet, do you?
     A.   No, sir.    Sergeant Swift is the Sergeant with no    hair.
     That is Sergeant Swift.     But, yes, basically I recognise
     my hair.    It was quite a bit longer than it is now.

Q.   To his left    or to his      right?         A.     I am at his right.

Q.   It may be you have got a slightly different print from
     ours.    It is a di ff er en t print from mine.    Yes,  your hair
     is longer.    So you were      then occupied in dealing with
     people at that gate t h ro ug ho ut that time?    A.    That's
     right, sir.

Q.   You are quite    sure that it was you that opened the gate,
     are you?   A.      I am a bs ol u t e l y positive, sir.

Q. Mr. I l l i n gw or th has given his          evidence and he has a recollection
   too about what he did.          A.            Whether he opened that gate
                                                               34


                                                                                     P.   HOOSON



                             prior    to my arrival        and did what he did -*

                        Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           That is what          I was going to ask
                             you       A.   I c a n 't s a y , s i r .

                        Q.   You were walk in g round the pitch,               I take it, along the      front
                             of the North Stand?     A.   That's               correct, my Lord.

                    B   Q.   Can you say whether there were any people being shepherded
                             along the front as you were doing that?   A.   I can't
                             recollect.

                        Q.   But by the time you   got    to the track in front of the West
                             terrace, there were   not s pectators out on the track?
                             A.    No, sir, not at that stage.    Whether this has happened
                             prior to me going there, I can't say.    I can only say what
                             h appened when I got there.

                        Q.        MR. W OODWARD:  But it is likely, is it not, if as you
                             walked along the front of the North Stand to go to the West
                             Stand you had seen a gate in the perimeter fence open and
                             a number of people come out, that is something you would
                             have remarked upon because of your training?   A.   That's
                             right, sir.
                    D
                        Q.   And if it had h ap pened .before your, eyes,                 you are likely to
                             have 'iren^mbfered i t . .
                                                      A.  Yes , .sir .                                'f'.'v

                                  MR. HYTNER:   Sir, may I just say, before we go further,
                             there seems to be a lot of difficulty encountered by people
                             in relation to this.  Can I just say there has, of course,
                             also been evidence from Mr. Grobbelaar ---

                                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I have it in mind.                      In fact,
                             I was about to ask a qusstion.

                                   MR. HYTNER:        Mr. Collins at some stage indicated that
                             he might be a ct ually going to submit that Mr. Grobbelaar
                             was wrong.      Can I just say so there is no mystery so far
                             as Mr. W oo dward is c o n c er ne d that I shall be making submissions
                             based on the p r o p o s i t i o n that the evidence seems to suggest
                             that Gate A at any rate was opened and shut, opened and shut,
                             and that is c on si s t e n t with all witnesses and it is also
                             cons is te nt with the e vi dence that we have heard very little
                             of, for obvious reasons, that some fans were actually pushed
                             back into the terraces once they had got out of the gate
                             on to the pitch.

                                  LORD JUSTICE            TAYLOR       Well,   Mr.   Hytner,    this is an
                             address.

                                   MR. HYTNER:   No, it is not an address.                       I am simply
                             i ndicating what line I am taking in fairness                     to Mr. Woodward
                             so he can meet it in questions.


                H            Mr.
                                     MR. COLLINS:
                                   G r o bb el aa r was
                                                           Sir,
                                                          wrong
                                                                    I do not think I ever sought to say
                                                                    except as to his timings.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                              35



                                                                                            P.   HOOSON



                                  LORD JUSTICE       TAYLOR:         The question           I was going to put
                             to this witness:

                             You say, as I unde rs ta nd it, from the time that you opened
                             Gate 4, it remained open for at any rate 20 minutes or s q
                             whilst you were getting people out, is that right?
                             A.   That is correct.

                    B   Q    Not shut   at all     in that     time?         A.        Not shut at all.

                        Q    So if it was opened at all other than by you it must have
                             been opened before you got to the front of the track, is
                             that right?   A.   That is correct.

                             Was there ever a stage when fans were coming out as if
                             the top had been taken off a C oca-Cola bottle?  A.    No,
                             sir, no.

                        Q. You were having to peel them out?                           A.   We were    having to
                             prize   them   out.

                        Q    Did that c on tinue right through or did there come a stage
                             at which the pressure being relieved, people were walking
                             out?   A.     Later on, sir, but we still had to pull them
                    D        out.


                             A,      I cannot   remember           No idea,

                                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR                 Yes,     thank you,         Well,    no
                             bollocking!   Thanks.

                                                       GARY    CAMMOCK,        called

                                                    E x am in ed   by MR.     PHILLIPS:

                        Q.   C onstable Gary       Cammock,    is that       right?         A,    That    is
                             correct, yes.

                        Q.   You, I think, were on the serial which went to the
                             railway station at W a ds le y Bridge, is that right?
                             A.   That's correct, yes.       One of the two serials.

                        Q.   You were there for some           c on si d e r a b l e    time waiting      for the
                             train to come in?   A.              Yes.

                        Q.   When it finally did come in, just                    before 2 o'clock, you
                             went with the people on the train                    down to Leppings Lane.
                             A.   T h a t 's t r u e , y e s .

                        Q.   What time did you get to Leppings Lane?       A.   I don't
                             know, ten minutes, q u a rt er of an hour after we had left                          the
                             station, I suppose.

                        Q.   Once you had arrived at L ep pings Lane with the people                            from
                H            the train, did you remain on duty in that vicinity?
                             A.   Yes, I did.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
