I N Q U I R Y   I N T O     T H E      H I L L S B O R O U G H


            S T A D I U M          D I S A S T E R




                            Before


                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                     MR. B. JOHNSON
        (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                              and

                    PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                          (ASSESSORS)




                              At

                      The Town Ha l l ,

                          Sheffield,

                              on

                Wednesday, 14th June, 1989.




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                    (Morning        Session)



           From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
                Official Shorthand Writers,
            55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                          (MORNING SESSION)


RANDOLPH SAYNOR, called

       Examined by MR. PHILLIPS
       Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER
       Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD

STEPHEN MICHAEL COPELAND, called

_       Examined by MR. GOLDSACK
        Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON
        Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD
        Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW

ALBERT RHODES, called

        Examined by MR. PHILLIPS
        Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW
        By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

STEVEN CHARLES RHODES, called

        Examined by MR. GOLDSACK

WAYNE AUSTIN HALL, called

        Examined by MR. PHILLIPS
        Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW
        By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
        Further Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW
        Further Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD

    ALLAN JOHN HASKINS, called

         Examined by MR. GOLDSACK
         Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW

    STUART ROLAND THORPE, called

         Examined by MR. GOLDSACK
         Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER
         Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON
         Cross-Examined by MR. ROBERTSON
         Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL
         Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS
         Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD
           TWENTY-FIRST DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

              WEDNESDAY, 14th JUNE, 1989

                  (MORNING   SESSION)


     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Mr. Phillips, yes.

     MR. PHILLIPS:   Sir, may I make a correction to
something that I put yesterday to Miss Davies when I
was examining her? I miscalculated the time that the
telephone conversation took between the Fire Service
and the Police Service.  So I have had distributed in
fact transcripts of the actual call and you will see
that the time when the call started was 15.13.45 and
it finished at 15.14.58.   I said it took a minute-and-
three-quarters. I meant to say a minute-and-a-quarter.
I apologise for that, sir.   It was a miscalculation.
Perhaps I can just put the record straight in that
respect.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes. Thank you. Well,
I notice that at least one newspaper today managed
to expand it to two minutes.

     MR. MULLER:   Sir, may I iust say a word about it
because I feel a bit conscious of Miss Davies' position?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

      MR. MULLER:     The position is that I think some
parts of the media have thought to give the impression
that she was responsible for the whole of the delay in
the cutting equipment being brought to the ground. For
the record I think it should be said the position is
that the ambulance was called - the fleet of ambulances
were called at 8-minutes-past~3. It appears about 13-
minutes-past-3 the call was made by Mr. Bichard from the
Hillsborough control room and saying specifically that
the Fire Service was urgently required at Leppings Lane.
That was taken up at Snig Hill and Snig Hill said yes,
Leppings Lane, you want them at Leppings Lane in effect,
and then some other Officer whom we have not yet
discovered then dealt with that call and rang the Fire
Brigade.    That call was received at almost 14 minutes
past, 15 seconds short of 14-minutes-past-3, and the
information was never relayed to her about Leppings Lane
at all and of course that was why she had to make
enquiry. Ultimately the information about Penistone
Road did not come from the Police at all, it came from
 the Fire Brigade, and the position is, as I am instructed,
 that in the Hillsborough area there are at least three
 other football grounds, one being the Sheffield Wednesday
 training, .ground at Middlewpod Road, there is a,rugby
v*l
  \
   0

                                                                        R. SAYNOR

                        football ground at Owlerton Stadium and there is another
                        place where the public play football at Hillsborough Park.
                        And so in those circumstances it was perhaps appropriate
                        she should be ascertaining precisely which ground it was
                        and had the Police passed on the message which the
                        emergency procedure provided that they should, that it
                        was Leppings Lane, there would have been no problem at
                        all because the computer would immediately have picked
                B       up Hillsborough, Leppings Lane.  I thought it right to
                        make that ....

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you, Mr. Muller.    Yes.

                             MR. PHILLIPS:    May I call Mr. Saynor, please?

                                         RANDOLPH SAYNOR Called

                                        Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

                      Q. Are you Randolph Saynor? - A. That is right.

                      Q. Are you a retired man but a part-time turnstile operator
                         at Sheffield Wednesday? - A. Yes.
                D     Q. How long have you been a turnstile operator there? - A.
                         25 years at least.

                      Q. And do you regularly attend at League and Cup matches?
                         - A. Every match, yes.

                      Q/ On this occasion you were engaged on turnstile No. 10.
                 E       Is that right? - A. That is right.

                      Q. What area of the ground did you understand that that was
                         to serve? - A. That was to serve the cantilever stand,
                         the last one, before you come to the West Stand ticket
                         turnstile.

                      Q. By the cantilever stand you mean the North Stand? - A.
                         The North Stand, yes.

                      Q. Yes. Was that the situation during the whole of the
                         period up to the start of the match? - A. Well, that
                         was supposed to be the situation as I was taking
                         tickets for the cantilever stand but it did not work
                         out that way.
                      Q. You see, Mr.Saynor, there was some evidence that originally
                         9 and 10 were to serve the West Stand then by .... - A..
                         That is true. That was early on. That was very early on,
                         that.  Then they changed it to the cantilever stand.   They
                         altered the barrier.

                       Q. Can you tell us, please, at what time they changed the
                       . .area which .you :were serving from the West to the North
                  H


 J . I. Harpham Ltd
                               3


                                                      R. SAYNOR

      Stand? - A. It would be 1 o'clock-ish, I should say.

Q.    And who did that?   How did you know about that?- A. Pardon?

Q.    How did you know about the change? - A. Because we
      reported it. We reported we were not getting anybody
      coming through our gates, so we happened to look outside
      and see - got the wrong tickets coming through, you know,
      so they told the stewards and Mr. Childs came round and
      they altered it round.

Q. So you ended up from 1o'clock onwards dealing with people
   going to the North Stand? - A. Yes.

Q      Yes. Now, did you get from that time onwards everybody
      presenting the right kind of ticket to you? - A. Up to
      about quarter-past-2-'j yes.

Q. Up to quarter-past-2? - A. Yes.

Q.     You were getting North Stand tickets? - A. Yes.

0.    Did you have anybody trying to get in without a ticket
      until that time? - A. Oh, yes, there is numerous do it,
      yes.  They do it every match any way.

Q. Do they? - A. Yes.

Q. What did you do with those people on this occasion before
    quarter-past-2? -A. Just knocked on the window and told the
  / Police.  They iust took them, sent them back or took them
    somewhere else.  I do not know.

 Q. So they came through the turnstile, did they, and then
    went out through the gates?-A. Possibly, yes, or he made
    them jump back over.   If they had jumped over the Policeman
    made them go back the same way they came.

 Q.    Yes. When people came without   tickets didtheyoffer     you
       anything at all? - A. No, no.

 Q. Did they not offer 'you money?- A. No, they     did notoffer
    me money, no.

    Q. Were you offered tickets for the wrong part of the ground
       until this time? -A. I was after quarter-past-2 but not up
       to quarter-past-2.




                             / Q. Now, after quarter-past-2
                                                             4

                                                                     R. SAYNOR


                                               r^ao-t-—2 then how did things change for you?
                    Q - r w i u ^ e J y t M n g seemeS to congregatl. Crowds started
                        A. Well everytn y                      bringing West Stand tickets
                        ^ ^ a n ^ I ^ w e r e n t allowed to take them, so I tried to send
                        S m S u t and we were sending them back out, you know they
                                  h^^When^t^go-t^to^O-to-S^they c o u l l^ no ^ge ^b ac k6


              B           on without tickets squeezing their way in and it was dus
                          chaotic.
                    o     What did you do about these people? - A. Well we kept
                          reporting it to Police and they kept doing their be~
                          t i n it finally got out oi hand.
                     o    Have you any idea how many people c a m e through your turn-
                           stile without a ticket? - A. Oh I should say a. least 50.

                     o        Have you anv idea how many people came through with the
                              wrong type of ticket? - A. With the West Stand tickets,
                              you mean?
                        voc?      A Well the Police told us to take them at finish
                     Q. l n , « j t h e * oou?S not get baok into the crowd. They coula
               D
                        Sot git back through so they told us to take them, so
                        quite a few but I would not say how many.

                        0 When was this instruction given to you? - A. On after
                           half-past-2, 20-to-3 I should say.

                        n' r-n vou say which Policeman gave you that instruction?
               E           -"a  I could not because they kept changing outsiae ana
                           Stewards kept coming round as well trying to nelp ouu.

                            What was your instruction, was it just to taxe^arxy type
                         Q. n- ticket’ - A. My instructions are on my sneeu wnat I
                            get to. take that lettered ticket.

                               I understand that. The instruction you were given by
                         Q.        poiire was it to take any kind o~ ticket or to
                               III people'through? - A. If they had got their t r o ^ s
                               to let them in, yes.
                                          i        a       rvpt let them in? - A. And what th€
                         Q. Polic^did? they removed a barrier what they tod put U
                               so ttat ttey coild go into the west Stand as well .s to
                               go into the North.
                                Did you see that outside your turnstile? - A. I saw them
                         Q. remove it, yes.      well I heard them.

                                SO people coning through your turnstile          could goeither
                          Q. wly? - A. They could go either way then, yes.

                                wife vou tti-ven   instructions .about people who _had no
                                                   a n y
                          Q. t lc Se tf a?    In? -
                                                  A. we are alwaysinstructed before we
                                go out, if that is what you mean.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
I                                                    5

                                                             R. SAYNOR


                         . No, no, I mean by the Police after half-past-2? - A. Oh
                           no, I don't let them in without a ticket. Our instructions
                           are from the office. We don't let them in without a ticket.

                        Q. Did you get any people with Spion Xop tickets? - A. An odd
                           one but I send them out but not at the time when the crash
                           was on, I got either West Stand tickets or the normal North
                           Stand tickets plus the ones what was doubling up with them
                  B        what knew, mates coming together like, and they double up
                           and they just follow round with them.

                        Q. Did there come a time really when you could not basically
                           do anything at all? - A. Well you could not do a thing
                           about it. You just could not do a thing about it.

                        Q. Did people have any difficulty getting through your turnstile
                           apart from. the crush of getting in? - A. Because they were
                           all together, yes. They had a lot of difficulty getting
                           in. In fact it got to a time where I just felt like
                           chucking sponge in and shutting door and letting i_hem sort
                           it out outside because I could tell there were plenty
                           inside in any case, you know. They were well over the
                           amount then inside what nad been before at semi—finals•
                  D
                        Q. In all your 25 years' experience as a turnstile operator
                            have vou experienced anything like this before? - A. Oh no,
                            nothing on that scale.  I have experienced then pushing
                            through the doors when a person has opened it but not to
                            that extent of probably about 100, 200 got in before the
                            Police took control over it. This time even before they
                           -opened the doors the Police had no control over the crowd
                            inside.
                             So you were getting the crush outside your particular
                             turnstile in a way you had not experienced before. Is
                             that what you are telling us? - A. Oh yes.

                                   MR. PHILLIPS:   Yes, thank you very much.


                                            Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:

                         Q. Yes, there are just two things you said, Mr. Saynor, that
                            I would just like you to expand on if you will to see if
                            you really meant what you said.

                                   You said you might have shut the gates and it would
                             not have made any difference because there were more inside
                             than there usually were anyway? - A. Yes.

                         Q   How could you tell that before Gate C was opened the ground
                             as it were was full.     Is that just a guess on your part?
                             - A. It is a guess for the simple reason they were all
                             milling just at the back of the terrace where they should
                             be .watching the,, game and the .game was due to be played
                    H        which it is obvious they have come to watch a semi-final,
                             they would have been in the ground watching and they could


    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                     R. SAYNOR


rrot get in. I have seen that happen before. They just
could not get there so what they are doing, they are just
doing the best way is hanging about hoping Police would
probably put them in a better place on front Oi ground,
somewhere like that. That has happened before.

Can you just take this slowly.  Before Gate C was open you
say there were a lot of people milling about in the concourse
between the turnstiles and the Stand wall? - A. Yes, yes.

How do you' know they weren't just standing there waiting
for friends to come through? - A. I don't know, but through
past experience X have a good idea tnev wasn' i», tiiey jusu
could not get in.

You have seen that before have you? - A. Oh I have seen it
before, yes.
Is that because the two central pens cet full and they don't
know where to go? - A. They just can't push their way in
from the back, you know. Once they start^getting in rro:n
the back they are not too bad, but the first five or ten
people in at the back seem to hold everything out you see
and if they have not got the push, not a young man or
anything like that, well they just have not got no chance.

Have vou ever seen in the past on similar games when it
has been like that., Stewards or Policemen sending them
off to the wing pens, the side pens? - A. They do try to
distribute them round where they can get in.

 You have seen that done before, have you? - A. Yes, I have
 seen that done before, yes.

 r-jas it being done on that day? — A. I could not^ tell you.
 I don't know, I was not able to see anything like that.

 Another thing you have said which souncs a biu dramatic
 and I want to see how far you mean it, is that"the Police
 had lost control of the crowd inside the ground"? - A. Yes,
 well you see there was that many. There was that many
 jumping over.
 This is before Gate C is open, we are talking about? - k.
 Yes, because I was finished before that opened, yes.
 I am talking about before Gate C.

 You are   talking about before the gates open? - A. Yes.

   You say they had "lost control".         In what way? - A. They
   were out-numbered.       Every time somebody came in without
   a ticket, which was every other one practically that were
   trying to get in, I was banging on window for them to
   pick them up as they went through which they were taking
...them. JLs:-:bes.t they could bu-t they were coming in too fast
   for them to take them and stop them.
I
                                                       7

                                                               R. SAYNOR


                        O. What you are talking about is the Police     were not able to
                           control the number of the fans coming in     without tickets.
                           It was not there was any disorder inside     the ground that
                           the Police weren't able to control? - A.     Well I don't know,
                           I was only interested in my turnstile.

                        Q. It is just the non-ticket holders you are talking about?
                           - A. Yes.
                  B
                                  MR. HYTNER:   Thank you.


                                           Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

                        Q. Mr. Saynor, you have been on the turnstiles time in and time
                           out over the years? - A. Yes.

                        Q. And on this day amongst the things that were happening,
                           there were a lot of people coming through following close
                           behind people who had got tickets? - A. That is a regular
                           occurrence with them evsn on normal matches.

                        O. But this was somewhat different on triis day, wasn t it?
                           A. Well they are better organised such teams as Liverpool
                   D       and Manchester United who take quite a vast number av/ay
                           with them, you know, they know all these tricks and you
                           have got to watch out for them.

                         0. Who is better organised? - A. Such as Liverpool supporters,
                            Manchester United, they take more away with them, you know.
                            They know all these tricks of trade, sort of thing.
                   E
                         Q. So this crowd was an experienced crowd, is that what you
                            are saying? - A. True, yes.

                         Q. And they were wise? - A. Oh, they was wise, they know the .
                            ropes which way to get in and which not, you know.

                         0. And one of the ways they adopt is those who have not got
                            a ticket aet close in behind someone who has, and are you^
                            saying at"'times three people were managing to come through?
                            - A. No, not three. Three could not get through but two
                            would.
                         O. Two on a ticket? - A. Yes, but they would know how to do
                            it you see, they push in and make sure. If the one in
                            front was his mate as well who had got a ticket well it
                            was quite easily done.

                          O   They would have to be organised to do that? - A. Not_
                              necessarily.  I mean I could walk through with a ticket;
                              and find out there is somebody following me at back, you
                              know what I mean, but I was interested in^getting in
                              myself so the one at the back has followed me in berore
                              you knoW Where •you a-re -if -you -don’t .watch out -for -it.
                    H
                                                                /Q. Are you saying ....
    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                 8

                                                 R. SAYNOR

Q. Are you saying on this day it was happening time and time
   again? A. True, yes, and when you were trying to stop
   it and argue with them that you hadn't a l e g t o stand on,
   before you know where you are they were jumping over.

Q. And this happened time and time again, people jumping
   over?   A. Oh yes, the last quarter of an hour of it
   being open, yes.

Q. So obviously you are not able to say how many did it,
   but many jumped over?   A. Many, yes.

Q. You see, you were on Gate No. 10, were you not?           A. Yes.

Q. According to the electronic count - page 167 - only one
   jumper came through your turnstile?   A. True. What
   do you mean, only one jumper?  It can't stamp how many
   do jump over.

Q. It misses them?   A. If they don't -- yes, if they don't
   register on the electronics.

Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I do not understand this. I
        thought the whole point of this presumably expensive
        device was to catch people who did just this? Is that
        that right?

q   .        Mr. WOODWARD:  According to the record, which says
        that just one jumped over --- Are you saying that that
        is not right?   A. I'm definitely saying it's not right.

Q/ And is the situation that you intend to describe this:
   that because of the great number that were coming_through,
   either by squeezing up behind someone without a ticket
   or leaping through because you have been distracted or
    .whatever, it was that that the Police were having great
   difficulty in dealing with? A. Yes, because they was
   out-numbered.    There were more getting over that way,_
   you know, in a short time than the Police could deal with.

Q. And this seemed to be happening to a greater degree and
   much more frequently, after about quarter-to-three?
   A. Between half-past-two and 3 o'clock.

 Q. And you have said that the situation was such that you
    felt like throwing the sponge in?   A. Oh, yes. You
    just couldn't deal with it. You had no chance.

 Q. And when you told the Inquiry that you had never seen
    anything like this in 25 years, that is what you are
    intending to describe?   A. Yes.

             Mr. WOODWARD:   Thank you.

             Mr. GLASGOW:    Thank you, no questions, sir.
                                   9


                                                        S. M. COPELAND

          Mr. GOLDSACK: Mr. Copeland, please.   Sir, Mr. Milton,
     who is No. 3 on the list, is not presently available.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Yes.

                  STEPHEN MICHAEL COPELAND. Called
                     Examined by Mr. GOLDSACK:

Q.   Mr. Copeland, I think the season that has just ended has
     been the fourth season that you have worked as a turnstile
     operator?    A. That's right.

Q. And on the semi-final day you were given Turnstile F?
   A. That's right, yes.

Q. Which means that you should have been receiving tickets for
   the Leppings Lane Terrace?    A. That's right.

Q.    Can I ask you please about other tickets that you may have
     received? Did you during the course of the day let people
     through your turnstile with tickets for the Spion Kop?
     A.    I did, yes.

Q. Who told you to do that?            A.     A police officer told me -to
   do it, sir.

Q. Do you know which one?   A. I don't know his name, sir, but
   he was an high rank because other constables were calliag
   him sir.

Q. Anything noticeable about his appearance?              A. Yes, he was
   a well-built fellow with a bushy beard.

Q.          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Is that likely to be Inspector
     Wh it e ?

          Mr. GOLDSACK:     Inspector White.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Yes.

Q.        Mr. GOLDSACK:   When did he tell you to let those people
     in?   A. Very early on.  It might have been any time between
     12 and 1 o'clock.

Q. And did he just come to your turnstile and tell you to do
   that? _ A. What actually happened was we had got one or
   two people coming, wanting to get in, and we sent them away.
   We told a police officer, and about five minutes later this
   officer came and he walked into my turnstile and told the
   officer outside and also myself, and I passed it down the
   line and told everybody else.

Q. I see.  Following that instruction, can you estimate how
   many people you let through with Spion Kop tickets? A. 3
   would say in the region of probably 50 to 150.

Q. That i s a fairly wide bracket, is it not?              A.   Yes.
IJ' r- \ z l
 * 'i     w> ^
                                                       10

                                                                        S. M. COPELAND

                      Q. 50 to 150.     Can you be any more precise?        A.   About 100.

                      Q. As far as you were concerned, did a time come when you were
                         told not to take Spion Kop tickets?   A. No, we took
                         them right up to closing time.

                      Q. When the crush which we all know so much about by now
                         built up, were there people going through your turnstile
                         without tickets at all?   A. Yes, a lot of people.
                 B
                      Q. A lot. How were they achieving that?          A.    They were mainly
                         coming through two at a time.

                      Q. Doubling up?      A. Yes, and "they were also jumping over.

                      Q. Can we take those one by one?    When they were doubling up,
                         would it normally be   a case of the first one having a ticket
                         and the one behind him not having a ticket?     A. Yes, that's
                         right.

                      Q. Can you give us someidea of how many got in   that way
                         without tickets? A.    I would say going through two at a
                         time and jumping over, once again probably about 100 people.

                  D   Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Just tell me the mechanics of
                           two going through at once.  You can actually get two people
                           through on one click of the turnstile, can you?   A. Yes.

                      Q.         Mr. GOLDSACK: . They really have to be chest-to-back,
                           do they?    A. On the old turnstiles you do have to be sort
                           ,of together, but the new turnstiles that they have on the
                           Kop you have great difficulty getting through two at a
                  E        time, because they are a different design to the old
                             turnstiles.

                      Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        And these are the old ones at
                           A to F?    A. Yes.

                      Q.        Mr. GOLDSACK:   Because of the sensor that we know
                           should catch people who are jumping, exactly what do you
                           mean by jumping?   A. Where you walk through the turnstile
                           you have got two wooden plates at the side.

                      Q. Let's try and find that in the bundle of photographs. Will
                         you look at photograph 8 in the bundle 'West Midlands 2',
                         and photograph 9?    Does that'help at all? I think they
                         show the one that you are on, do they not?A. Yes.      On
                         the right-hand side you've got like a wooden post and on
                         the left-hand side you've got the turnstile where there's
                         the hole where you put your ticket in. They put their
                         hands on there and just lift their feet over. Their head
                         doesn't really go much higher;   it's just their legs that
                         go over. They don't climb over the turnstile;   they just
                         lift themselves over.

                      ■Q. -So ■their-head ^oes through -at •very much- the height .they
                          would go through if they are going through properly? A. Yes
                          You would have to be very tall to get the sensor.       You see,

  J. L. Harpham Ltd
risk H-                                            11



                                                                     S. M. COPELAND

                          if someone did climb over, that’s the only way you would
                          get it on the sensor.

                      Q   If they put their foot on the top of the turnstile and got
                          over that way?   A. That way, yes.


                 B




                 D




                  G




                                                        /Q.   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
                  H

 J . L. Harpham Ltd
                              12


                                               S. M. COPELAND

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     What is the height of the
  top bit of   tubular steel there?    A. I would say 2 ft.
  to 3 ft.Not very high      at all.
. You can stand over it on tip-toes, can you?     A.    Yes.
  I would be   able to climb over it without struggling.
       MR. GOLDSACK:   That may have solved one problem,
  Mr. Copeland.   Thank you very much.
                 Cross-examined by MR. J A C K S O N :

 . M r - Copeland, when did you first realise your turnstile
   had sensors?     A.   Last season I think they installed
   them.
|. I am sorry?   A.   I think they installed them last season.
   That was the first time I knew about them.
Q. May I make it very clear I am not talking about you or
   anyone at Sheffield Wednesday but my Lord has asked some
   questions about why it is there has been evidence of people
   jumping over and going through without tickets but yet
   there is no evidence of the sensors catching them.   I
   again emphasise, I am not talking about you.   It is
   clear, is it not, that the fans who were climbing over
   would not know about the sensor?   A.   No, they wouldn't.
Q. It is quite clear that a fan who wanted to get in would
   not be terribly careful about where his head was as he
  /went over the barrier.   A.   That's right.
Q. But there would be one person who would be very careful
   about where the fanfe head was when he went over the barrier
   if he did not want him to be recorded, and that is a
   steward who was taking money for people going in without
   tickets.   A.   Yes.
Q. It does not take too much working out, does it, because
   at the end of the day you have to provide to the Club a
   number of tickets. , A.   Yes.
Q. And that has got to account for the people going through.
   A.   Yes.
Q. If there is a video on your turnstile, you have to explain
   not you particularly but a steward has to explain why
   it is” 250 people went through on the video and only 200
   went through his turnstile and 2 in the sensor.   A.   Yes.

Q. I would like you to look at Photograph No. 8.   We know
   that there are certain situations where Police Officers
   could not possibly stem the flow of hundreds of people.
   Is that your turnstile on the right?   A.   Yes, it is.
                                   *

 Q. You say all these people went through in twos.   Would
    it not have been very, very simple for Police Officers to
    prevent that by standing there?   A.   There were Police
                                            S. M. COPELAND

Officers standing there.

Yes, I appreciate they were standing there but we understand
that they were searching sometimes on the front and on the
back of the turnstiles.   A.   Yes.

A Police Officer stood there could prevent anyone coming
through in twos, could they not?   A.   They could do, yes.

At some stage, why did you not say to the Sergeant or the
Inspector or to any of the Police Officers or any of the
stewards, "Would you stand there, please."   A.   Right
from when I got there there was Police Officers outside
and inside and they were searching people when they came
in but after 2 o'clock it was totally impossible to do
this.
Mr. Copeland, it is my fault.   One of the tasks is to prevent
people getting in without tickets.   A.   Yes.

But that is a Horatio on the bridge situation - one man could
stem the whole flow, could he not, quite simply?   A.   No,
hecouldn't.
Look at Pho tograph No. 8, Turnstile F, a Policeman stood
in the doorway with a door that closes could quite easily
make sure that everybody who came in had a ticket.
A.    Well, you can see there are two turnstiles there
and he would have to be very quick to look at both
people coming through.
Mr. Copeland, I do not want to appear   to be rude - I really
did mean one Officer per turnstile, one for F and one     forG.
A.   It would be possible to do that, yes.

Not "possible" - very easy.     Can you   throw any light  on
this question: why do you think the Liverpool fans went
very carefully through in twos, not to attract the sensor?
A.    They went through in twos because it is the easiest way
of getting through.     To climb over, they are recognised
by the Police Officers outside.

So that they were doing it so carefully and deliberately
and quietly so that a Police Officer would not notice them?
A.   Or in other words, cli mbing over is a harder way than
going through in twos.
Finally, Mr. Copeland, could you assist on this: You will
have handed your tickets for the Spion Kqj in with your
bundle, will you not?   A.   Yes.
So we can, in fact, possibly check exactly how many Spion
Kop tickets you had?   A.   You could do that, yes.
                                                  S. M. COPELAND

                     Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD;

Q. Mr. Copeland, if someone does try to get through, you
   obviously will do your very best to prevent him getting
   through if he has not got a ticket. A.    I would do,yes.

Q. And apart from communicating with him and telling him to
   go back, if he does not co-operate with you, you would
   endeavour to attract the attention of a Police Officer?
   A.   Yes, I did do.

Q.   Are you sitting down at the turnstile?   Have you got
     a seat? A.No, standing up constantly throughout the
     game, throughout the working.

Q. Of course, you have to watch people coming in.                   A.    Yes.

Q. If you want to attract the attention of the Police Officer,
   what do you do?   Do you reach over and tap on the window?
   A.   No, what I actually did is - the Police Officer outside
   my turnstile, I could see him and if anybody jumped over
   or went through two together I gave him a nod to let him
   know there was somebody coming through without a ticket.

Q. And that was a system which you had used in the past?
    A.   No, it is just something that we did for that match.
    It is something we have not needed to do because people
    coming through, it is a constant flow and the Police
    Officers there can see what is happening, whereas at that
   .match you couldn't because there were that many people.
Q. And the situation was that the method you had got of
   communicating with the Policeman worked to start with,
   did it?  A.     It did, yes,up to about quarter past two.

Q. But even then people were still coming through and the
   Policeman was doing his best to deal with them.   A. Yes.
                       Cross-examined by MR. G L A S G O W :

Q.Mr. Copeland, I wonder if you could help us about the
   machinery, to save us having to call somebody else, and I
   am sorry to put the questions to you.   Do you know
   the way in which this sensor works?    A.   All I know
   is that if people go through the sensor it clicks on a
   computer somewhere in the office.

Q. Did you know that if somebody on, may I just say, a
   normal day were to come up to your turnstile and jump
   over the turnstile without the turnstile operating --
   A.   Yes.
Q. And break the beam above                  A.     Yes.

•..(J T h a t .wxujld .tri,g.ger the. ,digj..ta.l.counter-, within the computer...
      A.       Yes, it would do.
  I   ;rp


                                                      15


                                                                             S. M. COPELAND

                    Q. But if the situation is as it was on this day, that the
                       turnstile is turning all the time at the same time as
                       people are climbing over the top        A. Yes.

                    Q. Did you know that the machinery was set so that the
                       turnstile turning cancelled out the electric eye above
                       it?   A.   I didn't know that, no.
              B     Q. Perhaps it is a matter of commonsense.     If it did not
                       operate in. that way anybody who was very tall or was
                       carrying anything at all who went through there would
                       break the beam even if they had legitimately given you
                       their ticket, would they not?     A.   That's right, yes.
                    Q. You und erstood that?     A.        Yes.

                    Q. I should say you understand it now but did you understand
                       it at the time?   A.    I didn't understand it before but
                       I understand it now.

                    Q. The only people who the electric eye is going to catch
                       and designed to catch are people who climb over at a time
                       when the turnstile is not revolving?    A. Yes.
               D
                    Q. And is it your recollection that at the time when people
                       were climbing over was a.t a time when, within a matter of
                       seconds, the turnstile itself was operating as well?
                       A.   Yes.

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I do not entirely follow that.
                      •It would be difficult for anybody to climb over the
                E      turnstile while somebody else was physically going through
                       it, would it not?

                            MR. GLASGOW:   The difficulty, and I may have to call -
                       We are trying to save as much time and be as helpful as
                       possible and I wonder if I could give you the explanation
                       and if anybody needs it, they can --
                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           Yes, thank you.

                             MR. GLASGOW:   Our understanding, sir, of the position
                       is that there is a device set and it is really a matter of
                       timing that if the beam is broken within a matter of a few
                       seconds, and I cannot tell you how many, of the turnstile
                       operating, the turnstile revolution will cancel that out
                       in order not to give the false reading of the person who
                       just happens to be too tall, and what it is designed to
                       catch is the person who runs or climbs over the apparently
                       free and unrevolving turnstile.     It is not perfect but
                       it is thought to be better than a system which gave a
                       false alarm every time anybody came through at the time
                       when the machine was turning.

                            L.0R.D'. JUST.I.CE.,TAY-LOR: 'Yes, thank y o u . Can you- just
                H      complete this?         Does the turnstile operator know when the
                       sensor has been activated?

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                       S. M. COPELAND

        THE WITNESS:      I don't, my Lord, no.

        MR. GLASGOW:      So.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    So Mr. Jackson's point about
 some turnstile operator taking money and saying, "Keep /our
 head down" - he would not actually know whether that had
 been suc cessful or it had not; is that right?
      MR. G.LASGOW:   Did you get any warning at all of when
 that beam is broken?    A.   No, I have no idea. All I
 know is that if you are tall or you do climb over the
 turnstile it will be broken.    But the point I would like
 to make about taking money is that there were Police there;
 it would be impossible to take money or to arrange to
 take money.    It wouldn't be possible for a steward there
 to organise people climbing over under the beam to take
 money.
  I do not want to belittle that; I accept that and I am sure
  others do in your case, Mr. Copeland, but could we look
  together at Photograph No. 2 in the bundle.       Did you
  realise that the sensitive piece of machinery, which is
  rather like a little burglar detector, is it not, the
  little thing with the red winking eye, that little piece
  of machinery is s e t .actually on the wall at quite a
  hicji height where it is unlikely to be physically knocked
  by anyboty who gets, in the way of it.     A.   Yes, I did
  know.
.■■■'it is above head height.      A.      Yes.
. But despite the fact that,       like a     burglar alarm, it                        is set
  a b o v e head height, of course it has a little beam that
  can be adjusted to be turned down.       A.    Yes.
  According    to the   desires   of the   e n g i n e e r who is s e t t i n g   it
  up.     A.    Yes.
. And that is.something which is adjustable?                     A.      Yes.

. A n d you have had experience in the past, I think, with
   the alarm going off unn ecessarily and  people coming out
   from the Club Control Box to find out   what is going on?
         Yes.   I don't think that has happened to myself but
   I do hear of stories where that has happened to other
   people.
1. You knew that that had happened?               A.     Yes.
1. And there have been attempts by the control of the setting
   of the beam and the timing of its coincidence with the
   revolution of the turnstile to get it to the optimum
   position over the past season; did you know that they
   .were ..placing ar.ound .with it tp tjy and,.get the setting
    best?     A.   No, I didn't know that.
Q. Alright.     While we are looking at Photograph No. 2 -
                              17

                                                    S. M. COPELAND

  and again I am not suggesting this is your turnstile -
  it is obvious there that somebody has simply physically
  cut through the wire, is it not?   A.   Yes, I have
  noticed on a lot of turnstiles that there did seem to be
  a lot of cut wires.
Q. Perhaps I ought to ask you, lest the suggestion is made,
   have you ever heard of a turnstile operator cutting
   through the wire on his own sensor in order to let people
   through for bribes?   A.   No, none at all.

Q. It may be that will have to be put to somebody else.
   Thank you very much.   A.   Thank you.           —
                       ALBERT RHODES, called

                     Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

Q. You are Albert Rhodes, are you?       A.    Yes.

Q. And you are a turnstile operator at Sheffield Wednesday
   Ground?   A.   That is correct.

Q. And have been,   I think, for   about 9 years;        is that
   right?     A.    Yes.

Q. On this day, you were the turnstile operator on Turnstile C.
   A.   That is right.
Q. And concerned therefore with tickets for the standing Leppings
  :;Lane terrace.  A.   That is correct, yes.
Q. Would you look, please, at the bundle of photographs that
   you have before you, West Mid lands bundle 2, the larger
   bundle.   A.   Yes.
Q. Look at the first one, will you please?          A.      Yes.

Q. Is that, in fact, the back of your turnstile letter C?
   A.   Yes.
Q. And that is, of course, taken from the yard looking in.
   A.   Yes.
Q. We see there there is a window which appears to be cracked.
   A . Yes.
Q. Was it like that on the day, before you started?
   A.   Not before we started, no.

Q. Is that a window through which you can see?   A. No, it
   is a frosted glass, that.   Some of them are clear but that
   one was frosted.
Q. How, then, do you get in touch with anybody out in the
   yard?   A. We have got to open that inner gate, and either
   look round it or bring it back again to look out.
\,'-t   •■.k /
'       y /
                                                 18


                                                                  A. RHODES

                     Q. You have got to actually poke your head through the doorway,
                        do you mean?   A.   Yes.

                     Q. Look, will you please, at the next two pictures,      Do you see
                        there the infra-red beam in your turnstile?   A.      Yes.

                     Q. You can see quite plainly that the wire to that has been
                        cut?   A.   Yes.
                 B




                 D
                                                        /Can you tell us, first




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                               19


                                                       A. RHODES

Q.   Can you tell us, first of all, whether the wire was in
     that condition before you started .... - A. T have no
     idea.

Q         your tour? You have no idea. Did you not look at
     it when you went into the turnstile? - A. Not really, no.

Q. You cannot help then as to when that might have happened?
   - A. No.

Q. Did you see anybody with a knife? - A. No.

Q. You did not. -A. JSo.

Q. All right.  Thank you very much. Now, can I iust ask you
   a bit about the people who were coning through your
   turnstile? Your iob, of course, was to take the tickets
   which were standing tickets? - A. Yes, B tickets.

Q.   Did you get any different instructions at any time? - A.
     We were instructed before we went out to take some Forest
     tickets, Kop tickets, but if they got too many that they
     had a segregated part on the Spion Kop for Liverpool fans.
     We were told that by ....

Q. Who gave you that instruction? - A. Roger Childs.

Q. Roger Childs.  That was before you started your .... - A.
   That was at the briefing before we went out, yes.

Q; You had to take some Kop tickets? -A. Yes.

Q. Did he specify any limit or number? - A. No.

Q. Well, how would you know when you had got to the point of
   having too many?- A. Well, like has been said, when we got
   there a Police Officer later gave us instructions. He
   told me take half, half and half.

Q.   Take half and half? -A. And then - yes - turn half away.

Q.    Who was this Police Officer? - A. The Officer with    the
     beard.

Q. Yes.  And when was that instruction given? - A. Early on,
   about 2 o'clock.

Q. Early on, about 2 o'clock.  Now, altogether before you
   closed the turnstile can you give us any idea how many
   people came through with Kop tickets? - A. Not very many.

Q.   Not very many. - A. No.   I should say 5 to 10.

Q. Did you send  any of them back or let them allthrough?
   - A. I tried to send some back, yes.
                                                       A. RHODES

What happened? -A. I got a bit of abuse so I let them in.
There weren’t that many any way.

All right.  Now, what about people who had tickets for,
say, the North Stand or the West Stand? - A. I think I
took one West Stand.

What about people who had no tickets at all? - A. Yes,
got a few ....

How many people came through like that, would you say?
- A. At^ the beginning I caught a few, I got a few.

You say you caught a few? - A. Well, stopped them, tried
to stop them.

What did you do with them when you stopped them? - A. Like
I say, I had to open that gate and go round to shout the
Police Officer outside.   I got one or two like that.

Is that a Police Officer in the courtyard? - A. In the
compound, yes.

Yes.  So you would let them through and then they would
be taken out? - A. Yes.

Now, what happened afterwards? - A. Well, when it got
really bad they could not get out any way and I could
not get in contact with the Officer.

And people were just coming through with          or without
tickets, were they? - A. Well, yes.

Did you get offered any money? -A. Yes, got offered money.

How many times did that happen? -A. Said in my statement
about 6 to 8 times.

Yes.   Is that about right? - A. Yes.

What sort of sums were you offered?- A. Five, ten.

And what did you do? - A. Turned them back.

Were these people who came before about 2.30 or afterwards?
- A. Mostly before, I should say.

Yes. Now, altogether have you any clue as to the number of
people who came through your turnstile without tickets? -
A. Again, I said in my statement about 25. Probably 25
to 30.

 Is that right? - A. I would say so, yes.

..Iha.t is ^about right,, is it?   All, right. .-.How,...was. .there
                                                       21


                                                                                  A. RHODES

                         anything you could do about this? - A. Not at that time
                         after quarter-to-3, no.

                      Q. After quarter-to-3. - A. It was impossible.

                      Q. Is that the time when you regarded things as becoming
                         impossible? - A. Yes. After that, yes.

              B       Q. Had you received any particular instructions at that
                         time what to do from anybody?- A. Only - no, not really, no.

                      Q. No different instructions from what you got before? - A.
                         No.

                                MR. PHILLIPS:      Yes.      Yes, thank you.

                                        Cross-examined by MR. GLASGOW:

                      Q. Mr. Rhodes, one matter.   You were told you would have
                         to admit some people v/ith Kop tickets on this occasion,
                         I think? - A. Yes.

                      Q. It is just a question of your recollection of who told
               jy        you that. - A. I think it was at the briefing before we
                         went out.

                      Q. You think it was at the briefing. - A. Yes.

                      0.. Can you remember who that was with? -A. It was Roger,
                          Roger Childs, I think.

               E      Q. Roger Childs. - A. Yes.            He ....

                      Q. Forgive me.  You do notseem very sure           and I .... - A.
                         I am not actually, no.

                      Q. You are not. Well, perhaps you would like to look at
                         your statement, would you? Have you got your statement
                         there? - A. Yes.

                      Q. You made two statements, I think. One to the Police
                         Officer who came with the questionnaire? - A. Yes.

                      Q. And one to a solicitor.            Do you remember? - A. Yes.

                      Q. I do not think you deal v/ith it at all    - thatis nota
                         criticism - you were not asked about it by the Police
                         Officer v/ith the questionnaire? - A. No.

                      Q. But you were asked about it by the solicitor? -A. I
                         think so, yes.

                      Q. Go to the second, rather longer statement, would you,
                         and, first of all, perhaps you would just look at page
                    j    2 1 ... I think in fact ..you recalled when, you made your statement in the
               rl



J. L Harpham Ltd
                                                  A. RHODES

top three lines that you reported to the stiles room
located near the players' entrance and you in fact
reported to a Mr. Jones? - A. Well, I said that then,
yes. He is in charge, yes.

He is in charge. - A. Several people behind that desk.

Does that help you to recall who in fact spoke to you when
you arrived for work that day? Was it Mr. Jones or Mr.
Childs? -A. No, I do not think it - no.

Well, let's go on to the next page,the third paragraph
in the middle of the page about four lines down.  Well,
I had better give you the whole paragraph.  Did you say,
"Last year we had been told that we could accept tickets
from the wrong end of the ground.  This year we were
told that there was a segregated section at the Kop ....
- A. Yes.
".... for Liverpool fans. We were told to allow some
supporters through with Nottingham Forest tickets and
to send some back.  It was the Police Officer who issued
those instructions.  I do not know the identity of the
Police Officer but I noticed that he had a beard and
was wearing a flat cap"? - A. Correct.                 J:

 And again, I am not doubting at all your honesty, Mr.
 Rhodes, but does that help you to recall who it was who
 told you to do that? - A. Well, we only had that one
 briefing from Roger Childs, so ....

 Well, do you think what is in your statement is right?
 - A.*Yes, that Police Officer did say that, yes, he did,
 when we got on to the gates.

 When you got on to the gates. —A. Yes.

 Are you saying that you think either Mr. Childs ....         A.
 I think.  I cannot be certain.

, ___   had also told you? - A. Yes.

        MR. GLASGOW:    I see.   Thank you very much.

                   Bv LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

. Just before you go.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Just above the passage you
 quoted, Mr. Glasgow:

  "All ticket match I had been told to take B tickets.
  Standing only. As far as I can remember these were
  blue and mauve for Liverpool .supporters and yellow
                                                       A. RHODES

     and brown for Nottingham Forest." Is that right?
     I thought the brown was for the North Stand and the ....

          MR. GLASGOW:   Yes.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR .... the red was for the West
     Stand and the mauve was for the terraces, nothing to do
     v/ith Nottingham Forest.

           MR. GLASGOW:   I did not know this.  I am the one
     v/ith previous convictions for colour blindness in this
     case.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I thought you were an expert
     on that now.

          MR. GLASGOW:   I have to have reminders provided by
     my clients to know the difference between brown and
     yellow, sir, so I am the last to criticise anybody else.

          THE WITNESS:   I am colour blind as well.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Are you? - A. Yes.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well, we will not pursue it.
     Thank you very much.   . . . .

                  STEVEN CHARLES RHODES Called

                    Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

Q. Mr. Rhodes, you, I think were on turnstile 15? - A. Yes,
   that is right.

Q. Which means that you should have been taking tickets for
   the West Stand? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Did you during the course of the day have anyone come
   to your turnstile v/ith tickets for the Nottingham end
   of the match? -A. Not for the Nottingham end, no.

Q. As the crush developed did you have people coming through
   for other parts of the West end? - A. I had them coming
   through v/ith terrace tickets for the Liverpool end, yes.

Q. What I would like you in particular to deal v/ith, please,
   is anyone who came through without tickets at all. Did
   you have some? - A. Yes.

Q. From about what time? -A. I estimate from about 2, 2.L5.

Q. Using the methods we have heard others describe this
   morning already? - A. Exactly the same, yes.
                                                      24


                                                                              S.C. RHODES


                     Q- And again can you give us your best estimate of the number
                       who went through yours without tickets? -A. I think in the
                       statement I put about 30 to 40 but thinking about it after -
                       it is round about the same - I would up it to about 40 to
                       50 but I would not think more than 50 people.

                     Q. Up to 50 people. - A. Up to 50 people.
               B               MR. GOLDSACK:       Thank you very much.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Thank you very much, Mr. Rhodes
                        That is all.

                                           WAYNE AUSTIN HALL Called

                                           Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

                     Q. Mr. Hall, you are a part-time turnstile operator.            Is
                        that right? - A. That is right, yes.

                     Q. You have been doing this for about 11 years? -A. That
                        is correct.

                D    Q. On the day in question you were on turnstile 2? - A.              ^
                        That is right, yes.

                     Q- You expected therefore         to have people going into the
                        North Stand? - A. Yes,         that is correct.

                     Q. Did it work out like that? - A. Yes, it did.
                     Q. ' Did everybody who came through your turnstile have a
                        ticket for the North Stand? - A. Yes.

                     Q. Did you have anybody present any ticket for any other
                        part of the ground at any stage? - A. West Stand, three
                        people.

                     Q. Three people for the West Stand.          Can you say when that
                        was? - A. About 20-to~3.

                      Q. What did you do with them? - A. I put them on to a Police
                         Officer that was stood         in the ground.

                      Q. Were you offered any money by         anybody? - A. No,   I was not,
                         no.

                      Q. Did you see any forged tickets? - A. No.

                      Q. Did any people go through your turnstile without tickets
                         at all? - A. No.

                         At any stage? - A.At any stage.

                                MR.-.: PHILLIPS:    Thank .you very much.
                 H

J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                   25


                                                              W.A. HALL

                  Cross-examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Q. Mr. Hall, I think that you on this occasion actually
  . counted the number of people that you vrere admitting
    at one stage? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. There is iust one matter on that. You actually counted up
   between 2~15 and the time you closed your turnstile? - A .
   Well, from opening up to 2.15.

Q. You counted from up to 2.15 and I think you only had a
   very few people in? - A. That is correct.

Q.   Very quiet in the     early stages. -      A. 150.

Q.    Yes.In the next  hour after that          do you remember how
     many you counted? - A. 920.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         How many?

            MR. GLASGOW:    920:

Q. Between 2.15 and .... -A. 10-past-3.

Q. and 10-past-3 when you shut your gate. - A. 920.

Q. In the 55 minutes.    And-is it right to say after 3 o'cLock
    there really was just a dribble of a few people coming in?
    -   A. Paul Bentley was working opposite me and he had to
    keep opening and shutting doors but there was only about
  j three or four people came in after we closed up.

Q. Yes.   So the 950 people allowing for a handful all came
   through your turnstile in the period between 2.15 and 3
   o'clock? - A. That is right, yes.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          920 was it?

            MR. GLASGOW:     950.       920, My Lord.     I am so sorry.
     920:
 Q. And was that a fairly typical rate of flow for an all ticket
    game? - A. For an all ticket game, no.

 Q. Normally work faster than that or slower? - A. Slower.

 Q. Slower. - A. Are we talking about an all ticket semi­
    final?

 0. Yes. - A. Well, I worked in 1988 and I took about 700
    and they all came through in an orderly fashion.

 Q. Yes. In fact we have got your figures. Your own count,
    I think, was a physical one, was not it? You actually
                                                 W.A. HALL

counted the tickets? -A. Yes.

And then checked it against the read.... - A. Yes.

You have been there for 11 years, have not you, Mr. Hall?
- A. Yes.

Had you ever seen anything like this before? - A. Never.

     MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you.

                By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

I am afraid I have not followed this. You say in 1988
in the same period, an hour, you got 700 through? - A. Yes.
That was at the .same end.

So when you say you had never seen anything like this you
are just talking about never seen so many come so late.
Is that it? - A. That is it, yes.

What I am interested in is this. We have heard suggestions
that because a lot came late and there was a crush that
actually impaired the efficiency of the people going
through the turnstile, leaving aside people trying to
iump over, because of pressure and people all getting
squashed and not getting into the turnstiles easily
and so on? - A. Tempers were frayed.




                             / Q. Can you help
                                     W. HALL


Can you help about that. You seem to have go. then through
at a good rate? - A. Well what I kept shouting to tnem is:
“If you don't want to be crushed, please tear your suib end
just thrown it in" and as they were throwing it in I were
checking it and just throwing it to one side.

So you did not get people wedged in the doorway and that
sort of thing? - A. The reason why I did this I was seeing
children being passed over the tops of adults.

Passed over through the turnstiles? - A. Yes, and ^~ten
obviously the adult or parent, whoever he was or she was,
came through later .with the child's ticket already torn
to throw in. That is the reason why 1 too* that action
to have the tickets torn and allow then through quicker
to stop being literally crushed against tne pacdles in
the turnstile.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, thank you.

       HR. GLASGOW:    Right I ask one question on that,sir?

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, certainly.


            Further Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

  I render if you were aware, and I will give you the fi br e s
  t o I S v e y 5 u looking it up, that all your colleagues « tnat
  area       we have on page 166 sir at Turnstiles, 1, 2,3,   4, 5
/ and 6 all admitted either ]ust over or just ur.eer1,000
  people? - A. Yes, I was aware of that, yes.

 So everybody was working at your speed, approximately?
 - A. Approximately, yes.
 And for reasons that the Inquiry may hear fro* other witnesse
 those at for example Turnstiles A-G were having a lot more
 difficulties? - A. Yes.

        MR. GLASGOW:    Thank you.


             Further Cross-Examined by I1R. WOODWARD...

  There was a time when children were being passed over the
' heads o f p e o p l e waiting to go through the turnstiles? - A.
  That is correct.
> So they would have to be passed through carefully by tiie
!' Individuals and passed over the gate, over the turnstile
   gate? - A. Yes.
). Quite high   up above the heads of everybody? - A. Yes.
                                 W. HALL


Do you know whether the sensor was working in your turnstile?
- A . I don't know.

Because according to that nobody had got to that sort of
height certainly when the gate was stationary? - A. Well they
were being dropped below the sensor just in front of the
paddle so they could go away.

In front of the paddle on the ground side? - A. As the
sensors look there is like drill holes, isn't there, in the
gates where the sensor tracks through. Well the children
were being dropped in front of the paddle.

It nay not be important about the mechanics of it, but what
was happening was that people were being passed through
fairly high and then being put down on the ground side of
the turnstile? - A. That is right, yes.


                 ALLAN JOHN HASKINS Called

                 Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

Mr. Haskins, you I think were on Turnstile No. 4? -UA. E
was, yes.

So quite near to the last witness Mr. Hall? - A. That is
correct, yes.

 Can I simply ask you please about the numbers if there were
-any, of people who went through your turnstile without
 tickets at all? - A. I would estimate between 80 and 100.
 I said in my statement between 50 and 80.  SO and 100 I
 would estimate now.

 Did you also have some who went through with the wrong
 ticket for the right end of the ground? - A. I would say
 the' total, of people coming through without tickets and
 wrong tickets would be between SO and 100.

 And of that number what proportion had no ticket at all? -
 A. 60-70%.


                Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

 Mr. Haskins, I think you too make a calculation of the
 number of people you admitted in the last half-hour? - k.
 I did, yes.
 Between 2.40 and 3.10 and do you too agree that in the last
 ten minutes practically nobody came in? - A. From between ....

 The last ten minutes, in other words after kick-off? - A.
 kfter. 10-past-3 nobody came in at all. Between 3 and LO-past
 it just went dead.
                                     29


                                              A.J. HASKINS



o. So your count of the number that you had betv/een 2.40 and
   3.10, the vast majority are in the 20 minute period irom
   2*.40,and I think you calculated that at 600? - A. 600.

               MR. GLASGOW:     Thank you.

q              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   YOU do that simply by putting
         the tickets over that period in a pile and then counting
         them or are you doing a running count in your head, or v/hat?
         - A. No by, taking the tickets.
               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       No other questions.   Thank you.
         very much.
               MR. GOLDSACK:     Sir, we now move on to Stewards.
         Mr. Thorpe, please.


                          STUART ROLAND THORPE Called

                              Examined by HR. GOLDSACK:

Q.        Mr. Stuart Roland Thorpe, is that right? - A. That      is correct.

    O     yr Thorpe, I think for some 15 years now you have been Chief
          Steward for the West Stand area? - A. That is quite correct.

    0.    And     altogether you havebeen   a Steward at Sheffield Wednesday
          for over 20 years? - A.  Yes, that is correct.

    q   / I n recent years how many Stewards have you had under your
           control on normal league matches? - A. 26.

    Q. And how many do you have under your control for a semi-final?
       - A. 33. I have ten extra Stewards.

    Q. Who arranges for those extra Stewards? - A. The Club. I
       notify the Club.  I get the extra Stewards and tnen I let
       the Club know I have got the extra Stewards.

    q    . So you personally recruit them? - A. That is right.

    o     Will they all be people v/ho have stewarded before? - A.. This
          year I had just one nev; one.  The rest of them have stewaraed
          before.
    Q. Was the new one Mr. Cardwell? - A. That is correct.

        Q. He had never stev/arded before that particular match? - A. no.

        Q. Now again in recent years I think there has been an annual
           meeting sometime during the closed season for Stewards? -
           A. That is quite correct.

' Q. ’Have you attended•all of .those? — .A. I •.have..
                                     S. THORPE


Are they voluntary? - A. They are voluntary, yes.

Are you paid for attending? - A. That is right, yes.

Have you been paid for attending since they came in or were
they originally unpaid? - A. They were paid after the first
league match they paid us for attending the meetings.

What proportion of the Stewards do in fact go to that
meeting? - A. The turnstiles and the ground go to one day
and the set meeting is all the seating, North Stand, South
Stand, West Stand go to it.

So there are two separate meetings? - A. Yes.

Do you attend both? - A. No, I only attend the one meeting.

Now who is invited? Is it just the 26 regulars or are
there temporary Stewards also invited? - A. They are all
invited to the meeting.

So of the 33 or so that you may have under your control how
many of those usually come to the Annual Meeting? - A. They
all come to the Annual Meeting. They have got to do because
they get their passes and you have got to take two photos,
for the identity card you wear.

I think it is at that meeting that you are also issued with
the Ground Instructions.  Is that right? - A. That is irght.

We will perhaps come on to those in a little while.  Do
you also receive at that meeting a talk from a member of
the Club? - A. Yes.

 Who normally gives that? - A. Doug Lock.

 From a Police Officer? - A. And a Police Officer gives us
 a lecture; also the Fire Brigade and the St. John's Asibulanc
 Brigade.  The Fire Brigade demonstrate the fire extinguisher
 all the types of fire extinguishers and they always ask the
 Stewards where the fire points are in my Stand and I always
 tell them where they are and show them where they are and
 the Fireman generally aste what type the fire extinguishers
 are and he always demonstrates them to us.

 Does the Fire Brigade representative also deal with the
 emergency evacuation procedure? - A. Yes.

 Now as the Chief Steward for the West Stand is the Leppings
 Lane terrace under your control? - A. No.

 Under which Steward is that? - A. There are no Stewards in
 charge of the standing area, the Leppings Lane.           I am just
 in charge of eight men on C gate and B gate. There is
 • three, men .on., ea.ch ..gate, and I am in charge o_ the West Stand
 only.
                                  31

                                           S. THORPS



n       In the event of a fire or some other emergency in the West
        Stand, do you have a procedure whereby your Stewards
        know what position to take up to get people out quickly.
        - A. Yes.
              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  You have left rae behind slightly.
        You dealt with the Annual Meeting at which various things
        happened.  You said there were two meetings.   Is that ng.iu.

                  GOLDSACK: What the witness said was that one
        o* the meetings was for the Stewards and there was a ^separate
        meeting for the turnstile attendants, as I unaerstooc ic.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I see.

o              MR. GOLDSACK:  So do we understand this to be the
        position, Hr. Thorpe, that there is no one from tne Club
        who assists with the evacuation from the standing a . e a i n
        the event of an emergency? - A. No, the Police al./ays cc it.
        The'call a name over the Tannoy, we all know wnat^it i s .
        It "is in the South Yorkshire, all Clubs m souuri xorKsmre
        come under it. I just forget the name._ HyStewarcs tney
        clear the gangways; go to the fire extinguishers and t.
        toTice To to the gates. We open all the gates <and the Jolice
        opens everything, we stand on one side. Thau is rf.iat >ve
        do. That Is what the procedure is.

    O    Even though you say it is not part O j. vour respcns_bil_ty,
     "* car I just see what your understanding is as L.he means
        of'evacuating the West end terrace if there is an emergency.
      ■ ' - A. Yes.
    0. Where did you expect people to go? How were they going to
       leave? - A. Go through C Gate and B Gate.

    Q.That is on the roadway? - A. Yes.

    o      Sorry, how are they going to get off the terraces in tlie
          first place? - A. Well they get off_the terraces, m e r e is
          the cate on the perimeter fence. There is a Policeman
          stood at the side of those gates and those gates are^ojenec
          onto the pitch. There is always a Policeman stood a^ every
          gate all the way round the pitch.

    g. some of course would be able to come back down the tunnel,
       wouldn't they? - A. Yes.
    O     But your understanding as Chief Steward of the West Ena
          was that the main point of evacuation was the penmeta.
          gates onto the pitch? - A. That is right.

     O     Which are manned by Police Officers not Stewards? - A.
     **    Right throughout the game there is a Police Or^-icer sat
          in froijit of one of tnose.
                                                        32


                                                                S. THORPS


                           Now you know of course that there are gates at the Stand
                     Q.
                           end of the radial fences? - A. Yes.

                        Have you ever considered they are any part of the emergency
                     Q- evacuation procedure? - A. Ho, because they are n o t n m g to
                        do with me whatsoever.  I have never been told by cown-
                        stairs. All mv interest is the West Stand. I am in cnarge
                        of the*West Stand and is my responsibility for anyone in
                B       that West Stand to be cleared out.

                           I follow you sav it is not part of your responsibili<-j • ^
                           What I am wondering is whether as someone with 20 years
                           experience as a Steward, you had ever appreciated tna~_the
                           aates at the rear of the radial fences raignt be part or tne
                           emergency evacuation procedure? - A. Well it coulc o<= sar
                           but the Police see to all that.

                               You certainly thought the main exits were the perimeter
                     Q.
                               gates? - A. Yes.
                               Fas that just something you had picked up over the years
                      Q
                               or had someone told you that? - A. Since the last tnree
                               years since the Bradford Disaster that^is when it
                               or less started procedure on the grounc, a r e ana so ro.tn.
                D
                               I am not quite sure what you mean by that, Mr. Thorpe.^
                      Q
                               At vour Annual Meetings has it actually been said in tne
                               event of an emergency people on the terraces will leave
                               via the perimeter gates on to the pitch? - A. Yes, welL
                               it is automatic, you see them opening the gates the PoLice
                               from out of my Stand.
                               Who has said that at the Annual Meeting? - A. Mr. Lock.
                      Q-
                               That the way out from the terraces in an emergency are
                      Q.
                               the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

                         Has it been the same Police Officer who has attended tine
                      Q. Annual Meeting over the last two or three years? - A. -es,
                         the last two years it has been.

                                Who is that, do you know? - A. I have no idea.
                          Q.

                          Q. Mr. Sewell? - A. That is right.
                                And before him was it Mr. Calvert? - A. Yes.
                          Q.
                                I think he was there for several years? - A. Yes.
                          Q-
                             How what sort of things do the Police tell you ^ the
                          Q. Annual Meeting? - A. Well it is more or less m s t r u . a o n s
                             in the back of our passbook,"don*t get involvec .

                                 I wonder if we could just look at that then. It is the
                          Q.
                               ..Sheffield .Wednesday file and begins at page 4o.
                 H

J . I. Harpham Ltd
                                                            33

                                                                 S. THORPE
I



                  A               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Whilst that is being found,
                            I have got a figure of 376 Stewards from somewhere. Is
                            that a complete nonsense?
                                  MR. MAXWELL:  I gave you that figure, sir. It caine
                            from past Police documentation.  I think it is tneir
                            background material.
                   B                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I seem to remember reading
                            there    were 376 Stewards on duty on the day.

                                    M R . MAXWELL:   Yes.

                                    MR. GOLDSACK:   Sir, I will be corrected if I a n <
                             ,-ronc. I think that includes turnstile attendants ana I
                             think *when ilr. Thorpe refers to 26 and 33, he_is not
                   C         including turnstile attendants at the V<esi_ ^nc.
        i
                                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  There will only be about 73
                             turnstile operators, will there, all round the grounc?

                                   MR. GOLDSACK:  I think we will hear, if it is
                             necessary, that there are many more Stewards at the Kop
                             end where of course Stewards are on the Kop itself.
                   D
                                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  This is what I was wondering,
                             whether this witness is only talking about one part ox the
                             ground.
                                   MR. GOLDSACK: Yes, he is only talking about the
                            •West Stand and the immediate concourse.
                    E   o           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Forgive me, are you the Chief
                              Steward or a Chief Steward? - A. A Chief Steward.

                        n           MR. GOLDSACK:  That point having been rc.ised,
                              Mr. Thorpe, can I just clarify for whoa you areresponsible.
                              You have responsibility for Stewards   in tne »;est Stana
                              itself? - A. That is quite correct.
                    F
                        Q. For Stewards on B Gate and C Gate? -          A. That is quite
                           correct.
                        q   . And for Stewards who man the stairways to the West Stand?
                              - a . That is quite correct.

                        Q. is there anyone else for whom you have responsibility?
                    G         - A. No.
                        n        c h a n hear in due course that the Stewards in cnarge
                              of f S i t e in fact come under a different Chief Steward?
                              - A. That is quite correct.

                            o. Do you now have in front of you. Hr. Thorpe, page 46 of
                              "tfrkt 'bundle?— A . That i s - 'right.
                    H


    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          34

                                    S. THORPE



That is, I think, a three page document headed:     "Instructions
for Match Day Staff"? - A. Yes.

And you are all issued with that, are you, at the Annual
Meeting? - A. We are told about this at the Annual Meeting
and they give me copies to give to my Stewards at the start
of the season.  I give my Stewards one and I make them sign
for it to say that he has had the instructions, match day
instructions.

Is it the matters set out in that that the Police Officer goes
through? - A. Yes, more or less he goes through.

 Can I take you back a few years,Mr. Thorpe, to about 1931.
 There was a crushing incident in 1981? - A. V?ell it was not
 really a crushing incident.   They were getting a lot outside.
 The cueues were getting long outside the ground, what tn<;y
 did thev opened C Gates about a yard. I got my three
 Stewards; they came from the office if we could let a few
 through to take the congestion of the queues. There was
 about 50 came through the gates. We checked the tickets
 and they came through orderly, there was no trouble. What
 they did, they put then up at the side ox the wall, the
 Police on horseback and they just came in about 50 to take
 the congestion from the crowd outside and they started
 coming in very steady. We shut the gates atter that. There
 was only ±>out 50 what was allowed in and I remember it
 because it was the last semi-final for a while because
  Hillsborough District, round Hillsborough Football Ground,
  a lot of people were complaining about semi-finals, crowds,
./drunk people and things like that. They got a petition up
' and they did not get a semi-final until 1987 and I was
  amazed we got a semi-final because the people around in the
  houses round the Club were complaining:   "You will never
  get a semi-final".   There was petitions and everything to
  the M.P.s.




                               /Q. So you are telling
                              35



                                                   S. THORPE

Q. So you are telling us, are you,Mr. Thorpe, that at the
   1981 semi-final, shortly before the kick-off, stewards on
   gate C opened that, in effect, as an additional turnstile?
   A. Yes.

Q. And people came in in an orderly fashion?         A. That's right.

Q. But was there not then an incidnet on the South end of the
   Terrace when people were injured?   A. No, not to my
   knowledge.  I can't remember it.

Q. 38 people injured?     A. No, I can't remember.        I can't
   remember that.

Q. No recollection of that at all?          A. No recollection, I'm
   sorry, sir.

Q. Does it follow, then, that that incident, if there was an
   incident, was never mentioned at any meeting that you
   attended?   A. No.  I can't remember, if it was.

Q. All right.   Do you remember that in about 1981 there was
   either some confusion or disagreement between the stewards
   and the police as to what their specific responsibilities
   were?   A. Well, there was, yes.

Q. You remember that?        A.    I remember that.

Q. And do you recalll a particular meeting where a police officer
   -came along to try and explain, "This is our job, this is
  'your job"?    A.  I can slightly remember it. I think it
    was in the Gymnasium.

Q.    Would it have been Mr. Calvert?         A. I just forget now.

 Q.   But you have some recollection ----       A. I have some recollection
      of that.

 Q. --- of such a meeting?        A. Yes.

 Q.   Can you help as to what that policeman told you he thought
      the stewards' job was?    A. He said on the terracing, when
      I was with a few of my stewards, he said "It's nothing to
      do with us, because it's the West Stand, my Stand", and he
      was saying that the terracing was the Club's --

 Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am sorry, I am not following
       this.   I thought it was the policeman who was speaking?
      A. The policeman spoke to a crowd of us in the Gym.

 Q. What did he say?   A. He says that the Club's job is to_
    see to the terracing, the stewards to see to the terracing,
    the spectators on the terraces, and I thought to myself3
    "It's nothing to do with me, this, because I'm in charge
    of the seating accommodation" and I said "Well, it's
                                                          36


                                                                        S. THORPE

                              ridiculous." When I walked away from it, some stewards
                              objected to it, but I don't know who did, and when I walked
                              away I said "It's silly to put a person, put a steward
                              amongst away supporters for abuse and swearing that they
                              get.    I said, We .-get it in our Stand. They've only
                              got to sit in the wrong seat and you go to them and you
                              say 'You are in the wrong seat' and then you get abuse
                              and swearing and you've got to fetch a policeman." I
                B             said, "God help anyone what goes on the terracing with
                              away supporters.  I think it s disgusting."

                     q   .         Mr. GOLDSACK: Mr. Thorpe, at this meeting, you were
                              present and a number of the stewards under you were
                              present?   A. Yes.

                     Q. Do you recall any senior Club officials being present?
                        A. No, I can't remember.
    l    t           Q. This, of course, was before Mr. Lock's appointment, was it
                        not?   A. Yes.

                     Q. I think probably Mr. England was the Secretary in those
                        days? A. Yes.
                 D   Q. Do you remember whether he was at the meeting?                 A. No, I
                        don't think he was.

                     Q. Can I be totally clear about this? The policeman was
                         saying that the police considered it to be the stewards'
                         job to make sure that things were all right on the
                        /terrace?   A.  That's right.
                 E   Q.          That is to say, the standing area?    A.That's     right.

                     Q. You did not think that was any business of yours because
                        you had responsibility for the West Stand?   A. That's
                        quite correct.

                     Q. Were there any stewards who had responsibility at that
                        stage for the terraces?   A. No.

                     Q.          Did anyonetell the policeman that?        A. No.

                     Q.          So might it be the position, Mr. Thorpe, that that policeman
                                 had given instructions and the stewards were then to
                                 steward the terrace, but in fact there were no stewards
                                 who could do that?    A. No.

                         Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Is that the position?     A. That's
                                 the position.

                         q   .     Mr. GOLDSACK:   After that meeting, did stewards go
                             on to the terrace?      A. No, we didn't get stewards on the
                             Kop until two or three years after.      About three years
                         .. -.ago theyV.had stewards on the Kop.
                 H

J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                          S. THORPE

Well, that is the other end, is it not?    A. Yes.

Have there ever been Sheffield Wednesday stewards on the
Leppings Lane Terraces?   A. No, not to my knowledge.

Apart from the meeting that we have just been talking about,
do you recall any other meeting where a police officer has
asked for there to be stewards on the West End Terraces?
A. No.
So throughout your period, Mr. Thorpe, your understanding
is that there has never been any steward with any
responsibility for the Leppings Lane Terrace? A. No.

When you had these annual meetings, after the various
officials had given their little talk, are people invited
to raise points or ask questions if they wish?   A. Yes.

We may well hear evidence in due course, Mr. Thorpe, that
one of the things that has been raised at that stage of
meetings is the lack of signposting for people coming in
at the Leppings Lane end to tell them where to go to get
on to the Terraces.  Do you recall that being raised at
meetings?   A. Yes.
 The suggestion may be that that has fallen on deaf ears.
 What do you say to that?  A. Well, no, not really, sir,
 because as you approach Leppings Lane end, you ve got big
 notices, "Standing", and the turnstiles are below the
 "Standing".  To your left, as your are walking up, is for
 seating, and anyone coming on the road, as they get out
 of the coaches, they know which way to go and it is clearly
 marked for anyone, the supporters.   It's clearly marked
 outside.
 You mean this is on the turnstiles?   A. Yes,above the
 turnstiles.
 Can we come in to the turnstiles?  If people come in thrcugh
 turnstiles A to G with tickets for the Leppings Lane teriace,
 how do they know how to get on to the terrace?   A. Well ,
 at the top it says "Standing".

 That is the tunnel?   A. The tunnel. To the right, there's
 a letter to the right, and you more or less —

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry, what do you mean by
' saying to the right there is a letter? A. To the South
  Stand, the South Terracing.

 What letter?    A. I think it's No. 1.   There's 1 and 2.

       Mr. GOLDSACK:   Would you pick up the Bundle 'West
  Midlands 2' and go perhaps to photograph 17? That is
  rou2hlv the view that you would have when you came through
  turnstiles A to G, is it not? A. Yes, that s quite correct.
                                                             38



                                                                                S. THORPE


                    Q. And to someone who does not know the ground, if they look
                       straight ahead, they do see Standing over the tunnel?
                          A.     That's quite correct.

                              Can you explain from that photograph what you mean by the
                    Q.        lettering?   A. There's a letter 2 above ’Standing".

                    Q. Yes.         A. It's not on the photo, but just past my steps,
              B               the West Stand steps, there is a letter 1.

                              Is that Y to Z?    A.      Just past Y to Z.     It's not on the
                    Q.
                              photo, sir.

                                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           Try 14.

                                   Mr. GOLDSACK:  Just under the bottom, half way up the
                    Q-
                              stairs." Is that it, Mr. Thorpe? A. You can't see it.

                    Q- Are you saying that that can be seen as you come through
                              the turnstiles?      A.    Yes.

                       What is the significance of the numbers 1 and 2?   A. It
                    Q- used to be on the tickets when you have all-ticket matches.
               D       There's numbers on them.

                                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           I think when I look under thete,
                     Q- what it says is "Refreshments , is it not?                 A. Yes. Thete
                              was a N o . 1 on it,-sir.

                                   Mr. GOLDSACK:   Can I be clear what you are saying about
                     Q. 'tickets and semi-finals?        Are you saying that your
                E             understanding was that on semi-final tickets there was
                              a number which identified the part of the   terrace to which
                              people should go?    A. There used to be, yes, sir.

                                                             But I don't know about this year,
                     Q- There used to be?               A.
                               the '89 semi-final.

                               Part of the responsibilities of the stewards on Gates C aad
                     Q-
                               B would be generally to assist people to find their way^
                               to the right part of -the ground, would it not?  A. That s
                               quite correct, yes.

                         Q- And to do that, of course, they would obviously need to
                               know what the tickets said, would they not?    A. Well,
                               I have stewards at the bottom of the steps and they have
                               people coming to the bottom of the steps and my stewards
                               always tell them, "Round that corner for standing.

                               Regardless of what number is on the tickets? A. Thst s
                         Q-
                               quite correct.  They always come to my stewards at the
                               bottom of the steps and they always say, "This is seating.
                               Standing is round there." There are six stewards at the
                               bottom of those steps.
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                               39


                                                    S. THORPE

Q. So your stewards do not need to see a ticket to find out
   where the person should be sent to stand?   A. Well, he
   shows the ticket.  Sometimes they come to him and say
   "It's full under there, under the tunnel.  Can we come
   upstairs?" and they say "Standing is round the corner,
   round the refreshment bar."

Q. The complaint at the annual meetings has been that there
   has been inadequate signposting inside the ground, has
   it not?   Do you agree that that complaint has been made?
   A. Yes, I agree with you.

Q. Were you the person who was responsible for looking into
   it and making improvements if necessary?   A. No, not me.

Q. Whose responsibility was that?         A.   It was the Club's
    respoonsibility.

Q. In practice, who does that mean - Mr. Lock or Mr. MackreLL?
   A. I should say Mr. Lock, for security reasons, and
   safety.

Q. Mr.Lock.   So is this something that --

Q.      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Is this minuted?

        Mr. GOLDSACK:   Not    that I am aware of, sir.

Q. Is it a matter that you have ever given any thought to,
   Mr. Thorpe?   A. No,not really, no, because they filter
  /through themselves.

Q. They filter through?   A.  They stand in that courtyard
   waiting for their friends to come in. There's a snack
   bar and the toilets and they stand outside talking in
   groups, a lot of the supporters, when they come in. I have
   stood by 'C' Gate with my stewards to see if they were
   all right, and when people have come in, I've always told
   them, Go that way to 'Standing' please. Can we clear
   this area?"   I've just had a lot of abuse, and even the
   police have had abuse.   It's just that they don't want to
   go on to the terraces till the kick-off, some of them;
   they just stand about chatting - long-lost friends or
   something.

 Q. Where you send them is towards the South Stand entrance
    to the terracing?   A. Yes.

 Q. It is right, is it not, that one of the largest areas of
    standing is next to the North Stand?   A. That's quite
    correct.

 Q. Anyone coming in through turnstiles A to G needs to go
    through the gate in the wall to get there? A. That's
    quite correct.              -
                                            S. THORPE

Is there any provision made by stewards under your control
to make sure that people know they can go through there?
A. No, because it's locked.    I have a steward standing
on there and the bolt is across.   No-one can go through
there till they make sure that under the tunnel Pens 1 and
2 are full, and then they filter them through there to the
North Stand area - you know, the terracing on the north
side.
Can we just deal specifically with that point so far as the
semi-final this year was concerned? That gate in the wall
was open, was it not?   A. Yes.

All day, fastened back?   A. Yes.

Because at an all-ticket match the fans coming in at the
Leppings Lane entrance could have the whole of the terrace
area?   A.  That's correct.

Did you have any stewards at all on duty near to that gateway
so that a proportion of the fans were stewarded towards tie
North Stand end?   A. Yes, I had a steward standing there.
I had a steward there from B Gate.

So one of the stewards from B Gate was on the semi-final
positioned in that gateway in the wall?     A. Yes, he was.
Well, it's .ohly .about six or seven.yards away from B Gate,

That is right.  Did he have specific instructions to try
and      a . No, he just kept telling them "That way",
like, you know, just pointing which way to go.

Do you know who that was?     A.    No.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   The question was not what he
 did but whether he had any instructions to do anything?
 A. No, he didn't have any instructions whatsoever.

 Pardon? A. He didn't have any instructions. More or less,
 he stood there and used his common sense to tell them
 himself.
      Mr. GOLDSACK:  Does it come to this, Mr. Thorpe:
 That at the semi-final the only way people were likely
 to get on to the North standing area was if they happened
 to see the steward you have just described pointing ---
 A. Yes.

       or by going through thetunnel, on to thecentre   pens
 and   then filtering along? A.     That's right.

 Can I now ask you a few specific questions about the
 1988 semi-final? Were there any Liverpool stewards on
 duty at that match?   A. Yes, they came and helped me
■ •out.
                                41

                                                            S. THORPE

Q. How many?    A.   About half a dozen.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        How many?         A.    About six.

          Mr. GOLDSACK: Do. you know the names of any of them?
     A.   I am certain it was the Lloyd  brothers. There were
     six of them.  There were the Lloyd brothers and there were
     one called Jimmy. I've seen themyear in and year out,
     all these stewards what come.   He said, "Can we help you
     out?" and I said "If you will, please.   Stand by the
     terracing."

Q. Do we take it from that last answer, Mr. Thorpe, that no
   arrangement had been made prior to the match for them to
   come?   A. No.

Q. They just turned up and offered their services?                  A. Yes.

Q    Which you accepted? A. Oh, excuse me, sir. When I think
     back now, I did get a letter from the Club. There were
     some stewards who were coming down and they gave me a list.
     I don't know if it was for the League match or for the
     semi-final.

Q. We are talking about 1988, are we?   A. 1988. They gave
   me a list of stewards what was coming down, to be stewarded.

Q. And this is either the Liverpool League match or last
   years's semi-final?   A. Yes, or the semi-final.

 Q.-Do you know who wrote the letter?            Was it a steward or --
   •‘A. It came from Liverpool.

 Q. But do you know who at Liverpool?             A.        I have no idea,
    s ir.
 Q. Did it come addressed personally to you?                  A. No,to the Club.

 Q. Did you see the letter yourself?             A. Yes, I was given the
    letter. I was shown the letter.




                                           /Q.    Who at the Club gave you.
                                                         42


                                                                            S. THORPE

                    ].       Who at the Club gave you the letter?        A.   Basil Jones.
                            I think it was Basil Jones.    I will      not be certain
                            who showed me the letter, "There are       some stewards coming
                            down and if you will come round and,       you know, pick them
                            up, they will be coming round to the       players' entrance
                            round the back of the South Stand."

              _ I   q   . Now, was that common for visiting teams to bring their
                          own stewards?  A.    No.
                    Q. Was this occasion when Liverpool did it the first time you
                       were aware of it happening?   A.   The first time Liverpool
                       has ever done it.
                    Q. Can you jjst think very car efull y because it may be important
                       was it the League match or was it the Semi-Final?      A.   I
                       think it was the Semi-Final, sir.      I think it was the Semi-
                       Final.

                    Q. The 1988 Semi-Final.            A.     Yes.

                    Q. You had had a list of s te wards to expect.                   A.    Yes,

                    And then you           say six did turn up and you think the Lloyds
              DI Q- were amongst           those six?   A.   Yes.

                    Q. Did they wear stewards' bibs at 1988?             • A\        Liverpool bibs.

                    Q. Presumably they brought them with them?                  A.        They brought
                        their own bibs.
                       t

               El Q Where did you ask them to go in 1988?   A.   Well, I had
                    two of them upstairs with me in the Stand and the rest of
                            them stopped on the South West side of the terracing at the
                            top and as the supporters wer e coming in they were telling
                            them to, "Move down, lads."
                            That would be somewhere fairly near the Police Control Box?
                            A.   Yes, where the mou nted Police stand as well.

                        Q. That would be about four Liv erpool stewards?                  A.   Yes.

                        Q    Did they spend the whole game there as far as you know?
                             A.   As far as I know they did.
                             Was it your suggestion that they take up that position?
                             A.   Yes, it was my s u g g e s t i o n they took that position.

                             Why did you put them there?        A.   Well, I would not like
                             to put my own stewards on the terracing because in the
                             Stand, as I said before, if a supporter - Liverpool supporters,
                             any supporter, really - is in the wrong seat you go to him,
                             you get a lot of abuse, "I am stopping here."            We have got
                             to fetch the Police because I have stated to my stewards,
                             • ''Never ’get involved^ ••I f -anytme is -in fch-e -wrong s e a t , fetch
                H            a Policeman."      We get that abuse and swearing, "What are
                             y0U __ going to sit here."        We have got to fetch the Police
                             and I wouldn't like to put my stewards amongst a crowd like
                              that on his own.
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                            43


                                                                                  S. THORPE

                    Q. Was it any part of your t hi nking in 1988 that you wanted
                       the Liverpool stewards to make sure that the terraces
                       filled up evenly?   A.    Well, it was really but I was
                       more interested in my West Stand and the people in the
                       West Stand.
                    Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Why did you ask these Liverpool
              pi            stewards to go in to the terracing by the Police Control
                            Box?    That was not likely to be the most congested part,
                            was it?     A,. Well, it can be, sir, yes.

                    Q.      Can it?      A.    Yes.
                    Q.       Is not the most popular bit, we have been told, behind                   the
                            goal?      A. Yes, it is at the back of the goal aswell                  and
                            that corner.    They seem to all run to that corner.                     You
                            seem to get a congested area on that corner; they do                     sometimes

                    q   .        MR. GOLDSACK:   Well, that is the 1988 Semi-Final.
                            Now, coming to 1989, on the morning of the match did the
                            stewards under your control receive a briefing?   A.    That
                            is quite correct, yes.

              D|    Q. From whom?             A.      Inspector Knight.
                    Q.      Knigh t   or White?       A.- White, . I am sorry..

                    Q. Gentleman with a beard?                   A.   That is quite correct.

                    Q.,He is a regular at that end of the ground.                     A.      Yes.

               E| q. Did that briefing include all the 33 people under you?
                            A.   Yes.
                     Q. What did he tell them?    A.   Well, more or less what is
                        on his instructions - don't get involved with any crowd
                        trouble - and he showed us the tickets, the colours of the
                        tickets, you know, so that my stewards can have a look
                        what colour they was bec ause my stewards tear a corner
                        off the ticket when they come to the bottom of the steps
                        before they go up the stairs to stop people dropping
                        tickets down so they can be used again.

                        Q. Was the evacuation p r o c edur e mentioned at the briefing?
                           A.   Yes.
                        Q. In what terms?          A.     I can't remember now.

                        Q. Did he simply say, "You have all got instructions, make
                           sure you have read them"?   A.   Yes.
                        Q. Or did he actually go thr ough what the evacuation procedure
                           was?   A.   No, no.
                        Q. Which? ''’T h e 'former^? "You' have got it written down, make
                H          sure you have read it"?       A.   Yes.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                 S. THORPE

  Does it follow from that that no specific mention was
  made at the briefing of the Leppings Lane terraces?
  A.   No.
  Was anything said by the Inspector at the briefing about
  the possibility of Liverpool fans coming to the Leppings
  Lane turnstiles with tickets for the Spion Kop end?
  A.   I can't remember if he has said that, because they
  have nothing to do with tickets for the seating area, the
  Spion Kop; they are dif ferent tickets altogether.

  That is right but, you see, we have heard evidence - you
  may have heard some y ou rself yesterday and today - that for
  some time at least on the day Liverpool supporters with
  Spion Kop tickets were being let in at the Leppings Lane
  turnstiles.  A. The sta nding area?
  Yes.   Did you know that was going to happen?       A.     No.

  Do you think as chief steward of that end of the ground
  you should have done?   A.   Yes.
  What would you have done if you had been told?         A. I
  would have warned my stewards at the bottom of the steps,
  "Watch out for tickets what should be for the Kop, don't
  let them up, t h e y - a r e •for sta nding o n l y ."

   Where would y o u expect your stewards to direct those
   people to?    A. it is a standing area; once they are
   in, they cannot get back out of the ground.
   So they would go to somewhere on the Leppings Lane terrace?
   A.   Yes, that is quite correct.
Q. If you had heard a Pol iceman telling turnstile attendants
   to let people in at Lep pings Lane end with Spion Kop
   t i c k e t s , would you have bro ught that to the attention of
   Mr. Lock?          A.    Not really.
Q. Why not?   A.   Because someone will have told him
   anything like that.
Q. You would assume that the Pol iceme n would have discussed
   it with Mr. Lock?   A.   Yes.
Q. I follow that.   Would it have occurred to you, if you
   had been aware that that instruct ion had been given,
   that that might lead to overcrow ding on the Leppings Lane
   terraces?   A.   Yes, I wou ld think so.

Q. What, if anything, would you have done about that?
   A.   Well, I would have not ified Doug Lock.

Q. You mean, that you were not happy with that arrangement?
   A. , I- vifir.en 't h.app.y > r e a l l y .

Q. Did you know of it? A.     I      didn't get to know while
   yesterday in the questions.        I didn't know there was people
   coming in.
                                                      S. THORPE

You had no idea on the day that people with Spion Kop tickets
were being let in to Lep pings Lane terraces?   A.   No.
At 12 o'clock I was outside the ground.    There were people
coming up with tickets and they were saying, "This is for --
We are Liverpool supporters.    We have got tickets for the
Spion Kop."    I said, "You will have to go round to the
Spion Kop.    There is a part of the Spion Kop allocated
to you."    That was round about 12 o'clock.

Was that something you had been told at the briefing?
A.   No.
How did you know that there was a part of the Spion Kop
set aside for Liverpool supporters?   A. It was one of
my stewards what told me.
Are you surprised you were not told that directly?
A.   I was surprised.   You could see it from my Stand,
they had got a tape round, a red and white tape, and
there was Policemen stood.
Well now, prior to the 15th April, had any arrangement been
made for Liverpool stewards to come this year as stewards?
A. No, not to me until the chief steward in the North Stand
got on to my intercom to tell me that there were two stewards
there was some stewards coming down,, the Lloyd brothers,,
and some more stewards was coming down.

 The chief steward of the North Stand is Ken Castley.
, A.   Yes.

 So if he had made some prior arrangement with Liverpool,
 you did not know anything about that?   A.   No, until
 the match day.
 But some time match d ^ morning he came through on the
 intercom to say there were some Liverpool stewards --
 A.   Yes, and he came down.    He came to see me as well,
 to explain.
 What sort of time w a 3 that?            A.    Just after 12 o'clock.

  How many Liverpool stewards did he tell you to expect?
  A.   About eight.   Eight or nine stewards.

  Is it right that at about quarter past one or so the
  Lloyd brothers turned up?   A.   That's quite correct.

  From what you have toJd .us, you recognised them?                    A.    Yes.

  Were there any other stewards with them when they turned
  up?   A.   No.
  Did you -.have a discussion with them when they arrived?
  ft. ■ • - Y e s V 1 s p o k e .feo.■them. v . They -told me^ about Ken,, that
  he had arranged it - Ken Castley.
?   :   y   y


                                                     46

                                                                     S. THORPE

                        Q. That Ken Castley had arr anged them coming.      A.      Yes.

                        Q. Did you have a general discussi on with the Lloyd brothers
                           about your hopes or exp ectat ions for the match and the
                           day?   A.   Yes, I spoke to them at the bottom of the
                           steps because there was some more Liverpool supporters
                           came in and I had known them as stewards and we were all
                           talking together.
                   B
                        Q. Did they tell you anything about what they expected
                           so far as the Liverpool end was concerned?      A.    He
                           said, "There's a lot coming."     We were all talking and
                           he said, "There's a lot coming.     There's a lot coming
                           without tickets and you can expect a bit of trouble."
                           I said, "Oh we get that."    I says, "We get that.     The
                           Police can cope here.    We get a lot coming without
                           tickets."    He said, "There will be a lot more coming
                           because last year the St. Leger was run and a lot of
                           people went up to see the St. Leger."      I said, "I
                           thought they liked football."     He said, "Some of them
                           are having videos or som ethin g of the match."

                        Q. Are you a racing man at all, Mr. Thorpe?        A.      No.
                   D    Q. Do you know which of the Lloyd brothers told you this?
                           A.  I just forget.
                        Q. But it was one of them?        A.   Yes, one of them.         Yes.

                        Q. What they were telling you then was that there were going
                          / t o be more than usual wit hout tickets? A. That is quite
                            correct, yes.
                        Q. Based on your previous experience, how many did you expect
                           before this conversation would turn up without tickets?
                           A.   Quite a few.
                         Q. By that do you mean dozens, hundreds, thousands?
                            A.   Well, a couple of hundred.
                         Q. Perhaps a couple of hundred.   Was that your feeling of
                            the number who had turned up in 1988 without tickets?
                            A.   Yes.
                         Q. And as far as you were concerned, the Police had coped
                            without any undue difficulty, had they?   A.   Yes.

                         Q. Well now, you are then told, "No, there is going to be
                            a lot more than that this year without tickets."     A.             He
                            didn't say ----    He said, "There are going to be a lot
                            more coming down without tickets."
                         q   ,   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Did he actually say, "A lot
                            more" or just, "There's a lot"?    A.   A lot more.
                                    v’.
                                   . •» '
                                                       •
                    H    Q. A lot more than last year?    A.   Yes.
                         q   .    MR. GOLDSACK:    Did you realise that that was going
    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                               47


                                                   S. THORPE

     to add to the problems that the Police would have outside?
     A.   Well, not really, sir, because they have always coped
     at the Leppings Lane end, have the Police.   They have done
     a marvellous job, the South Yorkshire Police at Leppings
     Lane end.

Q. But you were effectively being told, were you not, "There
   is a new situation."?   You were being told, "There is
   a new situation;  there's going to be more."   A.   Yes,
   but they have always coped.

Q. Would you agree, Mr. Thorpe, it is often easier to cope
   if you know what to expect?  A. Yes.

Q.   Did it not cross your mind to pass this information       on
     to anyone?    A.   No, not really.

Q. You say that in this c o n v e rsa tion it was also mentioned
   that there would be trouble.         A.   There could be a bit
   of trouble.

Q. Did you und ersta nd that what you were being told was rattier
   more trouble than usual?     A.   No, not really.   No.

Q. So although there were likely to be more people without
   tickets, you did not think that would add to the problems
   or the trouble?  A.    No.

Q. And is it right that you did not pass that information
   on to anyone?    A.   That is quite correct.

Q. Neither Club official nor Police?       A.     No.

Q.    Well now, what did you ask the Lloyd brothers to do at
     this year's Semi-Final?    A.    One was upstairs and the
     other brother, he put a jacket on and he was with me quite
     a while and he went dow nstai rs and he went on to the
     C Gate, helped on the C Gate a while.      That is the last
     1 saw of him until nearly the end of the match.

Q. Well now, you had been told by Mr. Castley that there
   would be other Liverpool ste wards turning up as well.
   A.   Yes.

Q.    Did you see them at any stage?     A.      Yes, a steward
     brought them over, a s te ward from the    North Stand.

Q.    Can you help us as to the time?  A.     It is round about
     2 o'clock, just after 2, I should think.    I am not
     particularly --

Q.    Did they have Liverpool stewards' bibs with them?        A.   No.

Q.   I should have asked you, had the Lloyd brothers had Liverpool
     stewards,' bibs? A.    Yes.

Q. Just the two for the mselv es or did they have some spares?
   A.   They had a bag full of spares.
                                                        S. THORPE

What happened to those?   A.   They were put in a
locker at the back of the refreshment bar.

When, these other Liverpool stewards were brought to
you, what did you ask them to do?    A.   I said to them,
"I have got no jobs up here for you, I am sorry."    I
said, "You can go downstairs, if you like, on the terracing
because with you being Liverpool people you can mix with
your own fans;   I think it would be alright."   He said,
"Okay" and they went downstairs.

How many of       them were       there? A. About        half       a dozen,
about six.
Can you help us to identify any of them?                     A.         No.

You do not e ve n know C h r i s t i a n na m e s ?     A.        Nc.

Did you recognise any of them from other matches?
A.   No.
Did they at       any stage put bibs on?           A.     Not to         my
knowledge.         I didn't see them put         bibs on.

Did you suggest to which part of the terrace they might go?
A.   I just told them to go downstairs to the terracing
and I took t h e m downstairs to the bottom and Isaid, "Please
yourself which part" and then they left me and then I
went to see to my stewards.

;Did you see where they wen t?              A.    No.

Well now, so far as you knew was there any arrangement tc
pay any of the Liverpool stewards?   A.   Just the two
Lloyd brothers.  That was all I paid, no-one else.

 Why did you pay them?            A.     Because I put them on to my
 payroll.
 Was that something you did just off your own initiative?
 A.   Yes.
 Even though you had not been expecting them before they
 arrived?   A.   No.
 And so presumably they were not in your number of 33
 that you said --    A.   No, 36.

 — you were expecting, but there was no difficulty finding
 the extra money to pay two more people?   A. No, because
 they signed a docket and it went to the Club.

 Can you actually help as to whether those six Liverpool
 stewards did in fact go on to the terraces?   A.   No, I
 can't. . I can't say if they went on to the terracing
 anywhere.
 You did not see them at any later stage?                    A.         No.
                                                 49

                                                                         S. THORPE

                     Q. When you arranged for the Lloyd brothers to be paid, did
                        you have any discussion w i t h them about paying them?
                        A.   Told them what they w o u l d get paid and he said,
                        "Alright."   One of the bro thers signed for both of them
                        and he said, "Okay, thanks."
                     Q. Was there any discussion about more stewards turning up
                        than it had been agreed sho uld be paid for?  A.   No.
                B
                     Q. Well now, you have told us a few minutes ago that at some
                        stage you Went outside Lep pings Lane turnstiles.
                        A.   Yes.
                     Q. Was that fairly early on?     A.   12 o'clock.




                D




                 E                                    /Long before any crush




J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                       S. THORPE

Q.    Long before any .... - A. Yes.

Q.    Where were you between about 2 o'clock onwards? - A.         I
      was on my rounds seeing to my stewards, seeing if my
      stewards were all right, up in the stands.

Q. Some of your stewards of course were on B and C Gate?
   - A.That is quite correct.

Q. So when you do your rounds do you visit them to make
   sure they are all right? - A. Yes.

Q. And do you continue to do your rounds up until 3 o'clock?
   - A. That is quite correct.

Q. So at what stage didyou become aware   of the problems
   building up outside? - A. It was about iust after half-
   past-2, noticed it was building up a lot outside,
   about quart - 20-to~3, I should imagine, round 20-to-3.
   Started to climb over the turnstiles.

Q. And did you at that stage go to the area inside Gates B
   and C? -A. I went downstairs to my stewards at the bottom
   of the steps at the South West Side and I says watch it,
   lads, theres a lot climbing over, to make way for these
   gates and I went down towards this C Gate and asked the
   stewards if they were all right.

Q.Were you conscious that over the next 10/15 minutes the
    pressure outside was getting worse and worse? - A. Yes.
 //
Q. Did you at any stage give any consideration to how that
    pressure might be relieved? - A. No.

Q. You have told us that in 1981 Gate C was opened to
   relieve pressure? - A. That is right.

Q. Did you give any thought to the possibility of opening
   gates? - A. Well, they could not really because iust
   outside the C Gates they got a line of Police and a
   barrier across.  They could not do it this year because
   they had got this barrier across.

 0.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       I am sorry. What did they
       do last year? - A. No, 1981.     1981.

 Q. Yes. - A. They opened C Gate a little bit to ease the
    congestion.

 Q. Yes.   I appreciate that.   But this time? - A. They could
    not do. They could not do it this year because they had
    got, the side of my C Gate to the railings, to the
    Riverside, they had a barrier across with Police standing
    there stopping people going round to the South Stand, you
    know,- supporters. going .roundto. .the South -.Stand.
                                   51


                                                           S. THORPE

Q        Why did that stop them opening the gate? - A. Because -
         I have no idea but they got a barrier across, the Police.
         You could not do it with that barrier being there.

0.       MR. GOLDSACK:   Did not that actually mean there
 ** were a lot of Police Officers there who could be used
    to sheoherd people into Gate C if it   was partly open?
    - A. You could do, yes.   The reason they did it in
    198i there were less turnstiles. Three years - I
    think it ws 1984 they had some more turnstiles built
    and, you know, I thought there were enough turnstiles.

0   As vou looked at the situation at about quarter-to-3
 ** did'you think everyone was going to get in by 3 o'clock?
    - A. Oh, yes.

Q. Through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you see from your position how far down Leppings
   Lane .... - A. N o .

q    ..... the crowd went?    So    you did   nothave acomplete
       view .... - A. N o .

0             of   the situation outside? - A. No.

0.         Between about 2Q-to~3 and 3 o ’clock were you approached
         at all by any Police Officer about the problems that
         were .... - A . No.

Q.        .... building up?   You had a radio, I think? - A. Yes.

    Q.    Did you have any communication at all with Mr. Lock
          between about half-past~2 and 3 o cloc»c? — A. He just
          asked me if I was all right.

    Q.    What time was that? - A. About 10-to-3.

    0. Did you know where he was calling from? - A. I have no
       idea where he was calling from, to tell you the truth.

    Q     If you had needed to contact Hr. Lock yourself that day
          did you know where physically he would be? - A. No,
          because ....

    0. Sorry. Did you want to add something? - A. I cannot tell
        you because sometimes he used to go on his rounds.

    Q. So your understanding was that between half-past-2 and
       3 o ’clock he could well be on a general tour round
       the .... ” A. Y e s .

    0. So far as you are concerned do you take up a specific
       point at some stage so that your stewards know where
                            52


                                                      S. THORPE

    you are? - A. Yes, bottom of the - but I kept going round
    to see to them because they were getting a lot of abuse .
    from ....

0.. At what stage do you take up a specific point? - A. After
    the kick-off.

Q. After the kick-off. - A. Yes.

Q. So they know where to find you after kick-off? - A. Yes.

Q. Before kick-off you are on your rounds? - A. I go round
   to see my stewards are all right because this year they
   had more abuse than any.    I have never known abuse my
   stewards had this semi-final, abuse, swearing.    Two of
   my sons are stewards.    He   turned round, he says, "Dad,
   I don't know how you've coped with this lot." He says,
   "Its murder." He says, " I ’ve had nothing but abuse."
   He was walking on the seat.    Said look at him, walking
   on the seat.   An Officer says - all right, he fell and
   my son went down to him. When he got up he just swore
   at my son.   The Officer could not do nothing because
   there were that many coming and sitting in the wrong
   seats.

Q. Well now, Mr. Thorpe, we know that Gate C was opened
   twice .... - A. That is right. .

Q        in the few minutes before 3 o'clock.  Did you see
    either of those openings? - A. I saw it open first time.

Q. From where? Where were you when it opened? - A. I was
   stood up in the stand.

Q. You were looking down? -A. Yes, from the snack bar, back
   of the snack bar.

Q. Did you at that stage think you should go down to Gate C
   and speak to a senior Police Officer? - A. No. I was
   interested in my stewards, how they were coming in. All
   my concern was for my stewards at the bottom of the
   steps because they were rushing towards the bottom
   of the steps. When you get a hundred or more rushing
   to those steps, there are six lads there, their lives
   are at stake, so I went down to them.    Isaid, "Watch
   it, lads." We had some Liverpool peoplehelp us to hold
   the gates and we let them go   so many at a time up the
   stairs showing their tickets   because someof them came
   through with no tickets, standing tickets. They were
   bottom of the steps trying to get in.

0. This is bottom of Gangways Y and Z? -     A.Yes.

0.. The steps to .... - A. Yes.
                                  53


                                                          S. THORPE

Q. Did you give any instructions about the gates at the
   bottom of those"steps? - A. To open them about a yard
   and my other stewards held on to them while they filtered
   upstairs and while they were going upstairs, getting
   abuse, kicked at by the - I think it was a lot of
   frustration outside.  They were swearing at my stewards
   as they were going upstairs.  We made sure they got
   tickets for seating.  Anyone without a ticket we told
   them to get away and abuse they got ....

Q. After you tried to sort that problem out where did y o u .
   go? - A. When it finished then I went all the way round
   to my stewards to see that they were all right with all
   this crush coming up.

Q.        Did you go to Gate B or C at all at that stage? - A. I
         went round to Gate B. Asked the lads    if they were
         all right.   They said they were all right   but they says
         its terrible outside here, its terrible.

Q.        Did you at that stage give any thought to how the
         pressure outside could be relieved? -A. No, could not
         really. No way could do anything.

0.        Did it occur to you at all at that stage that   gates
         might be opened? - A...No.

Q. If you had been told that gates were going to be opened
   what, if anything, could you have done to help? - A. I
   was not told the gates were going to be opened.
    (/


q   . No, but if you had been told is thereanything that you
      could have organised your stewards to do to make the
      people coming in come in in an orderly fashion?-A. No,
      you could not, because there were that many at the back
      of the gates - they were not queuing at all. There was
      iust one mass of people.   It was just like a floodgate.
      No-one, if they had opened the gates, no-one could have
      stood there and told them which way to go, no-one, even
      the Police, they would be knocked out of the way. J.ust
      like opening water floodgates when that gate opened.
      No-one could control them.

Q.Were you conscious when the gates were opened for the
   second time that most of the people appeared to be
   going down the central terrace? - A. A third of them
   were making their way for my steps at the bottom, bottom
   of the steps.

 Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   A third of them, you say?
         - A. About a third of them were branching out like that.
         Biggest majority were going towards the tunnel and some
         of them were making their way to the right-hand side, to
         my steps.
                              54


                                                     S. THORPE

Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:   In your general tour round in the
     previous half-an-hour had you been conscious that the
     pens behind the goals were getting fairly full? - A.
     No.  I cannot see the pens from in the stands.

Q.   So had you at no stage seen pens   3 and 4 at all? - A. Mo.

Q.    But you would have expected thatby about 10-to-3 thev
     would be fairly full, would not you? - A. Well, I would
     do really but ....

Q.    Well, with that expectation when you saw all these people
     rushing into the tunnel did it occur to you then that
     there might be an overcrowding situation on the terraces?
     - A. No, not really, no.   Trouble was, I was dumbfounded
     to see them running, that many. My interest was for e v
     stewards in that stand.  That is all I was interested   and
     people round about.

Q. This was a new situation, was not it? - A. Yes.

Q. A gate being opened and a lot of people rushin» in? - A.
   Yes.

Q.   Did you consider it was anything that you as Chief ■'Steward
     for "that end of the ground should get involved in? - A. No.

Q.   Are you saying from that you regarded it as entirely a
     Police responsibility? - A. Yes, I do.

Q:, If you had thought there is going to be overcrowding on
    the terraces what would you have done? - A. Well, I would
    have notified the Police.  We have not got to get invoLved,
    like it says in our thing.

Q.   You are not supposed to deal with the problem. - A. No.

0.    But if you see one you should alert the Police to it?
     - A. Yes.

0. So if it had crossed your mind at that stage the pens cannot
   cope,- there is going to be overcrowding, how would you have
   contacted the Police? - A. I would have to go up to an Officer.

Q. Which one?    Do you have a particular point of contact? - A.
   No.

Q. You would not have done it by Mr. Lock and the radio? - A.
   Oh, no.

Q. Where were you in the few minutes after 3 o'clock?      Were
   you up in the stand by then? - A. Yes.

Q. And presumably you became aware of people going over the
   perimeter fences? - A. That is right.
                           55


                                                     S. THORPE

Q. Well now, I am not going to take   you through the part you
   played after 3o'clock. There has    been some evidence, Mr.
   Thorpe, of occasions when people   are prevented from going
   down the central tunnel if it is   already full. Are you
   aware of that? - A. Yes.

Q. How often to your knowledge is that done? - A. About two
   or three times.

Q. Has that been at League matches or semi-finals? - A. At
   a semi-final, you close the gates for, I estimate, about
   five minutes so that it could filter round to the West
   Side terracing.

Q. You say they close the gates? - A. Yes.

Q. Which gates do you mean? - A. Some gates under the tunnel

Q. Look again at photograph 18. Do you mean those gates we
   can see at the Leppings Lane end of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. And when you say they closed them who do you mean by they
   - A. Police.  Police have stood and closed them.

Q. Do you know whether, anything like that happened at the
   1988 semi-final? - A. No, I cannot remember if there was.

Q. You do not know one way or the other? - A. No.

Q. Are stewards ever involved in making sure that no more
   people go down that tunnel? - A. No.




                                / Q. Have you ever
                                                   56

                                                           S. THORPE



                    Q. Have you ever had a situation where you have thought it
                       necessary to bring to anyone's attention that parts or
                       the terraces appeared to you to be too full and something
                       should be done to ease it? - A. No, because I have always
                       ssid the Police have been more responsible fo.». filtering
                       the crowd.  They have filtered themselves as well as they
                       come in.

              B                MR. GOLDSACK:   Yes, thank you, Mr. Thorpe.


                                         Cross-Examined by MR. HYTHER:

                          Mr. Thorpe, can I just take you up on the closing of the
                          tunnel? - A. Yes.

                    Q. Could that have been something done at the '81 semi-final?
                       - A. No sir.

                    Q. It is simply you remember it being done but you don't remember
                       when? - A. I can't remember the date.

                    Q. Whether it is a good thing or a bad thing I am not going
                       to ask you, but was the position tnls: the Police simply
              D        closed those two gates at the entrance to the tunnel
                       temporarily? - A. Yes.

                     Q. Allowing people out in they wanted to go uO —hs uoile*.?
                        A. That is quite correct.

                          •But other than that not? - A. No.
                     Q/
               El         And they would be allowed in? — A. That is righ«_.
                     Q.

                     Q. Can I go back now to the '81 semi—linal. On tnai_ occasion
                        let it be said there was no northern team involved, was
                        there? - A. No.

                     Q. Midlands and London? - A. A London Club.

                           'Phere Were then complaints o£ drunken isns and hooliganism
                     Q.
                           from the local residents? — A. That is cuiue correct.

                     Q. Mr. Thorpe, I dare say you can remember the days when you
                        could go to a football match and mingle with the_opposing
                        sides' supporters and have a lot of fun, a lot or banter
                        and enjoy the game as well? - A. Yes sir.

                           Things have deteriorated? - A. That is quite correct.
                     Q

                     Q     They deteriorated by 1931? - A. That is right.

                           So "-hat by 1981 it was no mystery to a Football Club or those
                      Q
                           working for a Football Club that if there was a semi-final
                           or even'-a bi a league game,- there was likely to be hostlLity,
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                         57

                                                                 S. THORPE


                          abrasiveness between the fans and a certain degree of drunken­
                          ness and hooliganism? - A. That is quite correct.

                          Apart from the obvious step and fundamental step of segre­
                    Q.
                          gating fans, what different instructions were given or what
                          different procedures were carried out at Hillsborougn to
                          deal with this new phenomenon of drunkenness, hooliganism
                          and bad manners among fans? - A. They were ejected out of
               B          the ground for swearing and drunkenness, the Police ejected
                          them out of the ground.  If any one came in drunK, the Siuell
                          of beer, ejected out of the ground.

                              Well what different instructions were given for example
                    Q.
                              to Stewards to deal with what was obviously a new serious
                              problem? - A. Nothing really only "Don't get involved with
                              anyone".
                              "Don't get involved"? - A. That was it:        "Don't get involved.
                    Q.
                              Notify a Policeman".

                    Q.
                              The next thing is this:  from time to time there have^been
                              disasters or incidents, not amounting to disasters, when
                              people have been crushed and hurt or killed through over­
               D              crowding? - A. Yes.

                     Q.       You know that; don't you? - A. Yes.

                               You have been asked already by Hr. Goldsack about an incident
                     Q.
                               which you know nothing about at Hillsborough where 31 people
                              .were crushed? - A. I can't remember.
                         /
                E    Q.
                              gut you have known of other incidents? — A. Oh yes, the
                              Bradford one.

                     Q.        Well that was a fire? - A. Yes.

                               I am talking about crushing through overcrowding? - A. Ho.
                     Q.
                               You have known about that at otner xootball grounds, O:
                     Q.
                               course? - A. Yes.

                         Q. It has been in the papers? - A. Yes, that is correct..
                               What instructions were ever given to you or to any Oi_her
                         Q.
                               Stewards to your knowledge by the Sheffield Wednesday Club
                               which dealt with the problem of overcrowding and the
                               dangers that might arise from overcrowding? - A. nothing
                               really.
                               T.Tgg anything ever said to you to indicate thctt it ./as
                         Q.
                               your responsibility, or one of your responsibilii_ies.

                                        "To orevent overcrov/ding in sections of the
                                        ground and to help disperse spectators in
                                        such a way as to reduce crowd pressure”
                H
                                  Ho.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                               S. THORPE


Was anything ever said to you to indicate that one of your
duties w a s :
             "To control and direct members of the public
             entering or leaving the ground to help achieve
             an even flow of people to the viewing areas
             and safe dispersal of spectators on the terraces
             or viewing slopes"?

A. No.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                Did you ever see the Green Guide?
- A. No sir.
      MR. HYTNER:                You now realise what I have been reading
from? - A . No.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                 I am sorry, have I let the cat
out of the bag?
      MR. HYTNER:  No, not at all, sir. I was not trying
to catch"him out, nor was I trying to appear clever to those
who did not know what I was doing.

Did you even know of the existence of the booklet Lord
Justice Taylor has just held up? - A. No, it has amazed                me
when he has just shown it to me. •

 That is the first time you have everseen that?                - A. That is
 the first time I have ever seen that sir.

■ or heard of it? - A. That is right.

 Can we just get this right.  You were the Chief Steward               of
 the West Stand? - A. That is quite correct.

 There was attached to the West Stand  a terrace, the Leppings
 Lane terrace.  Did you regard yourself as     the ChiefSteward
 for that area as well? - A. No.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  You regarded the terrace as a
 no-go area really for Stewards, didn't you? — A. Yes sii-.

       MR. HYTNER:  So did the Club, didn't it? The Club
 did not appoint anybody, so far as you knew, to steward the
 terraces? - A. On away matches, where the ground is
 segregated like mine they have no Stewards for the standing
 area but the Spion Kop they have got Stewards there.

 Oh yes, but what Lord Justice Taylor is asking about and
 what I am asking about is not the Spion Kop where the
 Sheffield Wednesday supporters go, it is the terraces at
 the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, they have no Stewards
 there at all.
  A   n d   . t h   e   Judge using colloquial language has put it to you,
                                           S. THORPE



        that was a "no-go" area as far as the Sheffield Wednesday's
        Stewards were concerned? - A. That is quite correct.

        And on the day of this semi-final there were something
        like 10,000 people expected on those terraces? - A. Yes.

        And so far as you as the Chief Steward at the West Stand
        were concerned, the safe dispersal of those 10,000 spectators
        was in the hands of six chaps who turned up rrom Liverpool
        without tickets calling themselves Stewards and who mxgnt
        or might n o t have obeyed your suggestion of going on to
        the terraces? - A. That is quite correci..

                            Thank you.


                       Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

Q. 2-1r . Thorpe, Hillsborough is a venue for semi-finals? - A.
   That is quite correct.

o        '31 Gate C had to be opened, did it not, because the turn­
         stiles could not cope? - A. That is quite correct.

O        At t*at time residents got petitions together to urge that
         no semi-finals be held at Sheffield Wednesday? - A. That
         is quite correct.
Q        By '37 Sheffield Wednesday again noshed a semi—j-inal.
         A. Yes.
Q f The kick-off was delayed because          the Coventry fans had not
    arrived on time? — A. Yes.
o        '89 consideration night well have been given to the kicic-of:
         being delayed because of the Liverpool rans.

                   Looked at with those matters in mind, it is perhaps
         a little hopeful to say:            "Well it all went well in 88
         because in '88 you had in fact to close tne uunnel, didn l.
         y o u * t o p r e v e n t overcrowding? - A. I can't rememcer.

    O    Well can you remember, Mr. Thorpe, because did you not
         S i a statement saying that you ... A. Yes, I die «u*e
         a statement, a Police statement.

                MR. JACKSON:   It is at page 9, sir, of the Club's.

    q   . t remind you whati was said.
                "I witnessed the Police Officers at the entrance
                to the tunnel stopping fans from gaining access
                to the centre pens."

          A. That''is quite correct, -for about five minutes.
                                  60

                                           S. THORPS



q   . we know in '81 when they opened Gate C, someone had the
      foresight to make sure the fans went to the wing terraces.

              Mr. Thorpe, everything that happened in 1989 was
        well signposted, wasn't it? - A. Kell ....

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Unfortunate.

              MR. JACKSON:  I am obliged sir. Apart from the
        entrance to the West Stand standing area? - A. Yes.

Q. There had been occasions on which each of these matters
   had occurred.
               Mr. Thorpe, may I just move to one other matter.
        When you let, Mr. Hytner described them the si:i Liverpool
        people on to the terraces to act as your Stewards, what
        did1”you tell them about evacuation procedures? - A. I die
        not tell them anything.

O. Were they really Stewards? - A. Yes.

    Q. To do what? - A. Stewarding, they steward atAnfield       because
       they showed me their passes.

    Q. They may well steward at Anfielo.  I am concerned with
       stewarding at Sheffield;- They-have no idea of the
       evacuation procedures? - A.Mo.

    Q. They weren't wearing bibs? - A. Ho, they weren't wearing
       bibs when they lert me.

    Q. They weren't    being paid? - A. Ho.

    Q. No one would recognise them? - A. Theyhad got       tneideni_i<-y
       card on them.
    q    j.?r. Thorpe, when you told us earlier tnat cwo people s.rxivred
         and said:    "Can we help out?" can you tell us when that
         occurred? - A. After 1 o'clock.

    Q. Who were they? - A.'The Lloyd brothers.

    0. Were you really expecting them to work as Official Stewards?
       - A. Ilo.
    Q. And when they said:"Can we help out?" who had sent         them
       to you? - A. Ken Cast ley from the cantilever stand.

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I rather think that phrase
         v/as used in his evidence in relation tc 19G8?

                MR. JACKSOM: Sir, if I remember correctly his
         evidence. He first said in 1938 they had arrived in that
         wav and then he retracted, that and said he had a letter
         ■from the ‘Club.
                                        61

                                                    S. THORPS



                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        That is right.

                 MR. JACKS Oil:   And therefore I was asking wnere

                 THE WITNESS:     I am sorry, I meant 1S39.

                 MR. JACKSOK:     Sir, may I pursue tnat?

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Yes.
                 vrJACKSOi’: Let me make it quite clear. You saia
        that in W 8 8 the Lloyd brothers had stewardea? - A. les.

0. How did they make their presence known to you in 1938?
   - A. They were on the list rrom une Club.

q. in 1939 they just arrived? - A. That is ngh u .

r       Am I right that other people arrived with the same intent
        later? - A. That is quite correct.

                  MR. JACKSOK:     Thank you, Mr. Thorpe.


                           Cr o s s - E x a m i n e d by MR. ROBERTSOM:

~        >>- "mhA-np       ' t understand your evidence you consider.
            I ' , ! r e s p o n s i b i l i t y or the Stewards underj o u ,
          to steward t h e " Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Tnat is quius
         correct.
 o'" Did you see it as a matter for the Police to control those
     terraces? - A. That is quite correct.
                 • j-     fn the emerqency evacuation procedure ,
    °* your'7Stewarcs would take up particular points, would thoy
       not?. - A. That is quite correct.

    q   . They would know whicn point to go >_o.                    _-s


    ►     ss yssars sravsM ! ws
          From the’Stand? - A. That is right.

    q   . And at the gates going out into Leppings Lane? - A. That
          is quite correct.
    0. 3ut none of them would take up positions in the terraces
       at all, would they? - A. Wo.

        o. *ou
           t a
             k e uo that point because they would have to
           people"which direction they should go in. - A. .
           quite ’correct.
                                     s. THORPS


But nevertheless you would b e taking your initial instructions
front the Police? - A. That is right, yes.

And in particular were those Leppings Lane terraces to
be evacuated, did you understand it to be the case that it
would be the Police who would be directing people o^x tne
terraces? - A. That is right.

 Would it be fair to say for that reason you did not ever
 pay any particular attention to the direction in^whicn
 People should leave the terraces, tnat vas_a master *oi
 the* Police, was it? - A. That is a matter ror the Police.

    You mentioned in your evidence earlier in answering
    nr Goldsack, that you would expect your Stewards .0 ua^e
    up "positions at Gates 3 and C? - A. That is ngnt.

    If that be the case, Mr. Thorpe, the easiest j a v to get
    to Gates 3 and C from the terraces woula oe unrougn _he
    tunnel, would it not? - A. That is rignt.

    Back through the tunnel or alternatively round the sides
    of the Stand? - A. That is right, yes.

    When you were asked questions about the gates in the raaial
    barriers at the back of the terrace, do you rememoer being
    asked that? - A. Yes, I remember that.

  You said something about the Police, when you were being
  ,c--pd whether they could be used as a means o_ geu-ing
/        tel Stand, both sides of the Stand   What was xt
  you wanted to say about the Police and tae radial ....
  A A Policeman stands at each side of those racial ga.es
  and opens them when they announce tne evacuation.

. vou know what I mean by the "radial gates" don't you?
  Don't confuse them with perimeter rence gates, 1 «.ean
  right at the back? - A. Right at the very cacK ;just
  underneath my Stand.
     What should the Police do if the emergency evacuation
     procedure is initiated as regards those gaues at t*:e
     back of the radial fences? - A. Open them.

Q.And if they are already open what should the Police do?
   - A. Filter people through.

o    r ow it may be, Hr. Thorpe,that it is because you were
     concentrating on how to get people ort tne Stand ratner
     than off the terraces that you may have misunce.btood
     something. - A. Yes.
n     nut i*- never was the case, was it Mr. Thorpe, that
      people must be evacuated off the Leppings Lane terraces
      i^ there was to be mass evacuation on to die pitcn.
      The idea was for •them to go back through .the main
                                    63

                                             S. THORPE



        entrances, i.e. the tunnel and the wings round the sides
        of the Stand? - A. Yes, if they could get through but tney
        could not get through because it was compact.

O       If the tunnel was full then the alternative would be to
        go round the sides of the Stand, wouldn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. You see you said you thought Mr. Lock had said some thing
   to you about mass evacuation on to the pitch. Can you
   clearlv recall that conversation and in particular wr.en
   was it? - A. I can't remember now but they open the
   fencing gates for them to get on to the pitch.  If tnejr
   can't get through the tunnel the other way is to come on
   to the pitch.

            When did he say that? - A. I can't remember now.
Q.
            Is it since this incident that he has said that? - A. No,
Q.
            before.
Q. Was it at a special meeting? - A. A big meeting, I thxnL
   it was.
                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think he said before it
            was at the Annual Meeting.

                  THE WITNESS:   Yes.

    o             MR. ROBERTSON:  Obviously if people were going
            on to the pitch they would be going towards Gates o ana c
            which is where you thought people would be evacuated _rcm,
                  it’ - A. Thev would filter round to there. Tuere
            is also a gate at the right-hand side of the South Stand,
            a big emergency gate where they can go. Also they can
            use it from the terracing.

    0. Are you sure Mr. Lock was not talking about evacuating
       the Spion Kop when you heard him mentioning using
       the perimeter fence gates.  Is that a possibility?
          It could be a possibility sir.

             Finally a point Mr.' Jackson has already taken up. Is it_
    Q.
             fair to say that when you sent the si:; Liverpool utewaras
             as you thought towards the terraces, you gave them no
             instructions whatsoever as to what they saoulc co.    A-
             wo that is right.    It is quite correct.

             You don't know where they went and you weren't particularly
    Q.
             concerned as to where they went? - A. Mo, I wasn t.

        0    I said finally but just one other point. ^You say you
             could not see the pens from the Stand? - a . H o .

        o    So it would be impossible to monitor those pens iroa
             the Welt Stand, would it? - A. That is quite correct.
                                                 64

                                                          S. THORPS



                     n         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Was that because you were at
                         the back of the Stand? - A. That.is right sir.

                     O   if you were right at the front I suppose you could ...
                         A. I could do if I got right to the front.



             B




              D




                 H                           /Cross-Examined by HR. MAXWELL;


J. I. Harpham Ltd
I                                                        65


                                                                                S. THORPE

                                           Cross-examined by Mr. MAXWELL:

                               Mr. Thorpe, I would like to ask you something about signs
                               at the back of the Stand, and I invite you first of all
                               to look at photograph 14 in bundle ’West Midlands 2 ’.
                               It is the view of the back of the Stand. You have told
                               Lord Justice Taylor about a recollection you have of
                               there being some numbers posted.  X think you have
                 B             mentioned 1 and 2, and I think you may have referred
                               to 3?   A. 3 is the North Stand.

                         Q- Bear with me.      I am going to try and help you.  If you
                               look at the very right-hand concrete pillar, that is a
                               pillar on which there is a small sign which says
                                Standing"?    A. That's right.

                         Q- Immediately above "Standing" there are two wooden batons
                               that are attached to the pillar immediately above
                               "Standing"?   A. Yes.

                         Q. To the left-hand side of the West Stand “ and it is not
                               shown on any photograph - there are two similar wooden
                               batons fixed in the same sort of position at the extreme
                               edge of the Stand?   A. That's right.

                         Q- Neither of these pairs of batons has got anything attached
                               to them, but they look as though they may have been the
                               mounting points for signs at some stage?   A. Yes.

                         Q     Does that help you to remember whether or not at that edge,
                             / on photograph 14, of the West Stand there used to be a No.l
                                on a sign?   A. Yes, sir.
                   E
                         Q. Above the word "Standing"?            A.   That's right.

                         Q. And was there a No. 3 at the left-hand edge of the West
                            Stand?   A. Yes, sir.

                         Q And there was a time, was there, when one could look             at
                            a ticket for an all-ticket match and work ou whether
                            you were to go to 1, 2 or 3?   A. Yes, sir.

                          Q- Do you know when those signs came down?           A. I've no idea,
                                sir.

                          Q. Do you know how long, roughly, a matter of months or y&ars?
                                Were they up for the 1988 semi-final?         A. Yes.

                                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  They were?   A.        I think they
                          Q.
                                were up for the 1988 semi-final, yes, sir.

                                       Mr. MAXWELL: Do you know what reason there could
                          Q- be for not having them put back?      A. I have no idea, sir,
                                to tell you the truth.
                                        v* •                  ’



                     H    Q. Ydu told-Lord Justice- Taylor-about the.gate ..in. the. wall,
                             as it has been called, the opening that was left open at
                             this semi-final?    A. That's right.

    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                            66


                                                                        S. THORPE

                    O           You said, "The gate in the wall is locked. No one can
                                20 through there until you make sure the Pens through
                                the tunnel are full"?    A. That's right. That s for
                                ordinary League matches.

                    0           Yes that is ordinary League matches. Now, who makes
                                sure that the Pens through the tunnel are full so as then
                                to be able to unlock this opening?    A. The Inspector,
              B                 the duty officer who is on at Leppings Lane.

                    Q. What happens? What does he do? A. He tells me that he
                        is going to open the gates, he is going to filter the
                        crowd to the north side of the terraces. He always
                       notifies me, so as to watch my stewards at the bottom
                        of the steps in case they run up the steps    asthey are
                        filtering across.

                    0           And do you know what he has done immediately before telling
                                you this?    A. He has checked with his officers, you
                                know the Pens, because a lot of the supporters can t see
                                and I've mentioned it to him sometimes in League matches;
                                the spectators can't see , going over the north side

                        0                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   The spectators cannot see
              D                     what7    A. In ordinary League matches, sir, they come
                                    through there, the seats, for standing only, and when it
                                    gets full, the officer in. charge, the Inspector, always
                                    lets me know that he is going to open the north side
                                    terracing by the North Stand, the two tier.

                        q       .        Mr   MAXWELL:   He is an Inspector who lets you know?
                                    A. Yes.
               E
                        Q. He lets you know after he has checked with the officers?
                           A. That's right.

                        Q. Where are the officers with whom he             checks?   A. I've no
                           idea, to tell you the truth, sir.

                        0           When you were asked by the six Liverpool stewards whether
                                    they could help you, you sent them to the Terraces.
                                    A. That's right, sir.

                        Q. You thought there was something that they could do ther«,
                           did you not?   A. That s right.

                            0       What use did you think they would be there? What purpose
                                    did you think they would serve down there? A. To tell
                                    the crowd to move down, move down to the front instead
                                    of standing at the back.  A lot of supporters when they
                                    go to a match just stand in one spot, and they were
                                    telling them to move down, down towards the railings.

                            Q. What, to move from any area where there may be crushing?
                               A. Yes;,
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                 67



                                                      S. THORPE

Q. Is that the sort of        purpose that you had in mind? A. WeLl,
   not really.  I just        told them, "Do what you do atAnfield".

Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:Moving down to    the frontsounds
        more like trying to pack down so that you can get more and
        more in?   A. Yes.

Q. Well, is there any limit to that?             A.    No, not    really,
   sir.

Q. Not really?    A. Well, I told them to move them down so
   that there's spaces at the bottom, to move them down into
   those spaces until  it is practically full.

q   .         Mr. MAXWELL:   This is   what you told them to do,       is
        it?   A. Yes.

Q. To move them down?         A. Move them down.

Q. Until what point?When should they stop moving them   down?
   A. Well, I just tell them to move them down and I left
   it at that, because if they are stewards at Anfield, they
   must know what they are doing on the terracing, if they
   do stewarding on the terracing at Anfield.

Q. Do you know of any maximum capacity for the Pens?                A. N o .

Q. I suppose that is because you say it is not part of your
   area?   A. That's right.

Q./ Do you have a safety officer?          A. Yes.

Q. Who is that?         A.   Doug Lock..

Q. Mr. Lock is your safety officer, is he?                A. Yes.

 Q. How do you know that he is the safety officer? A. Because
    he was told that at the Annual General Meeting. At the
    Annual General Meeting he is told that he is the safety
    officer.

 Q. When was that? When were you told that?               A. When he got
    the job about three years ago.

    Q. That is before October, 1987?        A.    Yes.

    Q. And that has not been changed, as far as you          areaware?
       A. No.

    Q. He is the safety officer?   A. The safety officer.  If we
       want anything done, we always notify him - such as gates,
       bolts.  If the gates won't work properly, we always notify
       Mr. Lock.

    Q. What about Mr. Mackrell?    Is he thesafetyofficer?             A. Well,
       he must report to-Mr .'‘Mackrell.
                                    68


                                                       S. THORPE

Q       Yes but what is Mr. Mackrell's job in terms of safety?
        A. *1 don't know really.  He is Secretary of the Club;
        that's all I know.  I always thought the safety officer
        was Mr. Lock.  Anything that I want doing in my Stand,
        I always let Mr. Lock know.

Q. I see. That  is the practical way in which you did it?
   A. Yes, that is the practical way, sir.

                Mr. MAXWELL:    Thank you very much.

                    Cross-examined by Mr. KALLIPETIS:

Q         Mr. Thorpe, will you turn to page 9 of the statement that
         you made to the Club?    Do you have it, Mr. Thorpe?
         A. No, sir.    (Handed to the witness).

Q.       Would you turn down four paragraphs to the paragraph
         starting "At last year's semi-final ..."? A. Yes, that           s
         right.

Q. You say there that you saw the              police on the terraces;
   you cannot remember how many;               they were underneath the
   West Stand?   A. That's right.

Q        And you noticed these police officers as you leant over
         the front of the seated area?A. That's right, by the
         fire escape.

    Q    You say, "These police officers were in position well
         before kick-off ..."? A. That's right.

    Q. As far as you were aware, did they stay?           A. I've no idea,
       sir, to tell you the truth.

    Q. Whereabouts were they?            A. Just underneath the Stand.

    Q. Along the back of the terrace?            A. That's right.

    Q. Stretching up towards the gate leading to the two side
       pens?   A.  That's r.ight, yes, sir.

    Q.      Turning to page 3 of your s t a t e m e n t--- I am sorry, page
          2 -----
    q           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Just before you move on
          from that, you said that they were inposition well
          before kick-off - indeed shortly after the turnstiles
          opened?   A. Yes.

    Q  What were   they doing on the terrace at that time, those
       police officers?    A. I've no idea, to tell you the
       truth, sir.
              v*.
    Q. Pardon?    A. I've no idea." They just stood there.
                                                    S. THORPE

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I see, thank you.        I am sorry,
        Mr. Kallipetis. Where are we going now?

              Mr. KALLIPETIS:    Page 2, sir.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you.

q   .          Mr. KALLIPETIS:  Do you have that, Mr. Thorpe?
        A.   Yes, I've got it now, sir.

Q       Again the fourth paragraph down. You say:   "The evacuation
        procedures are important particularly with regard to any
        fire, and we are informed as to the code which     willbe^
        broadcasted over the public address system ? A.That s
        right.

Q. Mr. Thorpe, I do not want to know what the code is, but
   what I want to know is this: Have there been any
   dress rehearsals during League matches when this code
   has been tested?    A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you remember on how many occasions?   A. There was
   one two matches before this semi-final^that we were
   drilled on. We have had about four this year.

Q. Is that during a        match? . A. Yes,.

Q. With a lot of shouting and chanting?              A. That's quite
   correct.

    Q- Any difficulty with the tannoy?          A. No.

    Q    So everybody could hear the message and go to their
         designated position?   A. Yes, that's right, sir.

               Mr. KALLIPETIS:    Thank you very much.

                    Cross-examined by M r .WOODWARD:

    Q. Mr. Thorpe, you have been asked about the green guide
       and the first time you have seen it is today? A. That's
       right.

    Q. May I ask you about something else? Did you know that
       the Club had a Safety Certificate? A. Yes.

    Q    Had anybody told you about it and about the responsibility
         and importance of stewards in the Safety Certificate?
         A. The Safety Certificate?    I think it was in the press
          that we had got a Safety Certificate, Sheffield Wednesday
         Football Ground, because in my Stand there is a sheet
         up of the Safety Certificate, like a copy, with all the
          ground procedures and everything like that.

    Q. It is in the Club's bundle, the first document in the
       ■bundle". May 'I draw your attention,■please,••to p a g e 5 in
        the bundle?   Section 9 deals with stewards.   It is page
                                70


                                                 S. THORPE

     5 in the bundle.  Do you see what it says there?
     It says, "The holder shall arrange for the attendance
     at every specified activity a number of safety stewards".
     Now, that is you and your men, is it not?   A. Yes.

Q. You knew that you were a safety steward?        A. Yes.

Q. And it there sets out the sort of task that you are
   expected to perform:  the manning of the exits, the
   control and direction of spectators entering, using
   or leaving the stadium.  So there are three tasks,
   entering, using and leaving the stadium?   A. Yes.

Q. You knew that that was a steward's job?        A.   That's rigtit.

Q. The next requirement is that the safety stewards shall
   patrol the stadium.  Did you know that that was expected
   of the stewards? Did you know that, Mr. Thorpe? Not
   you necessarily, but that there would be stewards
   patrolling the stadium?   A. No, not to my knowledge.
   We just had to stand at us posts.

Q. Your role as a steward was in respect of a specific area
   and particular men?   A. Yes, that s right.

Q. And you did .not have any concern about other parts?
   A. No.
Q. But from time to time during a day whilst your stewards
     were at their posts, were you visited and patrolled by
  !: any of Mr. Lock's men?   A. No.

Q. Did Mr. Lock come round?          A.   Yes.

Q. You were a chief steward?          A. Yes.

Q. Were there stewards above you, before you get to Mr. Lock?
   A. Yes.
 Q. What is the order of rank? What sort of steward is abo^ve
    you? A. Basil Jones, Mr. Jones.

 Q. And above him?     A.   Mackrell.

 Q. Mr. Mackrell?     A. Yes.

 Q    Whatever job they had, there was Mr. Jones above you and
      then Mr. Mackrell. Where did Mr. Lock fit into all this?
      A. Well, he was overall.   He's below Graham.  I understood
      he was my safety officer for all the ground.

 Q. You took your directions and orders from Mr. Lock, did
    you?   A. Y e s .

 Q. But you-do not recall, other than Mr. Lock coming round,
   "any' -stewards- having'.^-he. .task.-.ofpatrolling? A.. N.o.
W / i O
                                                        71

                                                                                S. THORPE

                       Q. You have told us about certain briefings that took place
                          and certain meetings?   A. Yes.

                       Q. Those were briefings or meetings at which the police
                          attended?   A. That's right.

                       Q. Would you have a look, please, at this document?    (Handed
                          to the witness). It is a Club document and it is not in
                          the bundled   Could you please tell us whether you have
               B          seen it before?   It is headed "Management Information'
                          and it has got some writing on the top. Would you ignore
                          the writing on the top for a moment?    It then says,
                          "Safety of Sportsground" and then it says "Use and
                          Training of Stewards'', and it is Sheffield Wednesday's
                          material.   Have you seen this before?   A. No.

                C l Q- Or anything like it?         A. No.

                       Q. You have not seen that?        A. No.

                       Q. You have not?      A. I have not seen this whatsoever.

                             The first paragraph of it sets out that the prime
                       Q- responsibility for the arrangement of affairs at the
                D            Club lies with the Club.        Do you see that?       A.   Yes.

                             ^t paragraph 8 it talks about training and the training
                       Q.
                             of stewards. Do you see?    A. Yes.

                             And in the third section of that itsays, "Stewards             should
                       Q. be supplied with a hand-out detailing their responsibilities
                             'in general terms as set out above"?         A. Yes.
                 E
                             The general terms we can see at paragraph 3 on the left-
                             hand side.    That sets out "Controlling, directing and_
                             patrolling" and other matters.   You have never seen this
                             before?    A. No, sir.

                             At the briefing or meeting or lectures that you had from
                             the police, do you recall being present at the meeting
                             when Mr. Sewell addressed you in 1988?   A. Yes.

                              That would be in the August, would it, the summer of 1988?
                        Q.
                              A. Yes.
                              Mr. Sewell talked to you.  Was that the first time you had
                        Q.    had any address or lecture from him - do you remember?
                              A. I think it was.




                                                              /.Q.   Now, amongst the things
                   H

  J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                            S. THORPE

    amongst the things that he.explained to you stewards
    prp there was the sort of division of responsibility




stewards and the Club.      A.    No.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        That was a very long question.
                                 73


                                                     S. THORPE

     were present at that meeting?       A.   Yes.

Q.   You did have your little stewards' booklet? A.         That's
     right.
Q. Did you not, with the tic kets in.         A.     Yes.

Q.   Were those rules and regulations or the matters that are
     set out in that booklet, were they observed by you?
     A.   Yes.
Q. You are quite sure about that?   A.   That's right.    To
   a certain extent --    At the start of the season, the Club
   always gave me copies for everyone of my stewards; it is
   in their book.   Also I made sure that they had a copy
   as well.   The Club made sure they had that copy.

          MR. WOODWARD:   These booklets, sir, can be found
     following page 50 in the bundle, or an example of it.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Thank you.

q.        MR. WOODWARD:  Amongst the tasks that you had as a
     steward to be concerned with was being prepared for the
     event of an emergency, an evacuation procedure.   A.    Yes.

Q. In order to do that, you would obviously have to be. at
   your posts throughout the game to the end of the game.
   A.   That's right.
Q J, To the final whistle, because if you were not in your
     positions for the final whistle and something happened
     towards the end, then there would be no way by which the
     stewards could comply with the procedure.   A.   That's
     right, yes.
Q. Did you have a practice of paying the stewards before the
   end of the game?   A.   I used to have, years ago, but
   now I pay them at the end of the match.

 Q. Well, is that right, Mr. Thorpe?    Do you not pay your
    stewards before the -end of the game?   Would you have
    a look, please, at the statement that you made?    The Club
    statement, Page 1, the bottom of the page.    Do you see,
    "I am responsible for paying the stewards and the gatemen.
    When the stewards and gatemen arrive, they hand over their
    passes and I also take a ticket from their booklet.     I
    keep the jackets in the cup board in the snack bar at the
    rear of the West Stand...    Before the end of the match
    the stewards and the gatemen hand back their jackets
    and I provide them with their passes and their payment
    for the match."    Now, is that what you did?   A.    I
    pay them just before the final whistle, about 5 minutes
    before the final whistle and then they go back to their
    posts arrd they have the I.D. card on their jackets, on
    their c o a t s .
 Q. This may be a practice that has been going on for a long
                                      74


                                                                   S. THORPE

      time --    A.     No, it has only been going on for the
      last 4 years, because the reason it is, on some occasion
      somewhere on the ground some of the stewards have been
      paid before the end of the game and Doug Lock pointed
      it out to us when we went to a meeting that he saw a
      steward - he didn't know where he had come from - walking
      up Halifax    Road with his jacket    on.

Q. Can I just   ask about what you said there. Forgive me,
   I interrupt you.      You were going to say Mr. Lock then
   said something else should be done?           A.   He said, "When
   do you pay your s t e w a r d s ? " I said, "I pay them nearly
   at the end of the match and I take their jackets and they
   go back and they keep their I.D. Card on them.

Q.    Where do you pay them?           A. At      the snack bar, up         the
      stairs.

Q.     They have to come from their posts to the snack bar?
      A.    Well, they come one at a time from their posts.

Q.     And you take the tabard from them,.you give them               the
      money. A.     Yes.

Q. They do go back again, do they?                  A.      Yes.

Q.     But without their tabards they are slightly at a d i s a d v a n t a g e ,'
      are they not?    A.   They have got an I.D. Card on.      The
      gates have   opened at 25 to 5 to    let people outsidecome in.
      They always open the gates 5 or      10 minutes before the end
     •of the match and that is when I pay them because a lot
      of spectators are going home, the crowd — the stands are
      filtering out, emptying.

                            (Lun cheon a d j o u r n m e n t )
NQUIRY    INTO      t h e   HILLSBOROUGH

     STADIUM            DISASTER.




                   Before


             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                MR. B. JOHNSON
   (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                      and

               PROF. L . MAUNDER.

                  (ASSESSORS)




                      At

                The Town Hall,

                  Sheffield,

                       on

           Wednesday, 14th June, 1989




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Afternoon Session)



      From the Notes of J.L. Harphain, Ltd. ,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
       55, Oueen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                          (AFTERNOON SESSION)
                                                         Page

STUART THORPE, recalled
     C r o s s - e x a m i n e d b y MR. WOODWARD          75
     C r o s s - e x a m i n e d b y MR. GLASGOW           88

KENNETH CASTLEY, called
     E x a m i n e d b y MR. PHILLIPS                      98
     C r o s s - e x a m i n e d b y MR. HYTNER           101


JOHN CASTLEY, called
     E x a m i n e d by MR.
                      GOLDSACK                            101
     Cross-examined  by MR. HYTNER                        104
     Cross-examined  by MR. JACKSON                       105
     Cross-examined  by MR. KALLIPETIS                    107
     Cross-examined  by MR. WOODWARD                      107
      By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR                              1C7

ALBERT RONALD MARSH, called
      E x a m i n e d b y MR. PHILLIPS                     108
      C r o s s - e x a m i n e d b y MR. WOODWARD         114
      C r o s s - e x a m i n e d b y MR. GLASGOW          117

 ROBERT WILLIAM COBB, called
      E x a m i n e d b y MR.     GOLDSACK                 118
      Cross-examined            b y MR. JACKSON            122
      Cross-examined            b y MR. MAXWELL            123
      Cross-examined            b y MR. WOODWARD           124

 BRIAN RIDGE, called
       Examined by MR. PHILLIPS                             126

 RICHARD WIL LIAM B E A D S L E Y , called

       E x a m i n e d b y MR. GOLDSACK                     130
       C r o s s - e x a m i n e d b y MR. KALLIPETIS       134
       C r o s s - e x a m i n e d b y MR. WOODWARD         134

 MALCOLM BAIN, called
       E x a m i n e d by MR. PHILLIPS                      141
       C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by MR. WOODWARD          144

  STEPHEN CRAIG CARDWELL, called

        E x a m i n e d b y MR. GOLDSACK                     146
        C r o s s - e x a m i n e d b y MR. HYTNER          .1.47
        C r o s s - e x a m i n e d b y MR. KALLIPETIS       148
                                                   75




                                      TWENTY-FIRST D A Y 1S PROCEEDINGS

                                        tJF.nNF.SDAY. 14th JUNE, 1939

                                            (AFTERNOON   SESSION)


                                           STUART THORPE Recalled

                                      Cross-examined by M R - WOODWARD.

                         askins you about the obligation or a
                                      t ttqc
Q ' ste',>I5dr to’regain in his position throughout. - A. Yes.
                           nlpase  in the club's bundle or
Q ' doV you°have your little booklet there which sets out
     y   oobligations? - A. That is right.
             u   r




_    n                            -     sir      we look at page 58in the bundle

     fis to n ir^ ^
     Shis tie is gone and the area is clear?                                A. Yes.

Q. Do you see that? - A. Yes.
          *   i        utHp nractice o — st6V73.ircis leaving
 Q - thei^position before the final whistle will not be
     tolerated"? - A. That is right.

 0. You knew of that rule? - A. Yes.
   '      ■>.     c-v'^-ceot in an emergency"and then.
 Q ‘ "Stewards should not leave their place of duty witnout
     the consent of the Chief.Steward or SeniorPolice
     Officer"? - A. That is right, yes.
                         • i.   ctpwards having their tabards on.
    °" -hA t W e U ^ I have got to lock them away and where 1 pay
       ny stewards it is just a counter.

    0 what is the point of them wearing tabards?                                 - A. Well, so
    Q ' people can recognise them as stewards.

    Q. So            h   o   w   would that occur                ^ s t e ^ a r d s ? 6-*!! I 1
                                       have paid m ^ e w a r L    in an emergency.         I
                 only pay my stewards ....
                          Tt is nv fault.  If you had paid your
    Q ' ! ? e l « d s Ind they had handed their tabards in. - A.
        Tt would have been end of the match.

     o. Are y°» saying tha,: you^did not pay ^ - s t e w a r d s u n t i ^

                 SJiiS?                 wtiist1e I pay my. stewards because where I pay
                                                     76

                                                                              S. THORPE


                          m y stewards there is no office whatsoever.   It is the
                          counter of the snack bar.   And when I am paying 26
                          stewards I have got money to pay stewards.   I do not
                          want to get mugged by supporters coming down tne steps
                          front out 01 the seating.
                    Q        So are vou saying that it is just    a moment or twobefore
                             the final whistle goes? - A. Yes.
          B         Q. And they then go back to their positions, do they? - A.
                       That is right.
                     0        The oates are opened about 10 minutes before the final
                              whistle? - A. On a League match, yes, about 5 o. .0 _
                              minutes before the end of the match because a lot or
                                 nip leaving the ground to get to the coaches and
                              the* cars, but when we get a biggish match, Manchester
                              United coming to Hillsborough, Everton, Liverpool, the
                              Police seem to hold them back sothey can get tne coaches
                              round to ferry them away from the ground.

                     n        Your area of responsibility was where? Where did it begin
                              in relation to the turnstiles? Where did your area o,
                              responsibi1ity begin? - A. Bottom of the steps or tne
            D                 stands.
                        Q. At the bottom of the steps of the stands. - A. Yes.         That
                           is where my area starts.


                         «> S T A t t l V L S
                          ' round the ground - all the way     round the seating area
                               of the West Stand.
                         0      Andis that an area which you patrol, from the bottom of
                               i-hp steos to the balcony front of the stand.  A. - do
                               not go to the bottom of the steps of the balcony,you know.
                               I do not go to the bottom.
                         o   But you would be going up and d o w n the gangways and around?
                          ’* - A. Yes, seeing my .stewards are all right in their
                             pos itions.
                         n    nid vou have any stewards at the bottom of those gangways?
                         Q * - 1 7 have t w o - there are two fire escapes, at the _
                               •              v,f-Viflnd side o^ the stand and the leit hand side oi
                             "thi s t a n S because; the briefing of the match, Inspector
                G|            asked me the names of those two stewards.

                          q   . You have two stewards in the West Stand at the front?
                                - A. Yes.
                             Q.And they are positioned one at each end? - A. That is
                                quite correct.

                h    !

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   S. THORPE


There are no stewards across the centre? -A.Just at the
turnstiles - at the gangways. As you come up the steps
there are gangways.
You mean at the back of the stand? - A.      Well,-it is Diddle,
more or less. Middle of the stand.

Where are your stewards, Mr. Thorpe, in the West Stand?
 Whereabouts would you expect to find them, please? - A.
As you come up the steps there is a landing and there are
six steps leads up to the seating area, gangways    There
are two stewards stand at top of that gangway.   It is just
a small one, about half-a-dozen steps, and they just looic
at the tickets, as the supporters come in, which way to go.
The seating is numbered from 1 to 30.

 So you have two at those steps? - A. Yes.

 Where else do you have them in the stand? -A. Bottom
 corner. Two in every stand.  Go from U to Z.

 ^ u r stewards in the West Stand? - A. No. There is two
 in every gangway.   There are six gangways six gangways,
 where they gS up to the ticket, from U to Z.

  So at each gangway in the West Stand at the back there
' are two stewards to be found.   A. Yes.

 Do those stewards have any view across the people in
 the West Stand? - A. Oh, yes.

' Do thev have any responsibility for controlling those
' people’ -A. No.     Just show them - only way they have
  l i t is'to t e U them where their seat is and ir someone
  I f s a t in their seat they come back, they tell them
   that someone is in my seat and that steward goes to
  have a look if he has got the right ticket.

  Do we understand that on this day, the occasion of
• the semi-final in April, there were a number o z j e o p l e
  who were in the wrong seats in the West Stand.      A.

  People who should    not have been there? - A. That is
  quite correct.
i And who when approached and asked to move were most
  uncooperative? - A. That is right. The language was
  terrible.

J. I am sorry? - A. The language was terrible.

). And there were quite a number of those, were there?- A. Ye

}. llore than you would have expected? - A. That is right.
                                   78


                                                             S. THORPE

Q. i    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Is that people who were in
   the wrong seats or who had no stand tickets at all? - A.
   Some of them had no stand tickets whatsoever, sir, and ....

0. How had they got past down the bottom of the steps? - A.
   Some of them had climbed up from the front, been pulled
   up from the front.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Oh, I see.

0.        MR. WOODWARD:        Some of them had      cone up from the
      front? - A. Y e s .

0. Did you see that happening in any numbers? -A. I only
   saw it on the television.

Q. On the day? - A. Well, I did not see it but some of my
   stewards saw it. They told me that they were climbing
   up from the front.

Q. Did any of your stewards report that to you? - A. They
   tell me.

0. On the day? -A. They tell the Police when anything happens
   like that.

Q.    Did any of your stewards      report it   to you? -A. Yes.

Q.     Did you report that to Mr. Lock? - A. No. It is the
       Police. Report it to the Police because Mr. Lock
     l cannot do anything.   He has got to refer it back to
       the Police.

Q.     But if there were      numbers of people   in   the West Stand
      who should not have been there that would be a matter
      for the stewards tohave to deal with, would not it? - A.
      No, it is the Police, to eject them out of the ground.
      They have not got to be involved with anything like that,
      in the-wrong seats.   If they won't move out of the seats
      the Police eject them out of the ground.

 Q.   There seem to be tv/o' stages to it. If someone is observed
      to be in a place that he should not be in the steward comes
      along and says, "Excuse me.    May I see your ticket?_ You
      are in the wrong seat," and the steward deals with it if
      he can? -A. If he can.

 Q .And if there are numbers of people like that is that not
     something that you would report back to yourcontrol room?
     - A. Report it to the Police.

 Q. You have a radio, do not you? - A. Yes.

 Q.What is it for?          - A. Reporting    matters.Thatmatter is      for
                                                       79


                                                                                 S. THORPE


                             the Police, not the club. What can the club do ir they
                             are sat in the wrong seat and they have not got tickets?
                             The club cannot do nothing.  It is the Police to eject
                             them from that area, not the club.  lhat is my under
                             standing.
                     0       Are you saying that so far as you      are concerned no
                             instruction hid been given to you      by the club to
            B                report people being in the wrong       place being in
                             the stand when they should not be      there. A. No.

                     0       Did you know that the club was monitoring, so far as it
                             could, the admission to the various parts of the ground?
                             -A. Oh, yes.
                     0       What do you report on your      radio to the club? -A Any
                              accidents, if stewards are     short, stewards are late
                              anything like that and for     medical - it is more or less
                              for anyone getting hurt in     my stand.

                     0 Does it follow from that .... “A. Calling Hr. Lock ir
                        there is anyone injured so they can get the St. Johns
                        into my stand.
             D       Q. So it is in the event of an emergency you would use
                        your radio? —A. Yes.
                         Q. Where there has been an         injury? - A. That is quitecorrect.

                         0 Does it follow from that that      on    the day ofthismatchyou
                         Q / had no radio contact with Mr. Lock? -A. No.
                E        Q. It does     follow? - A. Yes.
                         n     vm, did not speak to him once     on    your radio?-A.Spoke to
                               him once asking for more medical people after   he had been
                               over the PA system.
                         Q.    But that was after the incident       had happened? - A. Yes.

                         0. Butbefore the incident, whilst   the crowd are coming in,
                            people being found in the wrong seats, is this the
                            position, there was no radio communication between you
                            and Mr. Lock? - A. No.
                         0. Nor radio communication between you and anyone else? - A.
                               i-io.
                          0. The club radio is in fact on talk through? - A. Yes.

                             0. It is on talk through, is not it? - A. That is quite
                                correct.
                             Q.So you are able to hear any messages? - A. That is right.

                 H

J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      80


                                                                                               S. THORPE


                Q. That are being passed.                             For example, to Mr. Lock? - A.
                   That is right.
                    n Tf there were more people in your stand than should have
                    Q ' J L n ?hPre than vou had expected was there any reason for
                             t u   8 i   lock about it? - A. No, only -my - I have
                          ?               - is fetch a Policeman, if we have got
                        always don          without tickets and in the wrong seat
           B
                          T ff Ms^u^° ;rhr&: - e^^^rp &
                          g       £                                   -     is.^ T h a fis'm ^ u le sio r
                          mv stewards in that stand.
                    0. Yes. You h a v e #that identified in your rulebook, I think?
                       - A.That is quite correct.

                                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:              Page 58.

                                          MR. WOODWARD:             Yes.   Mo. 5 there:

                     n "QfPi7Prds are responsible for ensuring spectators are in
                     Q * t S T o r r l c t S e a t s and when this is not the case tney have
                                 ™ n!?hilitv in the first instance to request tnen to
                           So“ !« And then you get in touch with the Pollce?                                 A "
                           That is right.
                     O Well, were there any people who actually moved when you
                        asked them to? -A. Some or them moved but ....

                     Q.There were some that did? ~ A. Yes.

                     Q ' stairs^ I j l c t e r i r ^ t h r g r L n d ^ n d ' S O T r S f       them°went into
                              the proper seats.


                              f   o   r   the f o r e c o u r t ?   A.There was no-one on the forecourt
               F|             whatsoever.
                      n       Thorp was no steward who had any responsibility for the
                              area between your stairs and the back of the turnstiles.
                              - A. No.
                      Q. You have spoken of seeing people hanging around in the
                         area?- A. Yes.
                      Q. Milling about betweenthe stairs .... - A.That is right.

                       n                    and the turnstiles.     Is this the position, that there
                       Q ...........
                           w a s no-one               frn"itheclub
                                                  rrom the ciud    who ^was doing
                                                                                b anything
                                                                                   q£       to wdeal
                                                                                           _e    aU
                                  ^        t    S    M   S    1 coming in ’and they stand talking.          There

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
p'    \i
                                                     81


                                                                             S. THORPE

                            are the toilets there and there is a refreshment bar.
                            They go to the refreshment bar and they stand there
                            eating and I do not t h i n k i f anyone went up to them
                            and told them to go to the terracing you will get a
                            lot of abuse, "Who do you think you are talking to?"
                            and the language is very nice to you.

                          Q. Are you saying that there were no club officials dealing
                   B         with people in the forecourt? - A. No.

                          Q. You agree?'- A. I agree, yes.

                          Q. If you had sent someone down the stairs because he had
                             not got a ticket from the West Stand .... - A. The Police
                             do that, not me, not the stewards, the Police.

                          Q.The Police do that? - A. Yes.  They bring them right down
                             and eiect them out of the ground.




                    D




                      F




                      G



                                                          / Q. May I just

                      H


     J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                       S. THORPS



m*v t ^ust ask you one matter on the emergency procedure,
    evacuation. Do you have the Club’s buncle please,
page 13, there is a document entitled:   emergency
Evacuation Procedure".
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Are you moving off this
booklet’
       MR. WOODWARD:     I     sir.



X £ t ! T t £ S U l t o , is it, of this booklet we have bee.
looking at? - A. That is quite correct.

 ^   <+■ C V S t^ere: "1S88/1S35 West Stand Steward".       Is
 A?a i* ‘^ L j V e ^ a t booklet for any Stewards elsewhere?.
 -°a! Yesf North Stand. The Stewards, for the hortn S.anc
    ' , .             stand" on their books and boojcs si;..-lci
                        « e different from the Gatemen. They
 have Gatemen in for the turnstiles ....

 That is the full range, is it? - A. Yes.

 Particular named Stands and Gatemen and who else? - A.               :
 The turnstile operators come under the ga^emen,
 North Stand and there is one for tne South Stanc.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Right, thank you.

            WOODWARD:  You have got. a lii_ule green boo..le_
  there, Mr. Thorpe? - A. Yes.

  Is ^ a t the same one.    Forgive me, will *’°u
     in norause the o'-int seems to be somewhat di-i.rej.~ni..
  1933/SsTis in much" bolder figures than the one that we
  haJe^t c o p ? e d . It may be unimportant. Tnat x, pace »

           have asked you about the Stewards or any steward
           t
           Mip west Stand and the turnstiles. Do you :;a-/e
   anv^Stewards with ai>y responsibility for the turnstiles?
   - A. 130.
-» nr. wou have any Stewards who had the task in front or
   t h e " turnstiles, between the turnstiles ana the ^ e p p m g a
   Lane gates? - A. Mo.
o   qo real1v it is not until a supporter gets to the oottcu
o. So rea                        . he is reaiiy going to encouni.ei.
   S L l i ' r s t l t e w a r d who is going to help hia to go «nyv*.r
   - a . That is right, yes.

Q. Are there any Stewards at the tunnel entrance? - A. Vo.

q. Has that always been the .case? - A. Yes.
                                      S. THORPE



 So the direction of any individual coning througn .he turn­
 stiles relies almost entirely upon the writing upon die
 notices? - A. That is quite correct.

    There is nothing else to help them? - A. No.

    To *elD with their confusion. May I ask you about tne
    i p v t h - t this incident occurred. You were expecting,
    weren't you, that there would be some Liverpool Stewards
                M jiin your forces? - A. That is rrgnt, yes.

     I think if we lock at page 3 of your statement this was
     Information you had received from Mr. Lo c k , tne bo-tom
     of page 3, do you see:
            "I now turn to my involvement in the events
            which took place on 15th April 1SG9 ---

     A. Yes.

. Then it goes on:
            "t picked up ny radio and made my way to the
            West Stand.  I_was told^at the previous
            match by Doug L>ock ....

     How that is a match that had taken place at Hillsborough,
      is it? - A. Yes.
3 . what a week or so.    How long before? - A. A week before.

->       according to your understanding from Mr. Lock some firm
      arrancement had been made .... A. With me as well i0r
      tpnoo-arv Stewards, for my temporary Stewards to come and
      I had*arranged it with Doug Lock to have ten temporary
       tewards
0     so you had asked Mr. Lock, had you, at some planning stage
      for additional Stewards? - A. That xs right.

Q. Ten in number? - A. 'That is right..

q    . Because you thought you needed ten? - A. That is right.

        i         i'foupri,s who vou were expecting to come j.ro.^
Q - Liverpool?               it is the Stewards that I had employed
       the year before.
 0 The Lloyd brothers? - A. No. Then ten temporary Stewards
    was temporary Stewards for me last year.

 Q. I see, these were Hillsborough men, were they? - A. Xes.

    o. Hot Liverpudlians? ~ A. I^o.
                                                                                               i
                                                        84

                                                                 S. THORPS



                    0        But you were expecting before the day of the match that
                             there would be Stewards coming from Liverpool? -    Ko,
                             I did not expect anyone.
                    Q. You had had some in the previous year, hadn't you? - A.
                             Yes.
                    Q. And they had been paid for? - A. No, they were not paid
           B           for in the previous year.

                    Q. In 1938? - A. i'<o.
                    Q. Had they taken part in the stewarding in 19GS? - A. Yes

                    Q. Had they worn their Liverpool colours, their tabarcs?
                       - A. Yes.
                        q   . h o w many were there. Were there about eight? - A. Six
                              to eight of them las. year.

                        q   . I think on page 4 of your statement you describe:

                                       "During the 1938 semi final, die Lloyc.^
             r\ I                      brothers had stewarded the terrace wii.n
                                       about 6 other Liverpool stewards."

                                 A. Yes.

                        a        cn that- is ricrht, there were six plus the Lloyds and tnej
                                 had stewarded"the terrace, had they? - A. *es. Well oie*
                                 went on to the terrace where they said ohey were going
              El                 to go and I left it at that.

                                 But you were directing them, weren't you? - A. I told
                            Q.
                                 them to go there.
                               Where did you send them? - A. I sent them to the south­
                            Q. west side of the Stand to the terracing.

                               well what was the point of sending them there? - A. Because
                            Q. I can't send them under the tunnel because cnere w«a «.
                               Policeman there, a load of Policemen.

                               Are you saving that if there had not b e e n policemen there
                            Q. vou would have sent some Liverpool Stev/arus on to u*.e
                               t r a c e s under the tunnel? - A. If any o, the otewarcs
                               had come I would have done but like I have been Sajir.b ,
                               i- is not mv responsibility for stewarding oi the
                               terracina. I have been to two or three semi-rinals_ away
                               from Sheffield to watch Sheffield Wednesday and we nave
                               never had Stewards in the terracing.

                                Are you saying that you would have sent Stewards on tc
                             Q- the terrace but there were Policemen m tne uunnel.

                                  A. Yes.'-
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                               85


                                                                            S. THORPE


                    0. Do you mean the Policemen were in the way? - A. They were
                       stood at each side of the tunnel.

                    0       Well whv did that prevent you from sending Stewards on
                            to the terrace? - A. I sent them to the right-hanc side.
                            They could filter their way round if they wanted to.

                    O       Why did the presence of Policemen prevent you sending
           8                S t e w a r d s o n to t h e t e r r a c e ? - A. I d o n ' t know r e a l l y
                            but I sent them tnat way.

                            vou have given that as a reason, you see. riny is i^ c*
                     Q.
                            reason? What reason is it? - A. Well that ngnr-nanc
                            side it filters a lot with Policemen on horseuacit anc
                            „ou Ge+- £ lot of Police standing there in case they are
                            wanted "for emergency.  You seem to get a lot ox Police
                            around that area and I said:   "Go round t.,a; area anu  ^
                            then you can filter across to 1 and 2 Pens ±rOi.i aie      .

                                I am sorry, we may be at cross purposes, but as^I under­
                                stood it the reason for not sending Stewards ln-o .ens
                                and 4 was because there were Policemen in tne tunnel.
                                A. Yes.
            D                  1     ,.,'nv is t'^at a reason? How does that prevent you
                        Q. sendina Stewards on to 3 and 4? - A . iWell I can•t;senc tnem
                           on to 3 and 4, they have got to go tnrough tne g ^ e s ana
                            they have got to go thro u g h a crowd.   I just tell rnes co
                            go there.      I told them to go there and cnat is my iinc-
                          , with them.
                            it
               E|       Q. VOU have told us that you told them to go there? - A. Ties.

                        o        The reason you told them to go there was something to do
                                 with'Policemen in the tunnel? - A. Kell there j a s a lo .
T                                of Policemen in the tunnel.  They can see to atat.

                        o        Fhv d^d that prevent you, Mr. Thorpe, sending Stewards^
                                 on to the terrace as you thought of aoing? - A. i ccn „
                                 know c. tell you the truth.
                                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Well you must have meant
                        Q. sonething.    Did you mean the Policemen would not have
                           U ? e d thl» going there for some reason or the Policeaen
                           were already looking after that so you die nou neea tuea
                           or what? - A. They did not need it really because one
                           Police was looking after it.

                                 That was the reason? - A. Yes.
                          Q.
                                 Were they wearing tabards when they went? - A. Yes sir
                          Q.
                            o           IP. WOODWARD:   You say there were "a lot'^of
                                  policemen in the tunnel or one or two either sxo*? - A
                                  There .would be about three or jour eitne- side o^ t.iw
                -H                tunne1.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                               86


                                                                              S .    THORPS



                                      .        _ a . They were there all the match.
                         At what time is thou.
                   Q.

                    Q. T?1S ' " i f the natch b « « s ! f know a W t * o ? ' t t o a ^ t h e y
                       u s e ^ t o stand and talk v,ell before the match.

                          Where were they? - A. The bottom of the tunnel.
                    Q-
           8                   •v. oni-r-irice to the tunnel? - A. Just to tne
                    Q. entrance^to the tunnel by the toilet doors.

                          Kell vou would not be able to see them from                             <**•
                    O.
                          fiest standbalcony -    ^                   “ iro/ihe                of the step,.
                          th-SEl OOV/HS S• *
                          I*brought then downstairs.
                              t„    1039 t h e two Lloyd b r o t h e r s c a n e and sp o k e t o you
                     Q.
                              again? - A. Yes.
                                                              rf,*-oinpnt. that vou made, they cave
                        Q. And according t     o                  ~ WOuld be a lot of fans coaing
                           you information uhc-u                 . k t , _ A . ve s . They were at
                               the^oottoCT^of the steps an d w e "were all talking. ^                             ;
            D
                                          * n o ' n t of conversation,, wasn't it? - A. Yes,
                        Q. a n o i n t of conversation, that is quite correct.

                               Thly were making a point of telling you? - A. Yes.
                         Q.
                                                 , _ a Well               it is news,   v.e ge^- -1 — -0l-
                         Q-: As if it w a s nev/s?   A.                       V/ithout tickets ana we
               E               at big                       t h f & i S W i n cope with it. Every
                               3“ t f t n a l t h e r e " i s a l w a y s a l o t who t r a v e l w i t h o u t
                               tickets trying to ceL in.
                                                       •• •nn m o r e than you w ould ordinarilv
                         0 . But if it was notni                  o£ news why did you se-
                             f f S J I i your s t?.tement? - A. Well I Just put it i..
                                   my statement, that is all.
                                   Keren.t they telling you that more than usual were going
                          Q.
                                   to be coming? - A. -es.
                                                          ,.e„ai tu r n e d     up    without tickets that
                          Q. would^cause ^oSlems, wouldn't i «                          - A. Well it woulc
                                   not for the Police.
                                                           •’« Bni i r p but- it would have been acre
                              Q. “ a T t h e y ^ a h t ' h a v e expected? - A. - can't say that sir.

                                    w a you think of passing that piece of information on
                              Q.
                                 to anybody? - A. So.
                                       .         Police if they had not got it from somewhere
                              Q. = l s e ^ g S eb ? w S e d ? - A. A'lot of times.....
                   HI


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                              87

                                          S. THORPS


           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Mr. Woodward, he has been
     asked that before already and he said no, it never crossed
     his mind.
           THS WITNESS: The Police get to know a lot when zans
     a'-e travelling down, at other matches fans are travelling
     down without tickets.   The Police seem to get to know as
     well over their PA system because I have known a lot o_
     the Police for years and they have all left that area new
     and they all seem to be new ones.

           MR. WOODWARD:   In the statement you made you saici:
2.
           "They also s a i d  " that is the Lloyd brothers,
                 that they thought there was going to be
           a lot of trouble."

     A. Yes, they did say a lot of trouble but we get tnc.s-
     coraino from other supporters other semi-finals.      "You ar*
     ooingJto get some trouble, you have no tickets". Tne
     re^sor was Liverpool wanted the Kop and they go._ the
     Leopings Lane end and that is where we got a lot of abuse
     to'mv Stewards in the Stand. "VJe should have nac that
     f-ing end".     That was the language.    I can't pronounce ;
      some of the language what was said to my Stewards because
      there -is that many ladies present in this room. They
     were just shouting at us as we were going up the step:
      hT'hi s Stand oucrht to fall down" and t/iings like chav, tc
      my Stewards.    Abuse, it was disgusting.

Ql    More Liverpool Stewards arrived while you were talking
      to the Lloyds? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you remember how many? - A. about five or Si.>.

Q. In your statement you said "7 or 8"? - A. Well it *aic.n.
   have been 7 or 3.
0.     At that time there was a discussion as _to where they would
      go   how they would be used? - A. I told the:a:     _he^.c is
      no'room up here for.you.   You cang o _ o n the terrace amoncs
      vour own supporters" because I said i w o u Ig not. pui. my
      Stewards in that area.   No way will a home Stewarc go
      amongst away supporters in .a ground.

 0. Did vou know that that was just the plan in respect of
    theKop? - A. We 11 the Kop was all Nottingham tores t
    supporters.  They were well behaved.




                                   /Q. In your statement ....
                                  88



                                                 S. THORPE

    In your statement, you said "I explained that my stewards
    had already been allocated to the stewarding of the stand
    and that they (the Liverpool stewards) were needed to look
    after the terraces as before"?   A. Yes.

     You needed stewards to look after the terraces? A. Well,
     I told them to go and look after the terraces.  I may_
     have said it wrong in my statement, but my idea were just
     to put them on there and that s it. I wasn t interested
     in the terracing whatsoever.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  You know, Mr. Woodward, if
     you will forgive me - and I am not saying this in any
     way against you - I do feel that we are getting the
     Liverpool stewards a bit out of proportion, are we not.
     I mean we are taking an enormous amount of time over
     them and we are only talking about six chaps.

             Mr. WOODWARD: Sir, if the time is disproportionate

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I am beginning to feel that
     it is .
           Mr. WOODWARD: Then I apologise.  Thank you, sir.
     Sir I am reminded by my learned junior of something thst
     I must put.
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes, of course.

0           Mr. WOODWARD:   In your statement, Mr. Thorpe, on
      paee 2 the statement that you made to the police, at
    / the top of the page, you say "All the stewards posted
      by me worked in the vicinity of the West Stand ? A. Yes,
      that's quite correct.

0 "I have no responsibility for the men working on pens
      1 to 7"?     A.   That's    right, if there is any put on
      there­
to     Sorry?  A. If there's any stewards put on          there, I'm
      not responsible for them.

Q.     So that is what you meant, is it?        A. Yes.

               Mr. WOODWARD:     Thank you, Mr. Thorpe.Thank you,
      sir.
                    Cross-examined by Mr. GLASGOW:

0 Mr Thorpe, you have    been asked some questions about your
   statements, your two statements, and I want t o a s k you
   about them.  I think you answered a questionnaire for the
   police?   A. That's quite correct, sir.

    Q. And gave them as much information as you could recall?
       A. Yes’, sir.
HKSK                                                                           89


                                                                                                S. THORPE


                       Q. I think you were then seen by a solicitor?                                    A. Yes.

                       Q     Who took a long time with you and asked you a great many
                             more questions?   A. That’s quite correct.

                                And you have been perfectly properly asked about sane of
                       Q-       the additional material which you put m your second
                                statement?   A. That s right.
             B
                                Perhaps you would make this plain, Mr. Thorpe. Was it
                       Q.          , nia-in to vou when you were asked to come and assist
                                this P    ui    that you should tell that solicitor-everything
                                which S      could recall that might be of assistance to
                                this Inquiry, whether or not it was thought to be helpful
                                to the Club? A. That's quite correct.
                                   you attempted to do that, both in your statement
                       Q- And have evidence?   A. Yes.
                          and your
                           0 Thank you    Mr. Thorpe.  I would like you to go on doing
                           Q ' so andYbeir with me for a few minutes if you would.
                               A.   All right.
                                    First I want to take you back to 1981 and I want to asV
               D           Q-            k o n t the incident which occurred outside the ground
                                    T   d    t habout anything you can help the Inquiry on that
                                                   e   n


                                    hflnnened inside the ground.    Outside the ground first,
                                        it right that in that year, 1981, that was the V ^ r
                                           slw some of the first football unpleasantness outside
                                    this ground that your Club had ever unfortunately witnessed?
                                    A. That is correct.
                 E!                     It was the first year, to your knowledge, ^ 7wh jc\
                            Q- had been, in a word, violence on the streets.            A. That
                                        right.
                                        There had been fighting between rival fans - and let it
                            Q. be said that none of them was from Liverpool.           A.
                                        quite correct.
                                        Local residents had .been disgusted and offended and had
                            Q- made complaints both to the police and to the club.
                                        A.         Yes.
                            0           As the people who had invited thosefans to the area?
                            9   ’       7 . Yes! I t ' s right, and also to the MP's.

                            Q. Yes, Members of Parliament?                                 A.   Members of Parliament.

                             n Ynn have rightly been asked about this. T^er® were, ,
                             Q ' T c c o u T t s of violence, of drunkenness and of thoroughly
                                   a n t i   social behaviour? A. That's quite correct.

                                Q. For the first time?                         A.   Yes.

                   H            Q: -(to-I       you to the -areaoutside^the turnstiles vh-ere
                                                           b   r   i   n   g


                                    your colleagues were working?   A. Yes.


   J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                      S. THORPE

Is it right that despite what was happening in the streets
in that area, the turnstiles had orderly queues of well-
behaved people in that year?   A. They had, yes.

And, despite all that was going on with the hooligan
element, which was then even smaller in proportion than
it is today, it was completely unaffecting the queueing
at the turnstiles?   A. That's right.

And the turnstiles coped and the men had no difficulty
whatsoever?.  A. That's correct.

Was there a problem with segregation_of fans as a result
of the fighting that there had been in the streets?
A. No, there was no segregation.

There was no segregation until that game?    A. Until that
game.
I simply want to ask you this: Did you know that the
police were concerned as a result of the queueing of that
match, that there should be segregation if possible in
the future?   A. Yes, they were.

And was one of the incidents which resulted from the
warfare and the fighting in the streets that individual
groups of fans had had to be brought to the ground almost
under police protection?    A. That's correct.

     that time, had it been important to which end of the
  ground they were delivered, do you recall? A. The
•'Tottenham supporters were brought to the Leppings Lane
  end and the Wolves supporters were took to the Penistone
  Road end.
 And there came a stage when, despite the orderly queueing,
 a very small group of approximately, I think you said
 50 --    A.  50, that's quite correct.

 —   was brought to 'C' Gate? ' A. That's right.

 Was that as a result'of a general crush that was happening
 outside the gates?   A. I couldn't really tell you, sir.
 They brought them and we opened them gates, and what we
 did was we put them up at the side of the wall and they
 were coming steady.

 When you say "They brought them", is it right that they
 were lined up on the outside?   A. Yes.

  And that a number of stewards, with police, had been asked
  to stand inside the gate in advance?   A. That s quite
  correct.
  And the $0 or so people were brought in and their tickets
  .w£re.,„p.r,C?perly .checked? A* That s right.
                                                        91

                                                                          S. THORPE


                    0        And they were sent to the area of the ground where they
                             should go?   A. Yes, that s right.

                    0        I simply have to ask you this Mr. Thorpe   If you cannot
                             help then of course you must say so. Did you believe
                             that’that was part of the attempt to segregate fans or
                             as a result of a crushing incident that had occurred
                             outside the turnstiles?   A. The crushing outside
            B                turnstiles.
                        0     So be it   But your recollection is that there was
                              orderly queueing      A. Orderly queueing.

                        Q. Throughout that period?           A. Yes.

                        n        T W -ic; right?  A. Yes.  They were fetched and they were
                                 going right across the bridge, andthat's where a lot was
                                 brought from, because they were going up Leppings Lane
                                 end   They brought them from the top and then they started
                                 coming in orderly and there was no trouble as they were
                    1            coming in.
                        Q. No trouble of any kind?           A. No, orderly, joyful and
                           everything;  no trouble.
             D
                        Q. No trouble in the queueing?          A. No, not as they was coming
                                 in.
                            n Thank vou    I would now like to move to inside the grourid
                            Q' ™   that year, Mr. Thorpe.   Did you know that there had
                              .been any trouble of any kind on the terraces.   A. No,
                               did n o t .

                            Q. Whether or not you knew of injury?        A. I didn't know of any
                               injuries whatsoever.
                                  But even if you were unaware of that you knew that there
                                  had been a police briefing shortly after that match when
                                  views had been exchanged between the Club and the Poli“ -
                                  A   No" I don't remember if anything like that happened.

                            Q. Well, you remember Mr. Calvert?         A. Yes

                            Q. Chief Inspector Calvert.       You remember him coming to talk
                               to you?   A. Yes.
                            n And vou have told us that Chief Inspector Calvert said
                            Q ' something about the divisions of responsibility betwee*
                                his men and your men, putting it bluntly. A.
                                right, yes.
                             n    Tn the course of that, did Chief Inspector Calvert suggest
                                  that he thought that stewards ought to be on the terraces.
                                  A. He thought that, yes.

                 H I O. And you 'left the meeting, I .think., a t ,the end, without
                    I   making any protest?    A. That s right, yes.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                    S. THORPE

But a number of stewards did protest?    A. That s right.

And said that they thought ----   A. It was too dangerous.

And whether it was right of them or not, they were critical
of the policeman for suggesting that they ought to be on
the terraces?   A. Yes.

Did you know that as a result of that exchange of views,
there was a complete separation of the way in which the
terraces were organised? A. Yes, after that.

As a result of this exchange of views between the Police
and the Club following that difference of opinion, the
terraces were divided into pens?   A. That s right, yes.

And from that moment onwards did you hear anybody ever
suggest that the stewards were responsible for policing
the pens?   A. No.

But it is right to say that until they were divided, and
as a result of the 1981 trouble, you had heard the
suggestion made which had provoked annoyance -- A. Annoyance
with the stewards.

Yes.  Once the terrace had been divided up into pens, who
controlled the people who went in and out of those pens?
A. The police.

 Did the Club attempt to organise, for some years, a ticket
 numbering system so as to divide fans between those pens?
■''A. Yes, they did.

 And did you recall that there had been a time when there
 had been numbers hanging outside the concourse area?
 A. Yes, there was numbers hanging.

 And I am sure that you seek to. be helpful, Mr. Thorpe.
 Those numbers have now gone?    A. Yes.

 And the signs which are left are not as helpful as they
 ought to be, are they?   A. No, they are not, not really.

 No. But did the system of numbered pens and numbered
 tickets have to be given up? A. No.

 Do you remember that up to today there is not a numbering
 system for the tickets between the different pens? A. I
 have not seen any.

 You have had no involvement in the ticketing of the terraces
 at all?   A.   No.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I am sorry, I did not get the
  answer to your question whether the numbering had to be
. given ...-up’
              .
                                               S. THORPE

       Mr. GLASGOW:   He has no knowledge, sir.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     He does not know.

       Mr. GLASGOW:   I will have to take it up with someone
else
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you.

      Mr. GLASGOW:  I would now like to bring you right
forward to 1988, and may I simply in the interests of
 shortness — and if you want to say more, please
interrupt - put to you the results.  Since 1981, the
only changes that there have been in organisation have
been the division of the terraces into pens?   A. Yes.

A vast increase in the number of police both outside and
inside the ground?   A. Very big increase in police.

A very big increase, and a very big increase in the
number of stewards?   A.  That's right.

Inside and outside the ground?        A.   That's right.

And a small increase in the number of turnstiles,
specifically two to deal with the terraces? A. That s
right, yes .
 And some changes in the lay-out to assist your organisation
 outside the ground?  A. Yes.

 And after those changes had come about, principally in
 1984 and 1985, had you seen or heard any trouble of any
 kind in policing any of the matches that have happened
 since then?   A. No.

 I would now like to ask you, Mr. Thorpe, about your
 conversation with the Lloyd brothers, which you very
 properly volunteered and which has been put before the
 Inquiry.  I simply want to know whether you can now
 remember at what stage that conversation took place
 in terms of time, first of all?   A. It was after 2 o clock

. After 2 o'clock?    A. Yes.

 I do not know whether you were in the room yesterday,
 were you?   A. Yes, I was in the room, sir.

 It may be that there is a perfectly genuine difference of
 recollection between you and the Lloyd brothers.          Do you
 remember that they do not believe that that conversation
 did take place?      A. Yes.     It was at the bottom of the
 steps on the right-hand side at the bottom of the steps,
 and we also saw some more Liverpool people, because when
 he was sg.t up near his brother, I was stood with Jimmy,
 arid' there were' about -five -ar- six' Liverpool’ supporters and
 their stewards and they came in with tickets and they were
                                           S. THORPE

stood talking to me, because I know them because they have
come in at previous matches and they always have a chat
with m e .




                            /Q.   Mr. Thorpe, I do not want
                                95

                                              S. THORPE

Q. Mr. Thorpe, I do not want to cut you too short but we
   want to get on.   Do you remember that one of the Lloyd
   brothers went to C Gate and worked outside for a bit?
   A.   Yes.
Q. Do you remember his return after he came into the Stand?
   A.   No, I don't remember him returning.

Q. Again, I simply want you to deal with it because it was said
   about you, if not in any acc using way, that when Mr. Lloyd
   had come back he had e x p l a i n e d to you why he had left
   C Gate.   A.   No.
Q. You do not recall that?           A.   I do not recall it.

Q. Is there any doubt in your mind as to whether the conversation
   which you had with the Lloyds was before or after one of
   them had been outside C Gate?    Or can you not remember?
   A.   I cannot remember, to tell you the truth.

Q. You were asked, Mr. Thorpe, about why you did not think
   it necessary to tell the Police about the possible
   consequences of opening C Gate; do you remember that?
   A.   Yes.
Q. Did it occur to you, rig htly or wrongly, that the Police
   knew what was going on at C Gate?    A.   I do not think
   they did, the Police what was inside the ground.    I don't
   think they would have known what was going on at the back.

Q . W h e n you say "inside the ground" do you mean the other side
     of the tunnel or in the con cours e?   A.   In the concourse.

Q. You were asked about the certificate. Forgive me for taking
   it very shortly but par t i c u l a r l y you were asked whether you
   knew what the requirements on the Safety Certificate were;
   do you remember that?     A.        Yes.
Q. Did you actually know, Mr. Thorpe, that the Safety Certificate
   did not require you to have any stewards on the terracing at
   all?   A.   I d i d n ’t ‘know .

 Q. You did not know?      A.    No.
 Q.    It was put to you   that you had closed off the tunnel in
      a previous year.     A. I h ad n't closed the tunnel.  The
      Police had closed    it off the previous year.

 Q. Had you or your stewards to your knowledge ever been
    involved in the closing off of the tunnel?   A.   No.

 Q. And in 1988 when you br o u g h t the Liverpool stewards down,
    does that help you to recall whether or not the tunnel
    had been closed in 1988?        A.   It was closed in 1988
    because ---
 Q. Are you sure about that?    A.   — one of my stewards
    told me,"No, they had clo sed it for a while, for a
                                                    S. THORPE

few moments so the fans could filter round to the south
end of the Stand  but it is open now."

Mr. Thorpe, I bring you right up to date, please, with Mr.
Sewell's meeting with you after he took over from Chief
Inspector Calvert.   A.   Yes.

Do you remember that?      A.    I remember it, yes.

Again you have agreed that he emphasised the difference
between your duties and the Police duties.   A.   Yes.

Was anything said at that meeting by M.r. Sewell or anybody
else to suggest that he wanted you to go back to stewarding
the terraces?   A.   No, I can't remember if he did.

At the start of every match, after you have been briefed,
I think that the Police Officer responsible for your area
of the ground comes round with you and checks that all is
well.   A.   Yes.
And who is that?          A. Inspector White.

Inspector White, the man with the beard?            A. That's    '
right.
And to a v o i d confusion I think he is known - he gets on
very well with the stewards?       A.   Yes, he does.

»And he is known universally and affectionately, without
 any disrespect, as Captain Birdseye.    A.    He is very
 homely.   He is very homely with all my stewards.     We
 have always had a good chat with him and everything. He
 is just like one of us, he will have a joke and everything.

 And he comes round to your Stand and one matter I want to
 ask you about, Mr. Thorpe: does he ask you to confirm
 where your stewards are?   A. Yes.

 And spe cifically does he ask you for the names of the
 stewards who you have got on the exit gates?    A.   Yes.

 And when asking you about the positions in which your
 stewards have been located, has he ever expressed surprise
 when you have not told him that there is nobody on the
 terraces?   A.   No, never, no.

 There is one other matter which may save us involving yet
 more witnesses, Mr. Thorpe. You speak   of  Mr. Jones as the
 head steward.   A.    Yes.
 I think in fairness to him it is right to say that he is
 the oldest of the stewards.   A.   That is quite correct.

 And .the .senior .man.   A.    .Th.a.t .is,,quite.,carre.ct .

 But he is exclusively responsi ble for the turnstile operators
                                          S. THORPE

A.   That's right, yes.
You do not report to him in any sense.     A.     No.

You report directly to Mr. Lock.     A.   That's right.

And a very small point, while we are talking about
Mr. Lock, you told my friend on my left, Mr. Woodward,
that there had been no contact with Mr. Lock over the
radio until, after the incident.  A.    That's right.

When there was a medical conversation.     A.     Yes.

And you told us earlier that he -- this morning you told
us that he had radioed you at about ten to three to
check whether everything was alright with you in the Stand.
A.   Yes.
And I simply want to ask which of those two recollections
is correct.   Did he radio you at about ten to three?
A.   It would be about ten to three.

At about ten to three?     A.   About ten to three - it was
if I was alright.
And was that    about the time of the influx of people through
Gate C?   A.      The first time when they came through.

 The first time he came through and putting it very shortly,
/was he saying quite urgently, "Is everything alright in
 your stand?" A.    Yes.
And at that time did you hear him talking in a similar      way
to the other    people on the radio? A.  No.

 You did not?   A.   No, because we were too busy with my
 stewards at the bottom of the steps.   I just turned my
 wireless -- turned my radio off so I could concentrate or
 my stewards.
 You turned your radio off?    A.   I turned    it off for a
 few moments tohelp my stewards.    I put it    into my pocket
 to help my stewards because I carry it.   I    put it into
 my pocket for a few moments while I helped     my stewards
 and then I turned my radio back on.

 Finally, Mr. Thorpe, I think it is right to say that you
 yourself have been fairly seriously affected by everything
 that went on on that day.    A. Yes.
 And, to be fair to all concerned, are the views  that you
 expressed about the behaviour of fans partly due to the
 fact that you yourself were involved in some unpleasantness?
 A.   That's right.
 With some very unr epres entat ive fans who were trying to
 break up the ----     A. The snack bar upstairs.
                                                        S. THORPE

-- the snack bar area and I think you were slightly
roughed up and pursued and had to take refuge with the
Police.   A.   That is quite correct.

And I am sure that you wou ld be the first to say that
that is not typical of all Liverpool supporters. A. No,
it is not.

But it rather confirmed your view that you did not think
it was safe for your men to be on the terraces?
A.   That is right.
                     KENNETH CASTLEY, called

                    Examined by MR. P H I L L I P S :

Are you Kenneth Castley?         A.     I am.

Are you the Chief Steward for the North Stand - similar
position to that which Mr. Thorpe holds for the West
Stand?     A. I am.

First, Mr. Castley, did you go to Liverpool during the
last away match between Sheffield Wednesday and Liverpool?
A.   On April 8th, yes.

And it seems to be the evidence that you asked for stewards
to come along from Liv erpool to Sheffield for the Semi-
Final.     A. Incorrect.
/
That     is incorrect, is it?     A.      Incorrect.

What did happen, briefly? A.     Briefly, as a senior match
day official at Sheffield Wednesday I, whenever possible,
like to go to other grounds to see their arrangements with
regard to stewarding and crowd control.    I had the
opportunity of going to Anf ield on that occasion and I
asked to be put in touch with their Chief Steward, Philip
O'Neill ---

    I think it is O'Brien, actually.       A. O'Brien, I am
    sorry. During the course of our conversations the
    stewarding of the Semi-Final was mentioned.     In 1988
    a number of stewards came from Liverpool specifically
    to help   out in the L ep pings Lane end.

    At whose invitation had that happened?   A.   As far as
    I am aware, this was a mutual agreement between Liverpool
    Football Club and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

    Were you aware of a similar arrangement for this year,
    1989?   A.   No.
    Did t h e .Liverpool steward volunteer to send people; is
    that what you are saying?      A.    Can I just say something
    here,'"please’? "At a m'efeting 'that was held with senior
    match day staff to discuss the arrangements for this year's
                                                 K. CASTLEY

Semi-Final, no mention was made of stewards coming over
from Liverpool and when I was speaking to Mr.    O'Brien at
Liverpool he   said, "Do you want our stewards the same
as last year?"
And what did you say?   A.   I said, "I have not heard
that they would be required but would it be possible for
you to organise, say, eight stewards, if agreeable?"

That is how it was left, was it?       A.    At that stage,
yes.
So you did not really know whether they would be coming
or not?   A.     At that stage, no.

When did you   know that they would be coming?   A.   On
the Monday following the match, I contacted my senior
steward, Basil Jones, acq uaint ed him of the conversation
and, as a result of that got his okay that eight stewards
would be provided by Liverpool.     They were to pay their
own expenses to get to Sheffield;     they would not be
p a i d --
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Can we take this shortly
because, as        Ihave already said, I think the eight
stewards from Liverpool are really not a major factor
in this m a t t e r .
      MR. PHILLIPS:    Sir, yes, that is what I am attempting
to d o .
And so, in fact, it turned out that they did come to the
ground on the day.   A.   They came to the ground, yes.

Now, when you had been in position     on your Stand, the Noith
Stand, you came across, I think, a      forged ticket during
the course   of the afternoon before   the match started, did
you not?     A. I came across what     appeared to be a forged
ticket, yes.
You took that from the per son who had it, did you not,
and went to the Police Room to see the Police about it?
A.   To see Inspector Sewell, yes.

 Inspector Sewell was there, was he not?          A.   He was.

 But he was having problems himself, did he tell you?
 A.   He said, "We have a problem at Leppings Lane end,
 Ken; can you deal with it?"
 Can you tell us what time this was?        A.     At approximately
 twenty to three.
 And you,,.I think, went back to tell the supporter what had
 h a p p e n e d ' and decided to go and see your Chief Security
                                            K. CASTLEY

Officer, Mr. Lock.        A.        That is correct.
Did you   go to the area of the players' tunnel?             A.   Yes.

Did you   see Mr. Lock there?          A.   At   the top of the tunnel,
yes.
Did you hear him saying anything when you got to the top
of the tunnel?   A.   Yes, as I was going up the tunnel,
he was speaking to Mrs. Sharon Lane.

She is the Secretary, is she not, of the Club?    A.   NQ,
she is the assistant to the Secretary.   As I got up to them,
Doug Lock all of a sudden said, "They have broken a gate
a t L e p p i n g s Lane."
Did you know who he meant by "they"?              A.     I assumed he
meant supporters.
What time was this?            A.    At approximately 2.45.

And you, I think, spoke about the forged ticket but
very briefly.   A.   I said, "This I believe is a forged
ticket.   I am leaving it with Mrs. Lane."
You wanted .to go. back to the North Stand straight away,
did you not?     A.   Doug Lock said to me        I am sorry.
When he said that a gate had been broken in Leppings Lane, I
knew that a gate gave direct access to the North Stand,
of which I am in charge and I was worried.

 You went back?      A.        I went back.
 And you looked at Gate A, did you?              A.    I looked at Gate A
 and saw that it was intact.

 It was closed.    A.     It was closed.
 I think then you had some further instructions    just after
 3 o'clock, is that right,    from Mr. Lock, to go to the
 corner, do you remember, of the Kop and the North Stand?
 A.   No, they weren't instruct ions from Mr. Lock.     I had
 decided previously that that is where I would position
 myself during the game.
 Did you have any liaison with Mr. Lock after the game had
 been stopped?   A.   Yes.   I asked him what I should do
 and he said, "Make sure that all the gates" - and he
 referred to Gate A, Gate  0 and the North Stand car park,
 he said, "Make sure that  those gates are open" which I
 did.
 Did you have anything to do with ambulances?       A.   The
 only t h i n g I had to do with ambulances was that when I
 came back from making sure that the gates were open, I
 was stood at the corner of the "front"o'f "Spiori Kop and the
 North Stand where there were some advertising hoardings
 and I was asked by a Senior Police Officer to get ready to
                                                           K. CASTLEY

take the hoardings down so that the ambulances could go
on the pitch.
Were you able to do that fairly quickly?                    A.   With help
of others, yes.
Were there any other d i f f i cul ties in the way of the
ambulances getting on to the pitch?         A.   Apart from
crowd, no.
Apart from?          A.    Crowd, no.

    Crowd of what?         A. People.
    On the pitch, on      that      cor ner? A.     All over the pitch.

    Were there any Policemen in the way of the ambulances
    getting on to the pitch?   A.   No.
                      C ro ss- e x a m i n e d by MR. HYTNER:

Mr. Castley, can I just ask you a little bit about your
 duties on the Kop.   Do I take —     A.   I am sorry, I
 have no duties on the Kop.

    You have none?         A. No.
         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:            North Stand.

         MR. GOLDSACK:           It is this witness's son who --

         MR. HYTNER:   I am so sorry, I am mixing up the
    Castleys.   I have no que stion s for you, Mr. Castley.
                             JOHN C A S T L E Y , called

                          Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

     Mr Castley, you are the C h i e f Steward for the Kop, is
     that right?  A.   That is correct, yes.
     There are just a few mat t e r s I would like to ask you about,
     please.    On the day of the match, did the stewards at
     the Kop end receive a bri e f i n g from a Police Officer?
     A.    They did, yes.
     Do you know his identity?   A.   I always thought it was
     Inspector Calvert but I have since heard it is Chief
     Inspector Calvert.
     Mr. Calvert, anyway, wha tever his title is.                 A.    Yes.

)    Was anything said by Mr. Cal vert in particular about
     any Liverpool supporters who might come on to the Spion
     .Kop area?      A.   Yes, Mr. Calvert said that they expected
     q u i t e a few Liverpool supporters.   It appeared that they
     were aware that there were quite a few supporters, Liverpool
                                       102



                                                           J. CASTLEY


              supporters, who had tickets for the Kop.
     Q. Was any figure put on it?            A.   I cannot really remember.

     Q        But what was going to happen to those people once they
              nnl inside the qround?    A.    Mr. Calvert said to the
              stewards that if the Liv erpool supporters when they got
              in made themselves rec ognis ed to the stewards, that they
B             should be directed over to the « " ! ! “ <£ of the Kop where
              tkp.g was noinq to be a cordon of Police to separate
              .... Q ff or if the ste wards recognised that they were
              Liverpool supporters, they should tell them, or if they
              were going to have any trouble, you k n o w , to tell the
               Police and they would then put them over to the wing
               side of the Kop.
         Q. So initially they were going to be .segregated into a
            particular part of the Kop.   A.    Yes.
               Was anything said about pos sibly moving them from that
               qtpa?     A      I believe they said depending on the numbers
               that w e r e "going to be there that they would consider
     I            later possibly moving them down to put them in, to tr ^ f e r
D              them into the West Stand, you know, depending on how many,
               did actually arrive.
         Q     Aqain, did you have any imp ressi on of how many might be
                involved   if that happened?  A.    Not real.ly. I thi
                he said that if there were too many to put inthe area
                vou know, if there were too many that they could not
              / keep them in that little segregat ion area that they woul
    E|          then have to transfer them across.
          n    in the event, do you know whether any Liverpool supporters
               were taken from the Spion Kop area down to the Leppings
               Lane terraces?   A.   I didn't see any.

          Q. You did not see that hap penin g?       A.   No.
          n     Mr  Castley, one matter that has cropped up this afternoon
                         a particular boo klet issued to the stewards on
                T q ' t h e r e

                the Kop?    A.  The ticket booklet that all stewards get.

             i Does it    say "Kop Steward" on the front?    A. In all
               honesty     I don't know.   Ihave never actually seen the
                front of their books.    All I do is take their ticket
                off them.

                                                    /Do you know whether.
                                                           103

                                                                                  J. CASTLEY

                      0           Do you know whether the wording inside the book is the
                                  same as for other stewards? - A. It will be the same,
                                  yes   The only difference that is possibly there is
                                  there may be a difference on the outside, saying Kop.
                                  I really do not know.

                      0           Can you let us have a copy of one of those booklets?
                                  Got it with you? - A. I have mine.  Mine actually says
             B                    North Stand steward.

                                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Says what?- A. Mine actually
                      Q.
                                  says North-Stand steward.

                                  That is your father 's ,•-is it? -A. Mo, no.  It is mine.
                      Q.
                                  I only <>ot the iob as Chief Steward on the Kop this ^
                                  season - I think it was probably decided late on, berore
                                  they had actually given me my ---

                                       MR. GOLDSACK: That is a different colour ---- - A.
                      Q.
                                  It is, yes.  That is what I am saying.

                      Q.VThat colour is the Spion Kop ....   A. I do not actually
                          know whether there is a particular one. I do not know.

              D           0       A U ri°-ht  Just one other matter, please, Mr. Castley.
                                  You were of course at the semi-final stewarding away
                                  fans, were not you, on the Spion Kop? -A. Yes.

                          0. Which is not the normal situation? - A. That is correct.

                          0        -Was any thought given to removing stewards from the
                                   Spion Kop area for that match? - A. Not bexore the
                                   start of the match, no.

                          0        So as the match approached the fact that you would not
                                   be stewarding your own supporters did not give you any
                                   cause for concern? - A. Not unduly, no, not until later
                                   on when I moved - when I came to the front or the Kop.

                F|        0.        You mean there were   some problems on the   day? - A. Yes.

                          Q.       But you had not felt’ before the match ---    - A. Had not
                                   anticipated any.

                           0             that it would be so unsafe you could not put your
                                    stewards there? - A. No.

                              0     Do you know whether any consideration was given" to
                                    putting stewards on the Leppings Lane terrace before
                                    that match? - A. No, none at all, as far as I am aware.

                                         MR. GOLDSACK:    Thank you.



                  H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                   104
s^'L

                                                                                                           J. CASTLEY

                                                                        Cross-examined by MR. HYTNER:

                           0 I would just like to take that up, if I may, Mr. Castley
                            ’’ The philosophy at Hillsborough was that the home
                               supporters were stewarded but the away supporters
                               were not   Is that correct? - A. I do not believe it
                               would be right to say that, no, because there are
                               awav supporters that sit down in the West Stand .
                  B
                                    I am sorrv.                         I should have been more precise.    Those
                           Q. who stand'up, of the standing supporters who would
                                    stand on the Kop or stand on the terraces, the norma,
                                    philosophy was home supporters were stewarded within
                                    the terrace;  away supporters were not? - A. I cannot
                                    really comment on that.  It has never been within my
                                    remit to have any discussions about really the away
                                    supporters and how they are stewarded.

                            Q. All right,                               Let's iust deal with .... - A. As far as
                               sorry.

                            0 , I am sorry.        May be that somebody higher u p _than you
                                    should answer those questions.    Now, let s just deal
                                    W i’th your duties on the Kop. We know that the Kop
                    D               takes something like 21,000 supporters. There is a
                                    capacity     Was it ever brought to your attention that
                                    p   o   s  due"to'people‘coning in with forged tickets
                                                s   i   b   l   y   ’


                                    or iumping the turnstiles or something or that sort
                                     that there might theoretically be more than ^.,000
                                    on the Kop? -A. No.
                      V\    0 Was the possibility of overcrowding on the Kop ever
                                     brought to your attention as one of your duties. - A. No.

                            0. Was it ever brought to your attention that^even with
                               the normal capacity on the Kop some parts or it might
                               actually be overcrowded wher e a s_other parts might nave
                               qDace’*- A. Brought to my attention, no.    I, as I
                               stated, later on, I, looking, you know, ray own Personal
                               opinion was that some areas may be. No-one else brought
                                it to my attention.t

                                Q. You have now jumped to the semi-final, have you? - A.
                                   Yes.  Sorry.

                                Q. I am just talking generally, you see. - A. Oh, no.

                                0       We know that at the other end - that is the Leppings Lane
                                        end - pens 3 and 4 traditionally fill up quicker than the
                                        other pens.  Precisely the same thing is likely to happen
                                        at the Kop end, the early supporters will tend to go or
                                          e art behind the goal and fill that up first.    Is tnat
                                        ri*ht’ -A. I do not really know.   I think it is more
                                        likely the Kop being home supporters., and being a lot
                            I           if regular supporters, people will be more likely to
                        H

       J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                            105

                                                                                       J. CASTLEY


                   stand in the same place every time they g o ^ C e r t a i n ^ n s




                   ; s , r . s " ; » ° s ; «s.>                      •>          “ “ ,u>
                   the goal than anywhere else.
                                         ic it’    Did it ever cross your mind
                 Q. Yes. _ That : “ 5 ’bring it to your attention that if
        B           or did anybody ev      J?ed behind the goal they should
                    there were too many crushed ^behind ^ ^          ^
                    be dlsP ? ^ edf*° to'o nany to'crush behind the goal because
                    be possible for too n y          •    20in p Uo - call tnen
                         'a l ° b a r r i e r s the ^    “ u S f e l ? . t herefore I do
                    r o f t h i n k yiu would get people
                    say, maybe the youn|er people t h w e a k e r p p ^ u,d-not
                    the older p e o p l e , i - ^ h e y^ a n te a        ^    U k e l y to fee

                        Iny'crush              They are very free to move about and so they
                        would not stand ....
                  0 . It did not cross your mind there might be a crush any-
                        where? - A. No.
         TlI         1.    '-final dav you say at some stage you noticed
            ' Q- 0n the          one section of the Kop, did you? -A. I,
                 overcrowding          really say overcrowding, no.
                 noticed - I would not r e ^ £ oreJpeople chere chan
                        T n e r e        o viou -               mat c h and some o£ the fa n s did not
                        s   e   e   m   to be b e i n g S u i t e as w e l l behaved as would normally
                    ,• be the case, being home fans.
            T? I                   i_• i ■ /v n f t-hp wav they behaved. I am thinki_n.g
             .   Q-                        °Do*vou follow? - A. They were definitely
                         of the density,
                         more dense ....
                                                             than at a normal League match.
                   Q. More dense. - A.
                                                                                                   v;ith
                   Q-       ^Lr;fortn
                                    hLP”rfoS:dtorsyeS^fi^l1arffrae^i                               part
                                                                                                   d ro-
                            was too dense? -A.As far as I am aware, no laid down
                            cedures. Nothing I'have been told of.
                                                 Cross— examined by MR. JACKSON:

                   0 Mr. Castley,you are now the Chief Steward at the Kop?
                    ‘ - A. That is correct.
                                     •                  j-- _ t do not wish to be rude
                    Q. Would you consid                   stewarded during a
                       wa? k /  AS I thinU it is very important that the Kop


                                S   r  CU is possible for stewards to actually do
                                that is-another question a.t all times.
             H

L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     J. CASTLEY

    I do not want to be rude but I do want to be sure we
    do not take too long about it. There are very many
    jobs a steward does in the Kop end and you accept that
    that is essential? -A. I believe so, yes.

    Can you tell me what would have happened if Evertonhad
    had drawn.Liverpool and Liverpool had been given the
    Kop end? - A. There would have been a lot of Liverpool
    supporters on the Kop.

i       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Whichever end? - A. Which­
    ever end, sir, yes.

I       MR. JACKSON:    The position is, is it not, that no-
    one would have given any thought then to the Liverpool
    people being unstewardable, if there is such a word.
    It was the position of the ends, not the nature of the
    fans, that decided there was going to be no stewards.
    Mr. Castley, let ne explain why I ask ---

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I should give him a chance
    to answer the question.

         MR. JACKSON:    I was trying to make it as simple
    a question to ....

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      What you have done is to
    make a statement.

         MR. JACKSON:    Indeed.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:^ Can we just see because I
    was going to ask about this?

          MR. JACKSON:   Yes.

0        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: . I think what we have been
 *’ told is that certainly at League games stewards do go
    on the'-Kop? -A. Yes.

Q. That is a well established practice and it is usually
   home supporters? - A. H'm.

Q. It is also a large undivided area.       Right? - A. It is
   not divided ....

Q. Not radially divided, no. - A. That is correct.

O.The Leppings Lane end is much narrower front to back?
   - A. Yes.

Q. It is also divided into pens? -A. Yes.

Q. And it is also where the away supporters usually are?
   - A. That is correct.
                               107


                                                       J. CASTLEY

Q. I. think what Counsel is putting as a statement but I
   would like to put as a question is,is the reason for
   not putting stewards on the Leppings Lane terraces
   but putting them on the Kop the difference between
   who is inside them or the layout at each end which
   is quite different? - A . 1 really do not feel able
   to comment on that ....

Q. Perhaps another Officer of the club may be able to help.

                Cross-examined by    MR. KALLIPETIS:

0 Mr. Castley, page 3 of your statement to the Police.
 *’ You said, "At about 2.50 p.m. I was at 'O' Gate when
    I heard that the Liverpool fans had broken down a gate
    at the Leppings Lane end of the ground"? - A. Sorry.
    Can you ....

Q. Sorry.  On page 3 of your statement to the Police.
   - A. I am sorry, sir. I have not a copy of  that.

Q     I have iust read out to you.  I will do it again.
      "At about 2.50 p.m. I was at ’O' Gate when I heard
      that the Liverpool fans had broken down a gate at the
      Leppings Lane end of the ground." - A. Yes.

0. How did you hear that, and from whom? -A. I cannot
   recollect who it came from.   I do not know whether
    it was from another steward or it was a Policeman
    in passing.  I really do not know.   I just seem to
  /remember hearing that at roughly that time.

           MR. KALLIPETIS:    Thank you.

                   Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD:

 0. Mr. Castley, is it 11 stewards for the-Kop? - A. There
  ’* are normally, if they all turn up, there are normally
     11 stewards on the Kop terrace.

 0. Was that the number you had on the semi-final day? -A.
    No.  I had an e x t r a ‘nine stewards making it 20.

            MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you.

                       By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

 Q. Can you iust help about one thing there? On the Kop if
    I am not'mis taken there are quite readily discernible
    aan^ways with steps at a different level from the main
    part of the terrace.   Is that right? - A. That is correct.

    Q. Do you aim to keep those gangways free or not? - A.
        That is basically a Kop steward'sjob, to try and make
       .sure...as,\f.a.r .as possible that they are kept free.
                                                          J. CASTLEY

When you had 21,000 in that day were they kept free or
was it iust one solid mass? -A. I do not really know.
All I can say is that the stewards will do the iob as per
their numbers as best as possible.

    I suppose we can see it from the video. We have been
    mostly looking at the other end but ....

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.   Sorry, M r .....

         MR. GLASGOW:      No, sir, there was nothing.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Nothing.    Thank you very much.

         MR. PHILLIPS:       Albert Marsh, please.

                     ALBERT RONALD MARSH Called

                      Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

    Are you Albert Ronald Marsh? - A. I am.

    And are you the Deputy Chief-Steward for the West Stand
    area? ~ A. Yes.

    Assistant Chief Steward? - A. Yes.

    Stuart Thorpe is of course the Chief Steward there? - A. Ye

    He has told us he confines   himself to the West Stand
i    itself, to the seated area? - A. More often than not, yes.

    Do your responsibilities go into that stand or do you stay
    •somewhere else? - A. I stay downstairs.

    You stay downstairs.       On the concourse itself? - A. Yes.

     Are vou responsible for the men who are posted to Gates
     B and C? - A. Well, I thought I was until Stuart Thorpe's
     s tatement.

     Well, never mind what Stuart Thorpe said. Let's have
     y o u r ’understanding of the situation. - A. I understand,
     yes, sir.
     Have you in practice over the last five years assumed
     responsibility for those men on Gates B and C?- A.
     Yes, yes.
     How many    other men do you have directly under your
     control?    -A. Just the six gatemen.

. Just the six gatemen. - A. Yes.

.....Wher^   .d^..Jou,.no.rmally ..put..yourself when there is   a match
                                                            A. MARSH


        - A. In the concourse.
5 In the concourse. - A. Not all Che cine but nose of Che
        time.
D       Do you in fact have any other stewards available to_you
        in the concourse apart from those gatemen that you nave
        mentioned? - A. The only stewards that would be available
        would be the stewards at the bottom or the stairs but I
        would have to ask Mr. Thorpe's permission to move those
        stewards.

Q. They are under his .... “ A. Yes.
o           .... particular jurisdicCion and they are concerned with
            checking tickets of people going in to the West Stand.
            - A. That is right.
                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Told us about one steward
Q. who was in the gap in the wall.              Do you know anything ....
            - A. That is right.     That was ....

o           Was he one of Hr. Thorpe's or one of yours? -A. So, it
            was Tony Garner, one of the gatemen.  I askea hin n
            he would stand at that gate.

                     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Ah.   Right.

    n            MR PHILLIPS:    How  many men do you haveon each
    ^       of those two gates? - A. Three on each gate.
        f
    0. Do you need three on each gate?- A. Yes.

    p T.jhv'? - A W e l l , it is worked on a rota system, agreeable
    Q ' by the men, each one is on that gate for ouarter-oi-an-hour
        and none o£ the gatemen are a l l o u e d t o l e a v e that gate
        until the other one relieves him.       ihat gate is covered
        throughout the game.
    0        Yes  So you need one at a time in erfect?   A. Yes, _ot
                      purposes or Police coming in and out of that
             e j e c t i o n

             gate during the match.
    0        And can the other two then take up some other position,
             in the concourse if they are not exactly on the gate?
             - A. Yes.
        0    And do you in fact get them to do this? -A. Yes-
             Occasionally they go upstairs sometimes and watch
              the match.
        0     Yes. Well, until the match starts.    I am concerned
               •        _ a . Before the match starts those si-
              stewards’
                      , well, gatemen, three on each gate, they
( i t l£
                                                                 110



                                                                                           A. MARSH

                                       never leave the gate until they know that the whistle has
                                       blown for the kick—o f f .

                             0         So if people want to be directed to a particular part of
                                       the terrace they would not find a steward in the concourse,
                                       would they? - A. No.

                             Q. Unless they came upon you? - A. Yes.
                   B
                               0        Do vou think it would be helprul to have some stewards
                                        in the concourse there as well as tne gatemen. - A. .es,
                                        could be, providing they do not have to go on to the
                                        terraces.
                                        ves   Whv not? - A. My own personal opinion is I would
                               Q. no t ’ask anyone to go on the terraces.      I f I can give a
                                        little example.  Probably half-an-hour berore the
           r->                          kick-off the programmes run out. The supporterss cone
                                        in   Thev want programmes. You have not got them. And
                                        the first man that they turn to is the steward, to abuse,
                                        so we have already got trouble before they even get on
                                        the terraces.
                                        That would apply anywhere in the ground, would not it?
                     D           Q.
                                        - A. Possibly so, yes.

                                 Q.Well, have there ever been to your knowledge stewards
                                    on the terraces? - A. No.

                                   0    And vou do not think it would be at all sensible t o p u t
                                   * V stewards on the terraces? - A. My own personal opinion, no
                       E           0     What about stewards at the entrance to the tunnel or to
                                         the other entrances to the terraces? Do you t m n k that
                                         would be sensible?- A. It could be sensible providing
                                         they have got the protection of the Police.

                                   0. What is the particular problem about having a steward at
                                      the entrance to the tunnel? - A. You have got to be at
                                      the match to see the trouble that is caused at the
                                      matches.
                                   0     Have you ever been asked to take control over the number
                                         of people going into any of the pens on the terraces.
                                         - A. No.
                                   0     You wouldof course need more stewards available to you
                                         personally to be able to do that, would not you? - A.
                                         Direct on to the terraces, yes.

                                       0. Has anybody to your knowledge been responsible for
                                          seeing how many people get into each pen on the
                                          terraces? — A. The Police.

                                   ■0. Have you- seen ..them .on. .prev.io.us..occasions .directing -fans
                           H


       J , L. H arpham Ltd
•iT •'S
'^t                                               in

                                                                         A. MARSH
t

                          to or away from particular entrances? - A. Oh, yes.
                A         Normally - it has been done in normal football matches
                          apart from the semi-final - whereby the gate that Your
                          Lordship said about being closed, where I put the stewards
                          on for the semi-finals, that is closed and also at the
                          far pen, which is the South, West pen, is railed off
                          so that all the supporters are channelled down the
                          tunnel and then I assume from the Police control they
                 B        can see when a certain area is getting full, then they
                          open the other end into the South, East pen - the South,
                          West pen and fill that and I have asked personally
                          myself on occasions if the North Stand pen couldbe
                          opened and the answer I got from the Police was it
                          was a safety area. What that meant I do not know.
|



i                 c
i     ; i
I     ^




                  D




                   E
i
I




                    F




                                                       / Q. Are you talking



                      H

    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                              A. HARSH


                ..n-jnr about leaque matches or semi-finals? - A.
      ny taikinq about league matches when we get Manchester
S n l t a f i ? Livlrpool, various Clubs like that wnere you are

getting a 40,000 gate.


s.'&wsr.s
Yes.
                                                                         „
    T   u-nt to deal with one or two other matters if you
           Marsh. On the day in question of course you
 were there in your position, were you? - A. i s .

    Did vou see the sates C and B being opened            just before the
    tine'for the kick-off?  - A. I saw C gau_,

    You saw C gate being opened? - A. I saw C gates open, yes.

         • n -~          o" the instruction for that gate to be
        opened? - A. The first time or the second time?

        Either time? - A. I heard instructions the second time to
        open the gate.
        -tv, v-^ o - a r M v w e re you when that happened? - A. I v;&s a t
’       v'l!    -Jo n* the cate          There is barriers where tne Programme
         "e!lS er= s?ind SehiS:           I was stood at the side of those
         which Is just at the side of the concertina gate.

  Was vour man in position on the gap in the wall ai
*-time? - A. As far as I know, yes
.1what instructions had you given him to do when he was there
  in that position? - A. On tne ...-

            The man in the gap in the wall? - A. Just to let people
            through, that was all.

Q. Hell the gate was open, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

0. People could go through at will? - A. They could go through
            at will, yes.
Q. In either direction? - A. Yes.


q       -          £:e4/;&c£<li!SS
            parncula*
                                            was
                                : the prograaitle was or whether tnere
            was^anywhere they could stand they could tell then

            •         information from anybody about the
°* state of thl pens"though, did he? - A. Oh no.
                      *.b eaGte was opened a number of people came
             through.; ^That is right, isn't it? - A. Tnat is ngn..
                                                        113

                                                                       A. MARSH



                          .       innpriiatelv before      that stage had any information
           Q. S S u H h i T t & ' M                   pens on the terrace? - X. no.


           Q. vmat do
                    was opened             ^ - ~ h ad because from where we are
                                                                                                               s?«
                    - *• T“ L " ^ h ; te“ a“ s soconsequently I don't know how
                    m a n v people Jre in.' He have to rely on the control .ower
      B             from the Police when the pens are full.

                     Have you ever known of the tunnel itself being closed o n ?
              o.
                     _ A . hot to m y knowledge.


               Q.    Have you known ox tne                         ^e                         ^ derstanding
                     A. a o f because anave          al.Jc.ys   Deen  on t                               Qn
                     that is the emergency            wel ^ ^ ^ / U c u a t i o n                              of the
                     to the t e r r a c e s ^ u ^ . t ^ s ^ t h ^ ^         Qf                                 terraces

                         bu^I     thought that was the m a i n exit tor any trouble.

                         Those gates of course o pen inwards into the tunnel don't
                         they? _ a . T h a t is right.
                                              , +. 30 sensible to close those gates? - a.
                         W o u l d you regarc it | | cf n - x o    l       know wha t the
       D       o.
                         Ho, not at a n .                l
                         gates are there ror.

                         Don't     you? - A. i-;o.
                                                           i ^ /   s     ^   * t *h   p   n   tf*S    C i O U H O

                n                                         C
                                                          an S                                                  «   a
                     ‘ sLai-final I have never seen those gates closed.

                         »av- vou seen access e f f e c t i v e l y barred by Police Officers?
                Q.       - h. I have seen Police across the gates, yes.

                          When was the last time you saw that? - A .                           i     don u know.
                    Q-
                          Can't you tell us when you last saw that? - A. No, I am
                          afraid not.
                                                a*''the 1988 semi-final?                        - A. To be truth-
                    Q. Did you see thau at m e
                           ful, no.
                           Were you there? - A. I was tnej.e, yas.
                    Q.
                       V •>   A I t’   r ’n’t 1938 semi-final is. a bit of a blur because
                    Q. Yes?.- A. I un-n.. -                  , T think if you co n ’t nave
                       we diroble.r.sa voi'adon?t remember these things. It is when
                       JSS have p r o b l e m s that you remember tnese things.
                                                     ^         i iftip. bit to the point when
                     Q.*        Can ^ic^ily^ver^bodv outside the ground had got into tne
                              PronnJ         YOU were, i'think at this stage, close uO a
                              .Po.lic.e *O f f ioer^and overheard something on hxs raaxo?
           H                  - A. That is right.


Harpham Ltd
                                                 114

                                                          A. MARSII



                     What did you hear on the r a d i o ? A .   It was repeated twice:
                Q.
                     "Pitch invasion, pitch invasion".

                      "as there any recruest with that or was it simply a^statenent?
                Q.    - A. That is all I heard.   Those were the only v/oras tha u
                      I heard.
                      That is all that you heard? - A. Yes.
        B       Q.
                   What did the Police Officers near to you do? - A. They just
                Q. went.  I don't know where they went to but they went.

                      And you were left outside still with y o u r           ft-. Hot outside,
                o.
                      in the concourse.

                      With your gatemen and your gates? - A. Yes.
         C Q.
                   . Were both of them open then? - A. For 3 Gate I cannot say.
                 Q.
                     For C Gate yes, it was open.
                             MR. PHILLIPS:    Yes, thank you very much.


                                      Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:
         D
                       Mr. Harsh, over the years that you have been a Steward you
                 Q.
                       must have been to many meetings? - A. \es.

                       You must have had a lot o£   contact with the Club to tel 1
                 Q.
                       you what your duties are? - A. Yes.

                       "bat would be one-to-one contact with Officials, people
                 O.
                       like h £ Lock? - A . That is only at the Annual Meeting.

                            c r n n time to time you have met and discussed with
                       the*Club"'your job of stewarding? - A. At the Annual Meeting,
                       yes, but not at any ocher time.
                       From your knowledge are you able to assist the inquiry at
                       all on this point:  does the Club take any steps at
                       to help to achieve an even flow of spectators or is
                       all left to the Police? - A. It is left to the Police
                       because the Police have taken it over.

                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Sorry, I an not quite sure
                        what you mean by "an even      flow of spectators ?

                              MR. WOODWARD:    Sir,I am quoting    from   paragraph   19a
                        of the Green Guide.
                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: May be, but I w o u l d _like to
                        know where you are talking about, inside, outsice, wr.au.

                              HE.. WOODWARD: Sir, page 56 heading entitled "S'i'SWARDIMG"
                        the ■section on -Stewarding.
             H

. Harpham Ltd
                                                               A. HARSH



       ••Effective stewarding should prevent overcrowding
                         rte around, reduce the likel—nooc.
       2ndS incidence*of "disorder, help disperse spectators
       in such a w a y ‘as to reduce crowd pressure and
       provide the means to investigate, report ana ,a.e
       early action in an emergency.

•Then paragraph 19 5 :
        "•-•annipa levels and stewarding requirements will
        v a r ydepending upon the size and configuration
        o" the ground, the nature of the event end c*o.*c
         ^ io v-inf- fc’iere are five bas-±c cuties vaiicn
        s    t   e are called upon to carry out. These are:
                     w   a   r   d   s


              II
         •   •   •   •




Then it is the first one.
                    ,r- r\o.
       LORD JUSTICE Ti^i-Oil:
                                                           "_•••; the even
                                                                        ew_.
                                                                             flow of people
 to the viewing areas ----"                                 i s ■unat i-.
                                                  "        to ■
                                                              ‘-he viewing areas ana s£.e
 dispersal                                                 the terraces or viewing slopes."

 Are you aware of any instruction or direction being given
 to anv Steward to do that? - A.Jo, no.

 SO t h e raoving o f t h e                                     f c?        IS g g S "
 i e f t t ° t h e P o l i c e *-0 C.                  .
                                              r e p e i t i n c m y se lf a g a in .   In
 P o n c e t o do . I                             n a t c h e * we g e t a b u i l a - u p
 Q=e s u p p o r t e r s s t o o d a? t h e balk p r o b a b l y six o r s e v e n c e e p .
 How t h o s e p e o p l e can't s e e t n e mate,'..



                                                  S  £ 5  becaus^that^'ha^'been S 3 * /
  My   request                       a m   been   r e ^ ^ ^ ^ hav<3 not been allowec.
  to do"the^stewarding so it has been accepted that the Police
  will do it-


  f t ! \ f t r e Cf £ a t i o n utL;s =s fro, your
   stewarding arw                    taken requiring you tc sal*
   to you, no suep llc-s ®     c „eool3 to the viewing areas
  •to achieve an even ^      o ^ ° P ; - f£ a the varlous ....
   or sare co.bperodl o_ ~ L       .         Y       this did happen
   - A . I know '*at YOU are s . y i n g . ^ . c . , tux.^           so
   until as I saic. d g j . -- *- Stewards raay say:   "That
   consequently occasl01 ^ r0 Uinto those" but the direction
   pen or that pen you can £ i            ^    ^     s but probabi
                                                      ^'d^e^y.the.Pdice,         so^on^uenxa
    the Stewards have thought it is of no value to tuea -o
    it because'the Police are doing it.
                                                                           116

                                                                                               A. MARSH



                               nT1iv role that the Stewards have fulrilled m the
                                       years boon to helppeople to go to wherever
                    ? S r tlcke? directed the,,?- A. As    far as the seatrng »
                    concerned?
               Q. yes, anything. What else do the Stewards do? - A. That is
                  chiefly their duties.
      B              c —. i.hpv -ust tell somebody where Gangway A is and Seat: 23 ^
               "•           - L ^ h e y can do that but when you walk into the grounc
                         ' - /s the letters above the stairs telling j*ou u, V,
                     jne.e is „ne letter          x     and z where the away supporters
                     A'             -n? it is above the Stand for then to see, sc
                          t h e f w a l k through the turnstile they loo!: at t ^ i r
                     ticket afid they look up at the Stand ana tney can s «
                     they should go.
                                                                •         i _         _        rjl..,    <3r\          Q 4 * O '* ? S "^C LS   C O   u H S ii /
                      _        . i ^            V rinw      V7l*>pr£      tO        CO*W ilc u      CO          u*lw   wu w a .s-«             ^
               o,      f / ^ reCthe^ there for? - A. They check tickets; to zLlov
                        Jnip who h ’ve ctot their tickets for seating to go upstairs
                      Ind s<t down"and"stop the people who are supposec to oe
                      standing going up in the seating area.

        n| .          Co n.            t’
                                        ois it-                 the fans can read what is on their ticket



                                                                                v         ^     r       s r            s :
                          ask e d   where the seating area is because the Gatenen a,e a,
                          ^e      side o£ tne turnstiles.
          rl A _ ^             4-rv to put it in a sentence, is the Stewards job
          fcl 0- BU;       1% ™ m t aeoole to where their place is? - A. Hoc
                 ii1'1..' , L * ‘ in"* job of the Stewards where i cone m to
                 S * « c * “ iih are S n s t a i r s are to tell then where tne
                 entrance is to go to uiose oeat-.
                                                 how the
                                                 ...n   r   e       o f                       Stewards work in the instructions
                    Q ‘ S a t h a v e been'given to them                                      over the years, aren't you?
                        _       t don't follow you.

                    O   Don’t you know what'goes on in the West Stand and wnax i^-.e
                    C ' stewards-do there? - A. In the Stanc itselr, y ^ , x -*>•<
                        what goes on there.
                              •    v, nfovj-r-fie; do envthing more than tell a spectaco.
                           y^ich row^hi^seat ' t / o n ? I A. In the Kest stand :.tnat xs
                           what the Stewards ao, yes.

                    Q* DO they do anything other than that at any other part of
                       the ground? - A. ho, tnac i- tne-r

                     Q.     Chat is all they do? - A. Yes
                                       .. ,4'
                                        „rv-,^4
                                              -,.whatsoever. in.watching-the xroud.^nc
                    -q-v -Tney-ta^e’.    *    •          _ A x don«t know what you mean
                            ensuring that it is sa_<~.
                            by "the crowd"?

H arpham Ltd
The spectators? - A. In the Stand itself?

Anywhere? - A. The terraces, the Stewards in the '.Jest Stand
can't see the terraces.
Anywhere in the ground, Mr. Karsh, do the Stewards take any
steps to make sure that the spectators are sai.e? - A. A...
we talking about the West Stand now?

Anywhere? - A. I don't know what happens in other parts
of the ground.
    What part-of the ground do you know about? - A. The West
    Stand.
          , tne
    Well in ,. West Sw&nc
                    __-nr* co uio/
                              thev ^do that? ~ A. Zn                                       tiie ses uj.ng
    area, yes.
    What do they do to make sure that the fans are sare? - A.
    I am afraid I don't Know.
    ro -,ev do anvthincr? - A. Well I don't know whether there
    is anything for them to do until there is an e.ue^gencv-

            Till. WOODWARD:   Very well, thank you.


                      C ross-Exarainec by rlP>« G^AS^OV'.:

. M-. Marsh       there is one natter.  Have you seenthis                                      book
 ;before? -       A. Hot until this disasuei,no.

  Well we can help you with it.  It has got soae 75
■ of useful information about testing barriers *nd u » s„reng_.
  and that sort of thing.
              Can vou tell us: would it in fact have been nore
     helpful to"you to have a 75 page book including ail t~e
     ^"o'-Tiis on testing barriers and egress pj.ccecuj.es c-X
     b S i u s t * a ? U Jr « have the book, that you get «itn a clear
     statement of what ypur duties are? - A. T.ie boor,
     get.
o     I think they spend about an      h   o   u  giving you
                                                   r   - a   n   d   - a   - h   a   l f


      lectures at the beginning of every season, don't Uiey?
      - A. Yes.
_     ...       rnnv be in the Green Guide, has there ever been
      an" la?"' o ^ d a r i t y in the language used by the people
      Sho try^and tell you what your duties are at those
       sessions? - A. Mot to ay knowledge.
                   .      -n-r f=-ifficultv understanding what *!-• Loc.-.
Q * isVL J i n 5ewhenI he is" explaining" in his terms what a Stewara:.
      duties are?' - A. -lio.
                                                         118

                                                                  A. MARSH



                    o. Have vou ever had any difficulty in understanding or following
                       the Police advice v/hen they give you lectures at tuose sessions.
                          - A. Ho.
                          Just your experiences, Mr. Marsh, on the terrace. Quite
                          apart from the men who serve under you, m the light. o£ your
                          own experience would you be prepared to go anc stanc on tne
                          terraces under the West Stand? - A. No, I aa arraia not.
            B
                          ts +*hat as a result of any incident that has happened
                    Q. recently or as a result of what has happened to you oyer_
                           tbe past years as a Steward? - A. Well during tne semi-rinal
                          i -h a d che occasion when the door was opened the n r s t tine
                           to go to the botton of the stairs to tell tne Stewarts <-o_
                           cet the gates closed, that the people were coning i n ^ n a '
                           did no*- know whether they had got tickets or tney nac no-_
                           cot tickets, to stop them from going up the stairs unless
                           thev had a ticket and I was physically wrestlec to tne _
                           ground.    I was trod on.  I think that these are tne ^nmga
                           what would happen if we were on the terrace.

                           Did vou know that Police Officers in uniform had been      ^
                     Q.
                           assaulted on that terrace and rendered incapable ana nac n&G
                           to be rescued from the terrace? - A. Only by hearsay.
             D             I never see the terrace.
                            Hr. Harsh, you yourself I think have bean on        du'cyat   thxs
                     Q.
                            ground for some 17 years? — A. Yes.

                     Q Had you ever knovm of any occasion when Gate C had been
                          .'opened to allow people in before? - A. Ho.

                                     MR. GLASGOW:     Thank you very much.


                                                   ROBERT WILLIAM COBB Called

                                                   Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

                FI o.           Hr. Cobb, I ,think for very many years now your Saturday
                                afternoons have been spent just inside a C-a._e? - A.

                                And you are one of a team of four men responsible for that
                      Q.
                                gate? - A. Yes.
                                And in ceneral terms what you have to ensure is there is
                      Q. always at least one of you immediately by tne gaue. - A.
                                That is correct.
                                I am cioinc now to page 7, sir.    On the 15th of April o_^
                      Q. this year "\?ere things fairly normal up until abou^ xQ
                                quarter-past-2? - A.    10-minutes-past- 2.


                      o. And u p until then from time to time if individual Police
                         ^ixxcexs;'.needed .to. .go in..or cm.t you would open, wne .gate
                H         to let them? - A. Yes.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
     cvirt-rH-iv after the crowd had built up outside Gate A kid
‘    y   o  s p e a k
             u        to a Police Inspector about the crowd outsice?
     - A. Correct.
     Was there anything in particular you wanted to bring to
     his attention? - A. Yes.
     What was that? - A. To move all non-ticket holders ouc.

              led vou to believe that there were a lot of non-ticket
         holders’ - A. Because they were offering money througn v . h e
         glass”panel of the door. They were offering EzO notes ana
         £10 notes.
0. i'lov/ we are talking about just one or two people doing that?
   - A. Ho a few v/ho could get near die rront.

         Can you give us any idea of the numbers you are talKing
Q.
         about? — A. wot really*
         But cuite a lot? - A. Quite a few was offering money right
O,
         ?rom sav halr-past-1, not when it built up. Previous
         that there was one or two coming and offering money oe_ore
         it even b u i l t up.

             What did the inspector soy about your request? - A. “I have
Q.
             not the m a n p o w e r   •

             Uhat was happening so far as the crowd were concerned
    Q. o ^ c ^ c a l l y with the gate? - A. It was getting very
         ' hostile and thev were banging and kicking on zcie coo_ «nu
         ' saying so and so, we will smash the gate down.

             From what time were you hearing threats to smash the gate
    Q,
             down? - A. It would be round about nalf-pasu t.

             I thin]: you were receiving requests from u a e to ti-.ie .ion
             individual Liverpool supporters to be let oac;c oa-.
             That is correct.
              vou know that is o£ten a trick? - A. We don't know hov; many
    Q. tickets they had taken out so you refuse.

                 so can I move forward, this is now page S of your statement
    Q. £            th2 time when Gate C was opened for the first time.
                 Did you know it was opened? - A. No.

        D<a you become aware that it was opened? - A. It nust have
     Q. been the second time when sonebody snoutec:   C »»te 2-
                 ooen" and that is all x heard.

                 You can't see C Gate from where you are? - A. Only taa
     Q.
                 very top.
                             vfee -fips't?~vou•know-.aboufe- the..sug-gestioiv-'tast.
     Q. S S u i d V           olcnlh           well I had said ho to the gate oe.nc
                                                                                      I
                                             120


                                                        R. W. COBB



                     opened.
                   To whom did you say that? - A. To the Police that were at
                Q. the side     A Police Sergeant came and he was really violent
                   at this time.     It is a collapsible gate and the gate was
                   not forward and backwards, the gate was actually going si^e
                   4-0 cide   so I looked through the window ana tnere was no
                   bars and no hammers. All this movement was being_cone by
          B        human beings moving all this steel worx ana wa>, is ,.o..
                   ^riahtening it was getting, you know. The Policeman c a »
                   over' and     sa^d:    "We had better open the gate anc ± sg.i~:
                    "Ho, not  until  we  get higher authority to open it" so he
                    c-me back and said they had authority whicn only leiz tnree
                    Policemen.    Then I said: "How there is not encugn Policeman
                             release   this lot in here so witn           snt away
                    nero .0
                    and got may be 20, 25 Policemen.




            D




              El




                G



                                                   /O. This was

                •H



J. L Harpham Ltd
                  4- WAS it?                             A. Pardon?
This was a Sergeant, was                                                        a           A sergeant
                                      t- a Police        Sergeant?              A.          A serg
Was              thisa S e r g e a n t , a P o l
at the time, yes.                                              ^           ^        ^          ^       do

    I know that tines          v f t y u a s when the
    you know at « h* t s“ |e A?            A. Oh, it m a y have bee
    ; i 6U “ tt°SS“ S t ! t s o m e o n e shouted about C gate
    1    L I U




  °p e n '                        thAt? A.
                             Just after that.
• Ifc was after                    . were get h ig h e r a u t h o r i t y ,
                                       ’
              • *-aA       he, as it were, g
                                       t - h A   t

. When you insl®J;eJ e contacted?   A. No.
  do you know who he c o m
,       Do you know how he contacted them?

1       But he left you £^ . . ^ ^ “’' ^ “ ave the authority to open                                                __
        ^    ^ Jack3 Stone wa s with me and he was handing the key
                                  n     a           ^ •?A cnau
                                            Cn we saia.    thAt wc
                                                                 we didn
                                                                    ^    t
Q ' S i S * t h l f t h l y ' o u S ^ t o b,opened.                            So                      , - en
        he said he had the autho       y,   afterwards he got the
        said   "Right.y°uh° ? f whtch he lined up round each                                                    :
        extra policeman here w ^        uh    to expect? andhe ^
         I said to     > ,     j picked the bigg         said "Right,
         ’.°h yes, Oh yes , so i ■
                                 P    then the sergeant said
         -                        ^              they opened                            ^                   _



    0   - U
           a        Would run in, yes,
                                    • •                difficult               Mr. Cobb, but from

    *■ the" time^hat                                                                            K
             n r t U r s * “ 4 u e » “ “ « i «                     «
             I f m inutes,                             ^ c o u p l e of minutes ke f ° ^ r ^hey
             of m i n u t e s ,
                          It wasn^t too long in bringing the ext
            ramP back.
            came fo£CK.   «L
            police back.                                people come in
                        •               *' was eventually o p e n e t h e y '
        Q . ^en^Gate     A ^as       b£ jokingl Whoosh, they e g

                                     •                                                                               *-v, n't-?
        p . How did the police cope with                               .                           ^

                 £Hed^down6each^sidet^because there^s n o ^ c o u
                                                                               see the match unless
                 fe ithe match at .all .
                 they %o up the aisles.
                                                      122


                                                                                       r   . W. COBB


                 V    rn carry on right through ---                                           A. Right
Q.       So they have to carry      6
         through to 0 ga      •

Q - seen^peopl^waving ^                               ‘ S s ^ h S u g h ^ h e r S a d no tickets?



Q' “f t e ^ a s           o p en ed ? "^      2 *        T ^ t '"“ c o r r e ^     y l'T *
                                   _ -v,Q nnmhpr without tickets had
 Q. Can you say whether °r          9       Vastly.   During the
    increased d u r i n g #that time.               There was three



          S i s W b e c a u s e ° e v e r y thing                                               ^ ^la/sible
                                                              loot on the gate and they we

          ! i eth                              i r 0- ma 5 *            ^          ^                  u - 1
           don't know.

     Q
                             . «                          a       Definitely.   Even long befoie
         . That is right, is it.                              •    ^   tickets that hadn t been
           that they were corning                                    m m    and they were saying
               torn, W h i c h    should have been^torn,                        « d ^            ^       ^    ve
               "I ' ve   lost m y m a t e,          £e                            h a v e h a d d o z e ns    in

          :           r o c r , « “ i r                       a     n       ^ k n o w .

                         Mr. GOLDSACK:               Thank you.

                         Mr. HYTNER:                I have no questions, sir.

                                  rvngfi-examir ^                       Mr. JACKSON:‘



         Q -                                                                            A '              l,°'
                none whatsoever,


                 been for year ,                    certainly.
                 a matchc         a       . 1CS,>                                             #        .
                                                                                it for a wedding party.
          o      And I think last year you opened
                 A.      That's           correct.                                                ^             ^

          Q-             l°wa sC ol d1 1 ^ w a s'a6 w e d d i n g 1”party3 fr orn^ the Football
                                      t




              Club.                                                                                                 r
          ,Q ..I .think it is -ell k n o w n i n ^ ^ e r p o o ^ t h a t ^ u k e

                ’ f o r m a ri f a r n
                                     rdi v e 1 t Srbout 3 o'clock                          A. 1 don't k.ov
                    about well dressed.
                                              123

                                                                          R.   W. COBB


         , flu kinds of people giving all kinds of excuses
Q. You get all kinds 0 1 v v     yes>
   and have done for years.

Q. This was no different?                          A. No.


Q -
        right, yes.
Q. Thank you.                 A.       And the number trying to get out.

q     . Out?.          A. Trying to get out with their mates' tickets
           to give out.
                                        a   Well, I know it vas.
 Q. Well, that is."hat V°V         „ three tickets and saying
    They were coming up witn two                     was saying
     These three belong to my ^ t e s outside       an<J
    to them,."Well why isn *         “ Mfor     y.^
           come tny "nSHow cln you accept that?                      It's got to be           an
           excuse to get out.
    q   . Is that something new?                    A. Oh no, no.

                       Mr. JACKSON:          Thank you.
                             Pr-ngc-examined by Mr. MAXWELL:


      «■    6      »     &         T     s     r     £      «    -    -        “          *




        Q- H i      g ^ e m a n r t tG a ^ A ? f61 A ^ i s f always, right through
                the match,
        q. Has anybody ever suggested

                f n T h e " internal gat;;.««
                The internal gate separ                         the police through, or
                which is a small gate to a                         ,   There are two on
                             a ^ l “ o! so8the?ef s alwafs two at the gate.^

           Q. There are always two available to ^ a l t h a t                       te   2 2 years

                 and ^his i ^ t h e first'match                          *ver use
                 to lock it; the very first match                     At e
                                                                         QV y as ^                   #
                                                    u    1J      thy . U t rtdhy 0Un0pen the

 ...... . f U - A i t                                            to’be locked.

           Q. At what point did you decide that you had to lock it.
              A. Twenty-minutes to three.
                                                              124


                                                                                  R. W. COBB

                      Q. What made you decide to lock it then?                   A. Because of the
                         crowd outside.
                      0       And what was happening to the gate at that time? A. The
                              gate at that time just started to move a bit and the top
                              bolts which are on spring steel clips that shoot in, were
                              gradually working down, which made it that-the gate could
                              be moved more and more like that. (Demonstrating).
             B                          Mr. MAXWELL:     Thank you very much, Mr. Cobb.

                                            Cross-examined by Mr. WOODWARD:

                                  Mr. Cobb, you have been on that gate 22 years?           A. Yes.
                      Q.
                                  You have been asked by Mr. Jackson about the tricks and
                      Q.          t i e r u s t s that p e o p U g e t up to in order to try and get
                                  in.       Of course, that is nothing new to you, is it.
                                  A. No.
                      0           But on this occasion is it right - and do you agree with
                                  and answer to Mr. Goldsack -  that people had been
                                  offering or trying to pay you money from about half past 1 .
                                  A. Yes.
               D
                          0       Not just half-past-2 but at an earlier stage? A. Yes,
                                  earlier than that they was offering money, yes.

                          Q. And did that increase as the afternoon went on?                 A. Yes,
                             it greatly increased.
                          Q. You have talked about the people coming into the ground?
                El           A. Yes.
                          Q. And then, almost as a kind of .
                                                           signal, running baok and
                             jumping out over the gate?   A. Two of them did, ,yes.

                          Q       They were with other people at that time, were they?
                                  A    I don't know, sir, because they came from the back
                                  as we was looking forward, you know, to the crowd
                                  outside through the glass, and then all of a sudden
                                   these two came but-I don't know where they came from
                                   The girl went up the side of the gate but whether
                                  made it or not, I don't know.

                           0   Are you saying that there were two and a girl? A. Yes,
                           Q ' two youths and one girl, but the two youths definitely
                               got -over.
                              Q     So they must have managed to get enough clear space to
                                    do this?   A. To do that, yes.
                              Q. And they did get the clear space?             A. At either side of
                                 us, yes.

                ■Hi

J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                          125


                                                                 R. W. COBB


Q. And your impression, using y°u* . ^ t i c k e t s ' ^ ' V ^ T h a t 's
   was that they were going out with tickets.
   correct, yes.
Q. Did you also see people throwing tickets over?                         A. That's
   right, yes.
n        Are vou saving that in all your 22 years, whilst people
         resort to tricks, you have never seen quite as many at
         it as you saw on thisday?   A. No.

0        That is right, is it?       A. That's right. The throwing
                ticket is wrapped in a 50 pence piece or a 10
               •    ~-nA t-Vipn it's thrown over and whoever picks



          ticket c a ^ b ^ c o n s t a n t l y ^ s e d b y Supporters coming
          through in a big match.
 0  As though it is organised between them and they are
 q. as cnougi           &     11  it doesn't matter.  I m
    W S i iofne to say it's organised but if it's thrown over,
    anyone cfuld.pick it up, but they know what they have to
    do to throw it back.
    Q        Having picked it up, they come in and then throw it over
             again?   A. That's right, yes.


    «■ muwus s.’&as'&s as*. we-
              to two policemen and they stopped it.
                i_ •   . i- iq r q ——— A    Oh well, 1 was so busy
    Q ' onCrte gate a f this match that’ ,to actually see whether
        it went on long enough,     I don t know.

    Q.        But you noticed that there w e r e far more o f these tricks
              being tried than you had seen before. A. les.

    Q. And w o u l d you say that it seemed to be far more determined
       than you ha3" ever 'seen before?     A. Definitely, yes.

        0 May I ask you about the            gate?    It was being shaken, vas
              it?    A.   That’s right.
        Q.     Was there also a lot of banging going on at it?                   A. That's
              rigtft, yes.

        Q '   t e L ^ t y 1 1 e t L l o S t f n 8Ath?t 8c ^ i r L ^   ^ e ? : nw S c h




               wasn't forwards and backwards;           it was all going sideways.
                                126


                                                    R. W. COBB

     In the proper direction for the gates to open?              A. Yes.

3 And was that building up to a sort o f .crescendo?              A. Oh
     yes, yes, it must have been, to move it.

           Mr. WOODWARD:      Thank you.

           Mr. PHILLIPS:     Thank you very much.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Thank you.

           Mr. PHILLIPS:     Brian Ridge please.

                     BRIAN RIDGE. Called
                   Examined by Mr. PHILLIPS:

Q. Is     your name Brian Ridge?        A.   Yes.

Q. And you have worked as a steward at Sheffield                 Wednesday
   for about 20 years?  A. Yes,correct.

Q. On the day in question you were one of the three men on
   B Gate?   A.  Correct.

Q. AtLeppings Lane?         A. Correct.

Q. Is      this a position that you had held before? A.            Yes.

Q. How long had you been working on B Gate?               A. About five
   years.
 Q. About five years.  Your job, of ocurse, was to open it
    from time to time if you were required to do so by the
    police?   A. Police or catering staff, programme sellers,
    anybody in authority from the Club.

 Q     Now this gate was normally kept locked, of course, but
       when you went on duty you would unlock it, would younot.
       A. Most League matches it's unlocked but for the semi-final
       it was locked.

 Q. It was locked?         A. Yes.
 0     Did it stay locked throughout the period till just before
       3 o'clock?    A. No, it was unlocked, at approximately
       11 o ’clock to allow the programme van in to unload has
       programmes.
 0 . I appreciate that, but then later on when people were
       arriving and were waiting at the turnstiles to get iti ,
       you were there in c h a r g e d the gateWas the gate locked
       or unlocked?    A. It was bolted with four bolts.

  Q.    With four bolts?     A. Yes.

  Q. It also had a catch, did it not?           A. It has a catch in the
     centre, yes.
                                   127

                                                      B. RIDGE

0. And did you keep it bolted except when you had to open
   it to let somebody out?   A. Yes.

Q. And that was unusual, was it?   A. Yes, it was.                 On a
   normal League match we don t need to.


Q - p S t ^ r t ^ r i n v r r U b l y l i v e 7it a U c " '
    just in case the centre catch jumps.                   It s only a little
    tiny catch maybe an inch long.
0 . Is that right?       A. It is possible to kick it hard enough
         to make it jump out of the socket.          _

o        It is as easy to dislodge as that, is it?            A. It can be,
         if it has not been properly connected.

0 . You were there on duty at this gate during the build                  up
          of supporters outside those gates, is that right. A.            Ye .

 0       When did you notice things getting to be d    i   f     lde?
         A   At 2 15 I remarked to one of my friends there that
         you wouldn’t think it was a semi, you know, with so few
         people coming through the turnstiles.

 Q. But then did things change after that?
 n         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What time do you say that
 Q ' was 7  A   Around 2.15, and then about 2.30 it really
     started to build up. Fans were banging on the §ates as
     they moved towards the turnstile. They had had to walk
     across the front of our gate to get to the standing
     turnstiles, and we can see through a little porthole.

    n            Mr. PHILLIPS: And you saw what was going on outside,
           did you?"  A. We saw something of what was going on
           outside.
     0      Were you worried by it?  A. Not really, n o t at that
           time. They were still singing and makrng a general
           hullabaloo.
     Q. Was anything happening to your gate?             A. Apart from
        banging it and kicking it, no.
     Q. Did things get any worse after this?             A.     They got vorse
        after, yes.
     Q.    And'when they started to get w o r s e , you could still see
           through the porthole, could you?        A. Yes, we could see
           a great mass of fans at the back.

        Q. Was anything happening to your gate then?            A. No, just
           that it was getting banged and thumped.

         Q. Was. it moving about, the .gate itself?        A. No more than
            normal.
                                    128
                                                      B. RIDGE

0 . Do you remember a police officer coming to you shortly
        v,pfnre kick-off and giving you some instructions with
        regard      he ate! 8 A. V    2.55 the police ordered the
        late to be opened and 1 said to the constable with the
        ginger moustache "No way am I opening the gate.

Q. Why did you say that?   A. Well, I knew what would
   happen if we did open the gate.

Q. What did you think would happen?             A. There would be an
   almighty great rush.
Q. Because there were still fans outside, were there?
   A. Yes.       —

Q. At that time?          A. Yes.
0        Even though, as we know, Gate C had been opened some
        minutes beforehand?   A. Yes, there was still a lot of
        people outside.
 Q.      In the immediate area outside your gate?        A. Yes.

 Q       Were you able to hear anything from these people? Were
         they shouting anything in particular?     A. No, not
         from outside.

 Q. Not from outside?           A. No.
 Q. So you thought there were so many people, it would be
    dangerous to open the gate?   A. Yes.

 Q.       The   gates were in fact opened, though?        A. Yes.

 Q.       Who did that?    A.   A Police        Constable.

 0       Pulled the bolts at the top?   A. Yes, he pulled the bolt
         and then once he had done that, we opened the gates.

    Q    And where did you stand then?   A. I stood at the side,
         at one side of the gates, and the other chap who was
         working with me stood at the far side of the gates.

     Q. And did the crowd rush in?         A. Yes.

     0 Did they come in quickly or did they comein at walking
          pace?   A. Well, I ’ve got it down on a note here Fans
          rushed into the ground.  Some lost shoes m the mad rush




                                          /Q.   I am asking you for your
                                                B. RIDGE

I am asking you for your r e c o l l e c t i o n s .n o w , if you can,
of what you saw there happening.            Were there many people
leaving their shoes?    You collected them up* I think,
did you not?  A.   Yes, I did.          I collected them up and
I put them on one side.
A lot of shoes?        A.   I think there were five pair and
some odd ones.
When these people came in, they were coming at a vigorous
pace, is that right?   A.   Yes.
Where did they go to?   Did you see?   A.         surprisingly
I think a lot of them went straight to the toilets.

Yes, they had been waiting some time, had they not?
A.   Yes.
 That would mean, would it not, going through the gap in
 the wall?   A.   No, no.
 There w e r e more toilets? A.  They go straight up and
 behind the stairs, the left-hand flight of stairs* is a
 big toilet.
 Were the people, in fact, broadly going in that direction
 towards the north corner?   A.   Yes.
 The north-west corner.          A.    Yes.
 From your position, were you able to see whether many
 people turned right to go towards the tunnel?   A.    No,
 there were not very many.
        MR. GOLDSACK:       Mr. Beadsley, please.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           Are we not going tc have
  Mr. Stone?
       MR. GOLDSACK:   Mr. Stone is not here today, sir.
  I am not sure whether he is going to come or no-.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Is he not the gentleman about
  whom there was some comment that no statement. = been
  taken from him at one stage?
       MR. GOLDSACK:         A statement arrived fairly late
  from Mr. Stone.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   At any rate, we nave got
  a statement from him but we do not know whether he as
  coming.
         MR. GOLDSACK:    We have a statement.             He ma/ o?;
   may. not appear latex.
         9
                                                    130




                                      RICHARD WILLIAM BEADSLEY, called
                                          Examined by MR. G O L D S A C K :

                     Q. Mr. Beadsley, you were one of the team of stewards on
                        Gate C?   A.   Yes.
                     Q. And is that a regular position for you?               A   For the
               B        last three or four seasons, yes.
                     Q. Can I take you, please, straight to half past two,
                        3 o'clock time on the 15th April.   I Uiink Gate C had
                        been used from time to time to eject people who had got
                        into the ground without tickets.   A.   That was after half
                        past two, yes.
                     Q. And when people were ejected, how wide open was the gate?
                        A.   There are two bolts at the top and there is a bolt
                        hole further on, about 18 inch, so it is open 18 inch.
                     Q.    And then a time came, we know, when Gate C was opened and
                          quite a lot of people came in. A.     Can you repeat that?
                          I was coughing, sorry.
                D
                     Q.    A time came, we know, when Gate C was opened and quite a
                          lot of fans came in from outside.      A. Yes, about five to
                          three.
                     Q. Now, why was that gate opened at that stage?   A.   I
                        have no idea.   We were told to open it, that's why it
                        was opened but I have no idea why.

                     Q. Who told you to open it?   A.          Inspector White, I have
                        found out his name is since,          The Inspector with the
                        beard.
                     Q. Had he been near to your gate for some time prior to that?
                        A.    Yes, he was the only Policeman on that concourse
                        that we knew.   We know all the Police every week in and
                        out but Semi-Final day he was the only one we knew.         If
                        the Policemen had b e e n there we do know, I don't t h i n k --
                        It might have happened, but it wouldn't have been as bad.
                     q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What do you mean by that?
                          A.    Well, every home match we know nearly all the
                          Police.    We know most of them by their first names.
                          Like .the stewards know the Police, the Police know the
                          stewards.    We do work together but on that day the
                          only person we knew was the Inspector.    Whether they
                          were from a different Police Force or what, I don't knew
                          but they were definitely different Policemen.
                      Q. So what happened or did not happen on this occasion
                         that the usual Police would have avoided?   A. To rne ,
                         they just did not seem to know what they were doing.
                 H       I have seen more Police there at a League march this
                         season than what I did at Semi-Final day.

J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    131


                                                                                           R. w. BEADSLEY


                              It is the numbers you are complaining about?                          A.    The

                                  to'police a ^ t b a u T r o w d . I .. n o t ' s a y i n g these didn't
                                  but they didn't seem to know as much.
                                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           You carry on.
             B        n                     MR. GOLDSACK:              Mr. Beadsley, let me, in view of that,
                                  iust take you back a little.                    In the first hour or so
                                  that the turnstiles had been opened and you were on the
                                              half one, half two, that sort of time, how many
                                  P o l i c e m e n were fairly near to you in the concourse area?
                                  A          I would say there was about eight covering - is
                                  t h e r e s i x t u r n s t i l e s , seven turnstiles?     A b o u t just over
                                  one per turnstile, searching people coming in.
                      0 Bv about half past two or so when we know a considerable
                      “ • c r o w d had built qj, how many Police Officers were still
                          in that area?         A.   On the inside.
                      n            nn the in s i d e 7 A.   If there was any more, you couldn't
                                   see t h e m because of people on the inside.   There was a
                 Dl                lot of people milling round the gates.
                          Q        You say if there were any more - were those eight or so
                                   still there?   A.    To my knowledge, yes.
                          n cn 4-he number of Police did not decrease as the afternoon
                          Q‘   r   n      were those eight still there    right up until
                             Gate C was opened?   A.     I would say so, yes.
                          Q. And was Inspector White always somewhere near that area?
                             A.   Yes.



                                    rt S U
                                         » i          o n erth; o u t s i d e ^ o f t h e ^ g a t e s ^ w i t h that
                                     Liverpool steward until we shut the gates fully and went
                                    inside.                                                 —
                              n     You say it was Inspector White who gave the instruction
                                    to open Gate C?   A.   99% certain.
                              Q. Had there been any discussion with you before that
                                 instruction   was given? A.   No.
                              0 Had it crossed your mind prior to that that the gate              might
                                 u                   A       No. There was comments from Liverpool
                                     ? Pe a v ino    "You will have bloodshed on your hands if
                                               e ^ d ^ a n d ^ h e . e ^ a s aiso comments "You will have
                                 a riot on your hands if they are not opened.
                              Q. That was coming from the Liverpool supporters?                            A.     Yes.
                  «
                              Q. Those inside, those outside or both?                        A.     Well, there

J . L. H arpham Ltd
''fu I
                                                        132


                                                                      R.   W.   BEADSLEY



                             was those inside trying to get those outside inside.
                     Q. Do you know whether Inspector White spoke to any of the other
                        Policemen who were nearby before telling you to open the
                        gate?   A. No idea.     He had a radio.  I don't know who
                        he was in contact with.

               B     Q. Was his instruction to open the gate complied with straight
                        away?   A.    It was words to that effect of, "Open the
                        gate".     It might not have come out as "Open the gate" but
                        those words were definitely in it, yes.
                     Q       And was~ the gate then opened straight away?  A.   I think
                             one of us said, "You what?" and then he said, "Open the
                             gate" again, then we opened the gate.
                     Q. And once the gate was opened, did fans come through
                        immediately?   A.   Yes, it was opened about five to and
                        they came through three or four abreast.
                     Q. At speed or at a leisurely pace?   A.    Well, walking
                         but with people pushing the walk became a bit faster than
                         a walk.
                D
                     Q. To take you back to what you said a moment or two ago,
                        if you had had the regular Policemen there, what would
                        you have expected them to do at that stage?   A.   Well,
                        I think if the regular Policemen had been there inside
                        and out, I don't think it would have been as bad outside.
                        It might have been as bad but I don't think it would have
                        been as bad outside to start with.    Like last year s
                 E      Semi-Final the fence outside the ground was at the other
                        side of our gates, so the fans could not get up to C Gate.
                        There was a Police barrier to the right-hand side as you
                        looked, not the left-hand side.    They moved the barrier
                        to the other side of the gate this season.
                         Q    Just make sure we have got that.    Where we see the Usher's
                              pole ____    a . That is where the barrier was this season
                              and last season it was to the front of the gates, towards
                              Leppings Lane end, so they couldn't get up to C Gate last
                              season.
                         Q. But given the numbers who turned up this year, there would
                            still have been pressure on the other two gates?
                            A.   As I say, until it all happened we couldn't see what
                            numbers was outside.
                         Q. I am just wondering what it is specifically that you
                            think the regular Policemen could have done to prevent this
                            trouble.         A.       Well, they jjst seemed to be more organised.
                            I don't know whether they could have prevented it but they
                            just seemed to be more organised.               We have had big matches
                            before and there has been no bother. They just seemed to
                 H          ■be m o r e o r g a n i s e d .
                         Q. But at the time Gate      C was opened,    are you    suggesting that

  J. L Harpham Ltd
                                          R.   W.   BEADSLEY



the Police could have done more than they did?   A.   Might
have been able to.   I am not saying they could have done,
no.
What do you think they might have been able to do?
A    Well as I say, I don't really know. - We are there
to steward a football match; we are not there to steward
a disaster.   I don't know.
We know that the Gate C was closed a minute orso after
it was  opened that first time.   A.   Yes.
And then it was opened again a few minutes later.
A    Yes.   It was opened fully wide a few minutes later
and everybody just rushed in.
 Who gave that instruction?     A.   The same person.
 Had Inspector White remained near to Gate C throughout
 those few minutes?   A.   Yes.
 And when he gave the instruction the second time was the
 instruction carried out straight away?   A.    Yes.   Can
 I just say as well, last season they filled each pen artd
 then closed it off and sent --    They, like, filled a
 pen at a time until they were all full.    This season the
 fans were just free to go anywhere.
 Let me ask you about that.     How did they achieve that
 last vear?    A.   Last season they had Police to the right
 and the left and they wasn't letting them go to them areas
 until the middle pens were full and when the middle pens
 was  full they moved the barriers to the left and the tight
 and let them round and filled each pen separately until
 a n the ground was full.     This year everything was open
 and they just was free to go anywhere.
  So you are suggesting that last year as you came through
  Turnstiles A-G you would have been met by two lines of
  Police  Officers?   A.   No, not two lines.   What there
  was at the side of the snack bar in the corner there
  were those railway barriers stopping people going round
  the corner and the gate in the middle, if I remember right,
  wal either manned by - well, I think it was a P o l l a n
  and a steward stopping people going through there and
  thev filled the middle pens first and then, when the
  middle pens were full, there was Police in front and I
   do seem to remember they shut the gates for a bit and
   they made people go to the sides because the middle
   was full.
J. When the middle was full, did they then let people ,o to
   both ends at the same time or —         A.     I can t really
   remember because I do recollect them going to the right-
   hand side..past the snack bar b u t .through., the wall _you
   c a n <t really tell. With the crowd of people in front of
   you, you can't see that way but you can see the other
                                              R.   W.    BEADSLEY



way.
Was that something you commented on at all to Inspector
White that the system seemed to be different this year.
A.   Not to Inspector White, no.   We commented between
ourselves, amongst ourselves, but not to the Inspector.
You see, they know what they are doing.   We don t interfere.
They tell us what to do. We do what we are told.     We don t
tell them what to do.
Do you know who decided last        year to do it the way
A.   No idea.
You do not know whether it was Inspector White's decision?
A    No.   No idea.    As I say, since the disaster has
happened you look at -    well, me, myself, I have looked
at things that happened last year and things that has
happened this year and you come up with what is different,
basically.   Like last year at ten to three I went out
with five seat tickets and I could not give them away.
There was nobody there at ten to three.
 The Police Officers who were near to you at last year's
 Semi-Final, were they the same Police Officers as you «jot
 at normal League matches?    A. Not all of them but
 am sure one or two of them was.    Not all of them, no.
 But more regularly than you had at this year's?   A.   Well,
 there was none regular apart from the Inspector this year.
              Cross-examined by MR. KALLIPET15:

 Just one matter, please, Mr. Beadsley, page 2 of your
 statement.   A.   Which statement?
 The Police statement.  You say you have no knowledge
 of First Aid?   A. No.
. And you have never been given any instruction b y t h e d u b
  or offered any facility to learn basic First Aid?      A. No.

  Did you ever ask?   ' A.    No.
  Do you think it would be a good idea if certain stewaids
  were trained in First Aid?   A.   Now.   Now, yes.
                Cross-examined by MR. W O O D W A R D :

  Mr. Beadsley, you were on Gate C last year, were you?
  A.   Yes.
. Doing the same job as you did this year?              .A.   Yes.
I This year are you saying that there were not as many Policemen
'* there?       A.   There didn't seem to be.    I am not sa/ing
   t h e r e wasn't but there didn't seem to be.

). When did it occur to you that there were         less Policemen   there
                         135


                                              R.   W.   BEADSLEY



this year than there has been in the past?   A.   Well,
I am almost certain there has been more Policemen at some
League matches round the turnstiles than there was at the
Semi-Final this season.
Would you look, please, at page 2 of your statement to
the solicitors for the Club, at the bottom of the page,
please.    Do you there say, "We knew all the senior Police
Officers" - have you got it?     I am sorry.    Do you see
that?    "We knew all the senior Police Officers at least by
sight who were present at or near Gate C.      However, many
of the other Police Officers appeared to be new faces.       _
It is normal for any League match to have 8-10 Police Officers
behind the turnstiles and near C Gate.      About the same
number were in position and as fans came through the
turnstiles they were searched."     A.    That is true but
 that is round the turnstiles.    Last season they was like
 filling the areas up one at a time and there was Police
 round those areas as well.    They wasn't this year.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think we have to compare
it with the middle of page 5.
     MR. WOODWARD:    Yes.
So the Police that you are talking about that there weie
less in number - where was there this difference?    Whereabouts
was it?   A.   It seemed to be round the tunnel area and
round the bottom of the stairs and places like that.    As I
say, last year there was definitely a lot of Police round
the tunnel area.




                                  /Round the tunnel.
                                                              136
                                                                                 R.W. B3AD3LKY




                Q. R o u n d the t u n n e l a r e a? - A. Yes.
                       And round where? - A. Round the bottom of each stair, i
                 Q.
                       cannot see the other stciir.
                       W h i c h s t a i r c a s e ar e y o u t a l k i n g abou t ? - A. T h a t one.
                 G.
                           , K n „ .   h o ,T   m a n y Policemen di d you see there last year?                    -
                 Q. f T c a S n o t l X a l l y re m e m b e r, b u t t h e o v e r a l l a m o u n t o f
       B            P o l i c e se e m e d t o b e l e s s .  A t t h e t u n n e l l a s t y e a r ,-nere
                    was d efinitely Police.
                           kow     rnanv’ - A .       I   d o n ' t kn ow,   t h ere m i g h t have b e e n four,
                 Q. 'there m i g h t h a v e b e e n f i v e , t h e r e m i g h t h a v e b e e n m o r e .
                           They were directing people                    i nt o the tunnel area.

                           A r e y o u s a v i n g t h e r e w e r e no P o l i c e t h e r e this year? -
                 Q.' a          I can't" r e m e m b e r s e e i n g any, no.         T n e r e m i g n t n ^ v e •j e o »
                           b u t I c a n ' t r e m e m b e r s e e i n g any.

                        I    s u r e s t to y o u t h a t a c c o r d i n g to the f igur es the r e were
                      ’ '-he s a m e n u m b e r of P o l i c e a r o u n d ? - A. I t m i g n u nav e ]usc
                            b e e n t r a t we d i d n o t know th e m . T hey l i k e make t n e r a s e l v e s
                            K w n t o u s a n d we h a v e a c h a t a t some m a tc h e s when t a e r o
         D                  is not a loL of- tans.              niight h ave j u s t s e e m e c leso.

                     r<- is just a guess is it on your part? - A. llo. ft is not
                  Q. V g u e s s . I stated that to we it was as tnougn tnere v.e.e
                     less Police there.
                             Are you saying this:     there were less people there that
                             yoS L e w ? - a " There was nobody there that i Knew a p a ^
           E!                from the Inspectors.
                             One can look at the numbers and the disposition i n c i t e s
                      Q.
                             hov; many there v/ere?
                                      Co far as your job was concerned in the immediate
                              area that you were working in, there were the same number
                              of P o l l « Officers as you were familiar with? - A. As
                              most matches, yes, but I have seen more.                                                       _

                              r-'ell when have you seen more? - A. Millvall me tea foi_ instc-uce
                      Q. this s e S o n .     I reckon there was a lot wore Police behind
                               the turnstiles searching them coming in .taan there &     ot
                               the serai-final.
                               If there were less people about did you think
                      Q. it- to anybody? - A. It xs not our 300 to u2ll the Police
                               their job. They tell us what we do.                          We don’t tell cneui
                               what to d o .
                                So are you saying that this apparent difference had no
                       Q ' istlTt S o n what you were doing? - A. No, we are there
                                i-o steward       We are there to let Police x n ana o u t , ....
             H                  • S t r t S g siaff ■to ana-out) m u b officials in and out ana
                                anybody that are allowed in and out.


. Harpham Ltd
V
                                                         137
                                                                   R.W. BEADSLEY



                   Q. You say that the Police did not seem to be so well organised?
                      - A. I said that, yes.
                   O        h   did that show itself? Why do you say that? - A. That
                                o   y   /

                            was just how I felt. I felt as though to me they were not
                            as well organised as normal policing.

                   O. Well what leads you to say that? - A. It rnignt jusu be ray
                      opinion.  It is my opinion.  I thought they we re not as
            6         well organised.

                   Q. On what is it based? - A. My opinion.

                   Q. Well what did you see that was different, if anything? -
                      A. Well to me it was different.

                       Q. What was different? - A. I can't remember what I saw but
                          it was different on that day. What are you trying to get
                          out of me? What do you want me to say?

                       Q.
                                T would like you to give us the detail or the observation
                                that you had that led you to the judgment that it was Less
                                organised.    Nov/ v/hat did you see that was different? - A.
                                t o me it was different.     I can't put a finger on what it
                                was*but it was different to a normal, to the normal poLicing
             D                  we have on match days.      It nay not have been different but
                                to me it w a s .
                                But you are not able to put your finger on anything that
                       Q.
                                was not being done? - A.Ho.

                                Di d you see, Mr. Beadsley.. in 1938, the tunnel being closed
                       Q.
                                off? - A. Yes.

                                    What time did that happen? - A. I have no idea._ When this
                       Q.
                                    happened this year you think of things tnat was cifreren-_
                                    last year. After 10-past-2 this year l never looked at
                                    my watch.
                                    In 1S08 you were able more or less to pack up at <=.bouL ^
                                    10-to-3 you told us? — A. I would no.t say pac.< up . «(e
                                    still stooped on our gate but everybody nad gone. Every­
                                    body was in the ground that was coming in the ground.

                                    Yes to all intents and purposes the spectators had got in
                        Q.
                                    and'your job was really you had just got to stay there till
                                    the time but there was really very little to g o ? - A. too.

                                    So by 10-to-3 this had happened, most of the crowd was in?
                        Q.
                                    - A. Yes.
                                    What time do you say you saw the tunnel being closed off?
                        Q.
                                    - A. I would not like to say.  I don't know.

                           Well was it before or after all the crowd was in? - A. It
                        Q. was a a r l y .on. , -The.y filled the middle.,pens and .then ,tiiey
                           allowed people in. They would not allow people into -the
                           side pens until the middle was full.

J. U Harpham Ltd
Are you confusing this with a league game? - A. No.

How do you know that they were filling the centre pens? -
A Because they were telling everybody to go in the centre,
the sides were closed off. Dntil they closec the gate they
pu? Police in front of it. They closed it for a minute ar.d
sent them round the sides.
    You heard that being said, did you? - A. You don't need to
    hear, you can see. You can see then close the ga^e anc
    move the fence and let people round, you don t neec uo
    hear it. I am not thick.
    This must have been seen by lots of other people then? - A.
    It has been mentioned by other people.

    "’hat the Police were not allowing people into the side pens
    in 1 98 9 until the centre pen was full up? - A. Until later
    on, yes.    I remember a chap come to us and ne ha^ go. a
    vounqster. We had a word with the Police ana ne saia:
    I I I hint on a bit they will be opening the side pens, you
    will be able to get in there and geu a. gooc viev, o_ u*.e
    match".
     So far as vou are concerned is there no difference then
     between what was happening in the 1S3G serai-nnal coaparec _
      ?th In ordinary league gr,:.e? - A. In 1988. no I t a    ^
     there was anv difference to a normal league game._
     filled a pen and when that was filled they openec anotle*
     on^ Tnd billed that one like they do in a noi.na.1 league
     SatcS Sow   Sn semi-final day this year they left everything
     open and let them go wnere they wanted.

> Mav I sucgest you are mistaken about that? Youjsaw a Lot
'* f ticket stubs being passed bark to people, dia you.
   -~A. I saw tickets being thrown back out through the gate
   as we were ejecting people, yes.

3.   So at your gate, Gate C, that was happening on a number of
     occasions? - A. Yes.
n    P r o m what time did it start? - A. I would say you are -talking,
      it h*s‘qot to be round half-past-2.    It has get to b e a x t e r
      10-past - 2 because we had not got the gate open till «-/ien.


             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: You mean when Gate C is open
Q.
      to eject somebody, somebody from inside v?ould throw some
      tickets out? - A. They were throwing tickets back out.
      V?e opened the gate so a Policeman could throw someooay ouu
      and they were throwing stubs out to people outside.

   What I don't understand, perhaps you can help ne, you heard
Q. the evidence a little bit before about people wrapping ---
   A*. I don't knoitf about 50 pences in it.
O     Or whatever else.  I ,Clean the .sort .of .crowd .that we. iiava
      seen on the video outside, I would not have tnought tnere
                              139

                                       • R.W. DBADSL3Y



    was a great deal of chance of a ticket getting  to the chap
    vou wanted it to get to? - A. I think it was ]usu a ca^e
    they were all trying to get everybody in. They weren t
    bothered who it was that got in ....
  it wasn't to anybody in particular? - A. Wo, it was just
’ a case of so-and-so had not got a ticket, I.will give hia
  one and throwing then out to anybody. They weren t
  bothered who it went to.
     Let nve follow it through.    Presumably somebody who has got
     in w i t h a ticket should have left half m s ticket m
     turnstile? - A. He did do, yes.                                   _

     So what he has got left to chuck out is ---         A. Is just
     the stub, his half or the ticket.

     t-   thincs   are done properly how is that going    to nelp
'■                to l e t in? - I. As far as I could see It was no,
     aoirci to help them but if there is a queue cu „he tu.nstile
     and *a chap turns up with half a ticket and he tnrows his^
     h          *-he ticket how does the man in the turnstile know
     h e h a s \ S r ^ p e S it in half already and given him the ctner
      half?
              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Right.

q.            MR. WOODWARD:   May we look at it in a little bit
      nore detail-
            v q u sav that they seemed to be intent on S ^ i n g ttiese
      other peonle' in who had not got tickets? - A. I cici no^ Soj
      th-v had not got tickets all of them rounc tnat gc:te, ba,
      they were intent on getting people m , yes.

q    . it was obviously being done for some purpose? - A. Yes.

Q. This was tickets being thrown out of Gate C? - A. Yes.

Q. That gate is only open from time to time? - A. Well tickets
   was only going out from time to time.

 o.Of course but they would m t be thrown out until         the gate
    was opened, would they? - A. No.
 n     so the coincidence was not only someone there ready to.throw
       tickets out, but someone having to get the gate open so tha-
          v c n b e q o t out? - A. As I say when the people were _
       *irst coning over the top of the turnstiles, the first sij
       or seven thlt climbed over the top was thrown out and there
       was a lot of people milling round the gate ana uney knc*
              the first one that they were going to be openec to
       be thrown out, so they were milling round more and more unen.

    q. so they would have to wait until by arrangement or chance
     ■ 'the gate was opened?   A. Yes.
                                             R.W. BEADSLEY



And in order for it to have some purpose they would have to

T * " - r ^ e n ^ h a t l i r t h e f l o s e i f \ h e 5 f w l s n o t ?nSbody
waiting for the tickets and they went on the floor. Tney



But this was happening on inumber of occasions? - A. Yes.

Did you see people throwing the tickets over ^    £u" ® tile'
tops as well? - A. I can't see a tic.ce, going ^hat f*r,
to tell you the truth.
 Did vou see      people on the turnstile tops gathering tickets
 from peoole      and throwing then down over? - A. 1 can t
 say! I was       not looking on the top of the turnstiles.

         MR. WOODWARD:        Thank yo u .




                            /Q_ .MALCOLM BAIH Ca.ll.ed
                                                                                                                      i
                                                                       141
                                                                                                  M. BAIN


                                        Mr. PHILLIPS:                  Malcolm Bain please.

                                                  MALCOLM BAIN. Called
                                                 Examined by M r . PHILLIPS:

                    Q. Is your name Malcolm Bain?                              A. Yes, sir.
                    Q. Have you been a steward at Sheffield Wednesday for about
                       12 years? A. Yes.
            B
                    Q. Were you one of the three men on *C* Gate on this particular
                       match?   A. Yes.
                    Q        Along with Mr. Beadsley-who has just given his evidence?
                             A.     Yes.
                    Q. And you were under instructions                                 to keep those gates closed,
                       were you not?   A. Yes.
                    O           Except when they were r e t i r e d to be opened by the police
                                for the purpose of ejecting people?        A. Yes.

                     0   Early on, when you first got there, did you in fact at
                     Q ‘ one stag4 have the gates slightly open?   A. Yes.

             D       Q          For some considerable time?                       A.     Yes.

                     «• ih
                         b^rLriraitowrtrroi^e^dbcrterL^ra;sf r. 2 s
                                in and out without keep opening and shutting the doo .

                        Q       How far apart did you have them                        ---      A. About 18 inches.


                        <■                                                                            A ' " * "

                        Q. Up to about 2 o ’clock?                           A. Yes.
                        n At that time were there many people about? A. No, because
                        Q - I commented to Inspector White that it was very quiet.

                         Q. When you were               anvone^^A ^ e s ^ I ^ a r a p p M a c h e ^ ’ -
                            were y°u.aPPr° f ^ d y r was offered £20 and £30 if I'd let
                            two or ‘hreE “ “     u a s a y o u n g lad who came and offered me
                            £ M m and i told him T o L v e aSay before I fetched the police,
                            “ °d ?5 « h i          c looking up at the perime e,: and 1 said
                                                       a   r   t   e   d




                                  I T    U   "   I ° s a W e i “ de ? « r “ f f V

                                                  o n ly           K & V SS Sn "        S i ; wa^early', S i . . .

                            Q. And these people were coming quite early on, were they?
                                  A.     Yes.
                H           q   . Did you let any of them in?                       A. No.



J . L Harpham Ltd
                           142


                                              M. BAIN

Q.   Did you report   any of this to the police?   A. No.

Q.   You did not?     A. No. They were just coming and going.

Q. At 2 o'clock, did you change your tactic and close the
   gate completely?   A. Yes, I went to Inspector White
   and told him that they was milling up and there was a
   lot of people trying to get in. He came over, looked
   out, and said "Right, close the gates. You only open
   them for the police", and that's what we did.

Q. But you still nevertheless, having closed the gates, had
   to open them on several occasions, did you not? A. Yes,
   for the police to eject fans.

Q. And when you were able to open them, you were able to see
   what was going on outside, were you not?   A. Yes.

Q. Did you notice a particular build-up of people outside?
   A. You can't see. All you can see is just in front of
   you.   The gate is only open about 18 inches. As they
   throw them out, they shut them straight away so you only
   get a quick glimpse of the outside. As they was trying
   to get in, we was getting a lot of abuse from them,
   swearing.

Q.    A lot of abuse from people outside?     A. Yes, "Let us
     in, let us in".

Q. And they were people in the area immediately outside 'C *
   gate, were they?   A. Yes.

Q. Of course, you took no notice of that, did you?          A. No.
   I don't want my earhole thumping!

Q. So you closed the gate and kept the gate closed?          A. Yes.

Q. Did you find that the crowd outside was getting somewhat,
   worse?   A. Yes, as the time went on they got very much
   worse.

 Q. Was there any pressure on the gate itself, after perhaps
    20-to-3 or quarter-to-3?    A. It wouldn't have gone.
    I ’ve said all the time it would never have gone, that
    gate, because I was stood directly at t h e b a c k o f it
    and all you could feel it doing was just vibrating.

 Q. You could feel the gate vibrating? A. Yes, but it
     wouldn’t have collapsed; I don’t think so anyhow.
    Nobody knows, do they?

 Q. No. Fortunately, it did not, but you did notice the
    gate moving, did you?  A. Yes, it was moving, flexing.

 Q. And that was at about what time, do you say?        A. I should
    say about 20-to-3.
                           143

                                                 M. BAIN

Q. Do you remember the gate being opened on the first
   occasion when a fan was ejected or an entrant was
   ejected who had come in, I think, through turnstile
   B?   A. Yes, they were ejecting a fan when the gates
   was opened.   I was stood at the side.  I don’t remember
   exactly until I saw it on the video, to be honest.

Q.    Until you saw it on the video? A. When I_ saw it on
      the telly, it came back.  I was stood at this side
      and all of a sudden the gate opened.

Q. Had you been one of those who opened the gate on that
   first occasion for this fan to be ejected? A. On the
   first one?

Q.     Yes.  As you know, there were two occasions when fans
      camein in quantity and the first one was at 2.48?
      A. Yes.

Q. Had you been one of the gatemen who had opened the gate
   for the ejection of that --    A. Not that particular fan.

Q. You had not?      A.   No.

Q. But you had nevertheless been standing ----         A. I was stood
   at the side of it, yes.

Q.    The gate had only been opened 18 inches or so?       A. And
      then   all of a sudden it just came wide open.

Q. Could you see what caused it to come wide open?   A. As
   far as I know, the police opened it, as far as I know.

Q. As far as you know.      That gate was closed after about 30
   seconds? A. Yes.

Q.     Do you recallthat now?    A.   Yes.

Q.     Do you recall the gate being opened on the second occasion?
      A. Yes,it was opened on the second occasion. We was
      told to open it.

 Q. You were told to ppen it, were you?  A. I heard somebody
    say "Open the gate and the gate was opened.

 Q. So you did not in fact open it yourself? A. No, I didn't
    in fact open it.  I was stood to one side, they let them
    in, and then they said "Pull it so far to" and then they
    filed them in and asked them to checktheir tickets  as
    they came in.

 Q.    Did you do that?    A. Yes.

 Q.     But that was, of course, some considerabletime after
       it had been opened, was it not?   A. Yes.

 Qi• 11- had been open ^-for •about •five-minutes, had •it not ?
    A. Yes.
iv-llvu                                                            144


                                                                                     M. BAIN

                       O         About five mintues?   A. Yes. There^was a W.P.C.
                                police lady outside and a constable directing them in.

                       n           <5he was directing them in and there were still people
                                   outside after the five minute quantity had gone through.
                                   A.      Yes.
                                               Hr. PHILLIPS:     Thank you very
             B                                  Hr. HYTNER:    I have no questions, sir.

                                                Hr. JACKSON:    No questions, sir.

                                                      Cross-examined by Hr. WOODWARD:

                       Q             Hr Bain, the number of people without tickets this
                                     seemed to be quite a lot, according to your recollection.
                                     A. Yes, there was a lot.    There was a lot this year
                                     milling about without tickets.

                           Q. Your view from Gate C is rather a narrow view, is it not?
                              A.   Yes.
                           Q         So you do not get much of a panorama of what is happening
               D                     outside 7      A. Only when we have it open first. Before
                                     2 o'clock there was a lot by the river. We can see the
                                     r i v e r and there was a lot milling round there without
                                      tickets.
                           0 I think you put an estimate upon those that youc ould
                              see in y o u r statement, and it was y o u r impression that
                              there were about 500 or so?      A. Well, I should say at
                              the time when the gate was opened there would be about
                              500 came in without tickets. A chap came up to me and
                              said "I’ve paid £14 for this and l've no need to ^ v e
                              bothered.     Half of those you've just let in haven t got
                              tickets".     I said, "Well, that's nothing to do with us .

                           Q. You are talking about them coming in through the gates?
                              A. Yes.
                               n        And one of the complaints that was made by a number of
                               Q '                fans with tickets was that about half of those
                                        L i v e r p o o l
                                        ^ o S d come had not got tickets? You got that complaint
                                        from more than one person?    A. Yes.

                               n That was not quite what I was asking you about   Have
                               Q ’ you got your statement there? A. No, I haven't, sir.

                               Q. On page 5 of the statement that you made to the poLice
                                  A. I haven’t received one.

                                0         Would you have a look at it? Have you got it there?
                                                    fn the witness).  That is a statement tha jr
                                         made on the 10th May"l98 9 . Will you look at page 5?     (^
                                         D o y o u have the top of the page there?   A. Yes, but it o
                   H
                                         cut off.      The page is cut off.


 J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                              145

                                                                                  M. BAIN


                    Q. Does that page begin "... very quiet which I thought was
                       extremely unusual ... ?   A. *e s •
                    n           On this day in 1989 there was a difference because it
                    Q   -       s e e m e d t o y o i very quiet. What this says is this:

                                      "After 2 p.m. a few more people began to arrive
                                      but what was noticeable was the large numbers of
                                      people standing outside the ground who obviously
           6                          didn't have tickets".

                                Do you see that?           A. Yes.
                        0. The time you are talking about is a long time before the
                           gates were opened.  You say:
                                       "The people were Liverpool supporters and I would
                                       estimate that just after 2 p.m. there were at
                                       least 500 people just hanging around and approaching
                                       spectators coming to the ground for tickets.

                                 It is that time I am asking you about?            A.   Yes.

                        n At that time round about 2 o'clock, your impression was^
                        Q ‘ that there were in the order of about 500 people who
            D               not got tickets milling about?   A. Yes.

                        Q. That is your guess?                 A. Yes.
                        Q. And that seems to be confirmed by what happened when the
                           gate opened?   A. Yes.
                         Q. Because there were people saying "Half of them that have
                            come in haven't got tickets ?   A. Yes.

                            Q. You stewarded in 1988?                A. Yes.
                            Q. But you were up on the West Stand?              A. That's correct.

                            Q     Perhaps you cannot help too much about   it but you say
                                  that in the past you have seen^he tunnel closed on  two
                                  or three occasions?     A. Yes, I have.

                            n     Knt onlv in relation to League games?          A.That’s the
                                  only time I ’ve seen it closed, yes, because last season
                                  I w o u l d n ’ t have seen it because I was upstairs.

                            n That is right, but your understanding of any closing of
                            Q ' th e --tunnel was in delation to League games’ A Yes
                                when they had big League games they used to put them 1
                                the pens first and fill them up.
                            Q. Because there       w a s    a difference at League games?      A. Yes.

                             Q. Whether anybody had decided             ^ close the tunnel
                                for. some other .reason, there was. a .difference, a. zes
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
(c
                                               146


                                                                    M. BAIN

                      In League games, people were put into pens?          A.    Yes.
                Q.
                   As though some organisation was attempted to ensure that
                Q. that was done, but that was not done at semi-finals, was
                   it?    A. Not as far as I know.

                      Where were you in the West Stand in 1988?          A. Showing
                Q.
                      people to their seats.

       6              Were you able to see down on to the terrace?            A. No, 70U
                Q.
                      can’t see from where I was.

                            Hr. PHILLIPS:     Thank you, sir.

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Thank you very much.

                            Hr. GOLDSACK:      Hr. Cardwell please.

                                   STEPHEN CRAIG CARDWELL. Called
                                   Examined by Mr. GOLDSACK:

                Q.       Mr. Cardwell, I think you work with Mr.Stuart Thorpe?
                       A . ’ Yes, that's right.

         Dl      Q. And you got to know, through him, that he needed some
                    temporary stewards to help out at semi final day. A. Yes.

                 Q. You had never stewarded before?           A.   No.

                 Q. But you fancied going to the semi-final?             A. Yes.

                 Q. So you volunteered?         A. Yes.

                 Q     Were you at any stage given any written instructions "by
                       Mr. Thorpe?   A. Not written instructions, no.

                 Q. Or any instructions at all, before the day?            A. No, I were
                    told just to report about quarter-past- 11.

                 Q. You turned up,        I think, and       the man   atthe gate had your
                    name on a list        and you were     allowed   in?   A. Yes.

                 Q. And you made your way up towards where there was a briefing?
                    A. Yes.
                     0. Taking the matter shortly, is this the position:  Because
                        you had arrived a little later than you intended, the
                        briefing was about to finish? A. I just caught the last
                         three or four minutes.
                        And were you then simply told to go with a more experienced
                        steward into the West Stand?   A. Well, we were already
                        in the West Stand. We were having the briefing where the
                        gangway was where I was positioned.

                       "We're y ou giv e n•anything- in -writing on- the day-?     A. -So.
            HP Q


. Harpham Ltd
                                 147

                                                 S. C. CARDWELL

 Were you told anything at all about an evacuationprocedure?
*A         Yes, I remember the police officer who were giving the
 h-ripfine asked for the names of the two stewards in the
  b o t t o m corners o? the stand and. said he would m t t b . i t
  names if there were any evacuation, and if there was,
  were to use the exit on the right, the bottom right.

D       So you got there in time to hear something at    about the
        e v a c u a t i o n procedure? A. Yes, I heard him say that,
        yes.
              Mr., GOLDSACK:   Yes, very well. Thank you.

                      Cross-examined by Mr. HYTNER:        _

Q. Mr. Cardwell, I think some time before the kj-ck"°ff y ™
   noticed that pens 3 and 4 were heaving ?    A. Yes.

n t i- i <? a oossible mis-typing in your statement. Do you
Q ' m e a n i t 521 1.50. or 2.18 t L t you noticed that they were
    "packed like sardines"?        A. It were 2.50.

Q. 2.50?         A.   Yes.
n           is before there was a sudden surge at 2.55? A. It
Q ' were eradSally building up from like 2.40. You could see,
    y o u k n o w , m o r e .people fn ?he pen. About 2.50 there were
    a sudden rush into the stand as well.

Q        Before the sudden rush, you noticed that the fans in the
         pens were packed like sardines?   A. Yes, only in
         two middle pens.
    O     Yes   Did it occur to you - and please do not think tins is
         a criticism of you, because you just turned up, of course,
         without any training or instruction - before the rush at
         2 55 that there was any danger to the fans who were packed
         like sardines?    A. Not particularly.  I go to football
         matches nearly every week and you get used to people, you
         know, swaying, so really it didn t, you know

    q    I do not suppose you had any idea at all that therewas
         a cafptv capacity for each pen?        A. I assumed there
         S e « ! bSt X i i S l y , like I say, you don't think at Che
         time.
    0    If you had thought there was any danger, did you h a v e ___
          any instructions or any idea of what          l i k e ^ were
          aboutr it?  A. On the terracing, no. It s not like 1 were
          stewarding in the stand.
    Q. You just did not think it was your business?            A. I suppose
       you could say that.

                 Mr. HYTNER:   Thank you.
                                     S. C. CARDWELL


         Cross-examined by Mr. KALLIPETIS:

Mr Cardwell, will you turn to the last page of your
statement, please? Can you find the point five lines
from the end of your statement?  A. Yes.

Did you actually see that yourself?   A. Yes, certainly
jostling and punching.  I know it says in here about
being dragged over the fence, but at what time and at
what stage I can't really remember.^I think it were when
it first started happening and I think everybody just
assumed it were like a pitch invasion. It were obvious
that they were, you know, hostile. You just got the
feeling that it were going to be violent.  I definitely
saw police officers pushed and punched.

Did you see any ambulancemen hit?   A.^ I saw an ambulance­
man get chased and a lad got hold of him, but whether that
were to come and attend a friend, you know, or whatever,
I don't really know. There was so much going off that you
can't really take it all in.

      Mr. KALLIPETIS:   Thank you very much.

      Mr. WOODWARD:   I have no questions, thank you, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Thank you very much.       We vill
break now until 10 o'clock in the morning.




       (The Inquiry was adjourned until 10 a.m.
                the following morning)
I N Q U I R Y   I N T O     T H E      H I L L S B O R O U G H


            S T A D I U M       ' D I S A S T E R




                            Before


                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                     MR. B. JOHNSON
        (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                              and

                    PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                          (ASSESSORS)




                              At

                      The Town Hall,.

                          Sheffield,

                              on

                  Thursday, 15th June, 1989.




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                    (Morning        Session)



           From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
                Official Shorthand Writers,
            55, Queen Street," Sheffield Si 2DX
                                INDEX      TO   TRANSCRIPT

                                     (Morning S e s s i o n )
                                                                Page

    GARY VAUX, called
         E x a m i n e d b y MR.     PHILLIPS                     1
         Cross-examined             by   MR. HYTNER               4
         Cross-examined             by   MR. GLASGOW              6
         Cross-examined             by   MR. WOODWARD            10
         R e - e x a m i n e d by   MR. COLLINS                  13

    MR. COLLINS                                                  14

i




(
            TWENTY-SECOND DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

               THURSDAY. 15th JUNE,1989

                   (HORNING SESSION)



     MR. PHILLIPS:      May I call Mr. Vaux?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Yes, please.

     MR. PHILLIPS:      Mr. Vaux, please.

                      GARY VAUX Called

                 Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

Are you Gary Vaux? - A. Yes.

And you live, I think, in Middlesex.         Is that right? - A.
Yes .
Now you came to send a letter after you read about the
H i l l s b o r o u g h disaster on the 15th of April of this year
and told about your experiences in 1981.             Is that right?
- A. That is correct.

And you can give us some evidence, I think, of what
happened on that occasion? — A. Yes.

 You attended the match, did you? 7 A. Yes.          Twelve of us
 travelled up from London in a minibus.

 Yes. What time did you get to the ground on that occasion
 in 19817 - A. We got to Sheffield about half-past-12 but
 then there was a very bad traffic iam where we were diverted
 round the city to get to the ground, so by the time we aad
 parked and walked to the ground we did not get to the ground
 until about quart.—to—3, 10 to 3.

 And were you at the Leppings Lane end of the ground? - A.
 Ye s .
  And did you go through the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A.
' With extreme difficulty.   There were 12 of us had travelled
  up together, varying ages.   The youngest was a boy of 8.
  The oldest was a woman of 60. We got separated going
  into the ground because the crush outside the turnstiles
  was so bad.
 There were a lot of people waiting, were there, still at
 that time to get in?- A. Yes, mostly caused by the
 t r a f f i c 'iams--getting- through -Sheffield.
                           2


                                                 G. VAUX

Q. Did the crush at that time extend beyond the perimeter
   gates of the ground itself? Look, please, will you,
   perhaps, and turn round and see the plan? Do you see
   some outer gates and then the turnstiles further in?
   I appreciate things were not exactly the same when you
   came in 1981.  How far out did the crush extend? - A.
   In distance I do not really know.  It took us quarter-
   of-an-hour to get into the ground and that was constantly
   pushing and shuffling in rather than in an orderly fashion.

Q. Now, when you got into the ground where did you go to?
   -A. Once we got through the turnstiles we were milling
   around, if you like, between the turnstile and the
   terracing.  We tried to locate the other people we
   had come with.  I saw some other friends who said that
   the terracing was very full, so we thought we had better
   make our way as it was only a couple of minutes to the
   kick-off straight through into the terracing.

Q. Did you go through the tunnel? - A. I believe so, yes.

Q. When you got into the terrace on the other side of the
   tunnel. - A. Yes.

Q. Did you stay in the vicinity of the tunnel or did you
   move off to one side or the other? - A. We moved down
   because the back of the terracing was just a solid mass
   of bodies.  I was with my girlfriend and we moved our
   way down the terracing down to the front where we thought
   there may be more room.

Q. And was there? - A. There was slightly more room, yes.
   I mean, you could at least stand upright.

Q. And how did things go for you when you found your final
   position in the terrace? - A. We were about three or foux
   rows back from the bottom of the terracing, just to the
   right-hand side of the goal, as you are looking at the
   pitch and after about three or four minutes of the game
   Tottenham scored at the other end and the cheering and
   the crowd surging forward meant that we were pushed right
   up against the fencing.  What I heard from friends after­
   wards who had not got into the ground at that point when
   Spurs scored the cheering made all the people who were
   outside in the bit between the turnstiles and the terracing
   surge forward to see what had happened and the whole
   terrace just in fact fell forward towards the fencing.

 Q. What happened as a result of that?- A. Well, as you can
    see I am six foot two and fifteen stone and I lost my
    footing.  My girlfriend lost her footing. There was a
    small boy - we were standing with our back to a crush
    barrier and there was a small boy who was sitting on
    the barrier with his father behind him. They became
                                    3


                                                          G. VAUX

        separated so I was holding a small child up with one hand
        because he was about two foot off the ground, I suppose,
        at that point and my girlfriend had almost passed out on
        my right-hand side and we were pushed up against the fence.

Q        Were people iniured? - A. Yes, there were people passing
        out and a lot of people, particularly small children who
        tend to go to the front of the terracing, were in very
        acute distress.

Q.       And what happened? How were these people relieved of
         their distress? - A. By good fortune. Where I was pushed
         up against was actually one of the gates on to the pitch.

Q. Yes. That would probably be No. 3, would not it?              No,
   it did not exist. -A. I do not know what ---

Q. You do not know what gate it was? “ A. I do not know what
   the gates were.  I think it was a slightly different
   system ....
Q.        It was. - A ..... of fencing    in operation at the time.

Q        Yes — A. We were pushed up against this gate in the
         fencing and we were rattling it to try and attract the
         Police and stewards' attention.   The Police and stewards
         were a yard away from us and we were shouting at them to
         open the gates to let people  out because we were saying
         that therewere people in distress.

q       /' Were there   both Policemen and stewards there? - A. Yes.

    Q     And was the gate opened? - A..Not immediately.  The
          Policeman who was facing me actually instructed me to
          stop trying to force the gate open.

    Q. Yes. - A. I did not and at that point an Inspector came
       along or someone with a flat hat on any way and the
       Inspector, whoever it was, instructed that the gate be
       opened.
    Q. Yes. And the gate was opened.         Were people taken out
       of the pen? ~A. Yes.

    Q. How many people, could you estimate? — A. There was, I
       think two - we were only concerned with getting through
       the gate we were at but I think there was another gate
       opened further along. We got out and we spilled out on
       to the touch line of the pitch, the perimeter of the
       pitch.   I would esimate there was probably about 200,
       maybe 250, and then another group of supporters were
       escorted out and taken around the pitch and placed at
        the far end of the ground which had been allocated to
        the Wolverhampton supporters because there were quite
Sr-v


                                                                                          G. VAUX

                               clearly gaps on the terracing at that end.

                       Q       You were taken out and you say about 250 people al­
                               together? -A. It is hard to esimate because we were
                               along the edges of the pitch so I would not like to
                               give a number to it but I would estimate that.

                         Q. Did any of those people appear to you to be injured?
                B|         * - A. Yes.  The St. Johns Ambulance were in evidence -
                             it was a very hot day - and were reviving people who
                             had passed out.

                         0. Yes. You, I think, were all right, were you not? - A.
                            Yes.  I had been uncomfortable.  I go to football matches
                            30/40 times a season and have done for 20 years and I
                            have never been as uncomfortable at a football match
                            as I was on that day.

                         0      And those people who were taken out of the pen and
                                attended to by the St. Johns Ambulance, where did they
                                spend the rest of the match? - A. Some of them were
                                taken off to treatment rooms.  Some of them iust remained
                                round the edge of the pitch.

                 D|                              MR> PHILLIPS:   Yes.   Yes, thank you very much.

                                                         Cross-examined by MR, HYTNER:

                           0    Could I iust get the picture of the scene outside in
                                Leppings” Lane? You were scheduled to get there earlier,
                               ■ i ^ake it? - A. Yes, we had intended, because we were
                  xp I           travelling such a large group, we hoped to get into the
                                 ground by, sort of, half-past- 1/2 o clock.

                           Q.   Yes. Could you iust help us on this?               You are a regular
                                supporter, are you ? - A. I am.

                           Q. You go to big matches? - A. Yes.

                           0    Never mind a badly attended League match. At an all ticket
                                match how long do you e x p e c t i t is going to take you to get
                                into the ground once you arrive? -A. You expect it to take
                                from starting to queue to getting into the ground probably
                                 q  t e r - o f - a n - h o u r /half-an-hour b u t we had given ourselves
                                     u   a   r


                                plenty of time. We had set off from London at h al r- pa s t- 7/
                                8 o'clock in the morning.




                                                                         / Q. Do I take


                   H

   J. I. Harpham Ltd
                                     5

                                                      G. VAUX

Q       Do I take it that it actually only took you fifteen
        minutes on this occasion?   A. It took_us about fifteen
        minutes but it was like pushing to get in, it wasn t
        an orderly queueing system.

Q. W e r e there any police officers, as it were, stopping
   you pushing or controlling the queues or controlling
   the crowd?       A. No.

Q. The area between the turnstiles and the gates, which
   the usher will point out to you, was that full of
   people?   A. Yes, there were people all through it.
   I mean it wasn't solidly jam packed but it was very
   tight, yes.

Q           As you came along, did you walk from the roundabout from
            the top of Leppings Lane, or did(you come over a
            bridge, over the river? A. I can't remember.

Q. Which direction did you come from,the town centre?
   A. We had parked quite a long way from the ground
   because it was the first available parking spot we
   found.  I had lost my bearings, if you like, by that
   point, because we had come such a long way round through
   Sheffield, so I can't say that I remember which direction
   we came to the ground from.

Q. Did ><">u walk a long way down a lane - do you remember
   to get to the turnstiles , or did you sort of walk a
   short distance?      A. We came across a park ---

    Q.:;          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Would a photograph help,
            do you think?      A. We came across a park area. We
            came across a park; I remember that.

    q   #          Mr. HYTNER: And then suddenly turned into t h e ----
            A.   Yes, would we have turned right towards the ground?

    Q       If you just look over there, I do not know whether it
            will help you.  Lord Justice Taylor suggested a photograph,
            but I think the park is over there --

    Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  If you came past Hillsborough
            Park, you must have come from Penistone Road, must you
            not?
                   Mr. HYTNER:   I think over the bridge.

                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Sorry, over the bridge.

    nt             Mr. HYTNER: Did you see any police officers, as
             it were, helping to filter the crowd or to control the
             crowd on the a p p r o a c h A. There were police officers
             who were instructing Wolverhampton fans to go one way
             and Tottenham fans to go another way.

     Q. Did anyone ask you to show a ticket?         A. No.

                   Mr. HYTNER:   Thank you.
                                     6


                                                                G. VAUX


             Mr. JACKSON:      I have no questions.

              Mr. MAXWELL:     No questions.

              Mr. MULLER:     No questions, thank you.

                  C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by Mr. GLASGOW:

0       I wonder if I could just show you some photographs Mr.
        Vaux? You have got a bundle there called South Yorkshire
        1 '?  A. That's right.

0        The composite bundle.  Just to help you, these are
        photographs taken obviously in 1989, and I do not want
        to confuse you because the lay-out is slightly different.
        The only thing I want your help on is the comparative
         crowding position. Would you like to look first roughly
        half-way through the bundle?^ You will see it has Sot
         funny labelling in the top right-hand corner MWL10, and
         it is 25A with that reference.   Can you find that. Have
         you got that?   A. Yes.

0. And we there see, if you can orientate yourself, the
   general approach to one of the sets of turnstiles.
   A. Yes, that is familiar.

Q. Is that familiar now?               A. Yes. The lay-out is slightly
   different, I think.

n         Y p <? A  The gate to the left I seem to remember being
        • set'further back or further round.

    0    Do not worry, Mr. Vaux.  We have got the drawings. What
         I want your help with is the people more than the gates.
         Would I be right in suggesting that that is something
         like the sort of scene that you were part of in 1 9 8 W
         A. At that stage, yes, I would say it was about that
         nature.
    0 Could we just compare it with another photograph much
       later on?   Could you just flip on perhaps half a dozen
       photographs to MWL10-32A?  Have you found that, 32A?
       A. Yes.
    Q    Where the crowd is spread over the whole of that concourse
         area with the police horses and things?   A. Yes.

    0 Am I rieht in saying that that is something very much
    9 ' worse than Ihat ^ / e x p e r i e n c e d ? A. It's not substantially
        worse.  There weren't people climbing over the fence or
        on the top there, and the crowd to the extreme left of
        the photograph wasn't quite as far back, but the body m
        the middle of the photograph was substantially the same.
                                               G. VAUX

If you are pointing to the middle, are you saying that
that part of the crowd on MWL10, that part of the crowd
which is also illustrated on the first of the two
photographs that we looked at, 25A, is much the same
with solid lines or, shall we say, packed crowd up to
the turnstiles? Can you find your finger in both of
them?      A. Yes.

Are   you saying that that part of the crowd was roughly
the   same in 1981?   A.  I am sorry, that 25A was?

Yes.  But 32A, the spilling round to the left andall the
way round back that you see, that was not there to that
extent?    A. Not tothat extent.  I haven't quite got the
perspective of the two photographs yet.

Let me help you.   The first photograph just shows the -
'queue' is maybe an exaggerated word and I do not want
to do that - the block of people waiting for the turnstiles?
A.   Yes.
Because the turnstiles themselves are on the right?         A. Yes.

Behind the man with the red jumper?      A. Yes.

And the man with the red anorak and the ---        A.    The cap.

    middle-aged man with the hat, queueing or standing        in
front of one of the turnstiles?    A. Yes.

.And if we go back to 32A, that photograph is taken from
 a position much further back to the right than the camera
 was in 25A?   A. Yes.

What I am suggesting to you or wanting your help with is
whether or not the lines of people which are packed up
in front of the turnstiles in 25A represented the sort of
situation that you contended with in 1981, as distinct
from the general spread of people all over the area, as
represented in 32A?    A. The crowd in 25A is about the
density, though it wasn't as orderly because of the
barriers which I can^ see in 25A, which seems to be
funnelling it to some extent.   It was slightly more
dispersed, though probably of that density.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Do we know, Mr. Glasgow, that
 that barrier was not there in 1981?

        Mr. GLASGOW:   No, it was not, sir.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

       MR. GLASGOW:     And perhaps I ought to put that to
 Mr. Vaux.

 You are right in s a y i n g that there would ;have been
 nothing to confine it, but, despite the absence of the
 barrier, the appearance of the crowd was much the same?
 A.  It was a wider queue going to the turnstile.         It was
                                8

                                                 G. VAUX

  very much a funnel of people, probably 15 or 20 across,
  all trying to get through a space of a one person line.

Q. Thank you. Having brought you back to a sort of pictorial
   memory of what it looked like, Mr. Vaux, can I ask you
   about one particular incident that you may not have seen
   at all but which you may be able to help us with? A. Yes,
   certainly.

Q. We have been told recently of an incident of approximately
   50 people being taken out of that crowd from somewhere
   and taken through a separate gate in an orderly line.
   Now, in the first place, can you remember anything like
   that happening?   A.   In 1981, no.

Q. Nothing at all?   A.   No.

Q. Up to the time that you got in the ground, were you ever
   conscious of any of those big gates of the kind that we
   saw in the photograph and which you probably remember -
   those blue concertina things -being opened?  A. Iwasn't
   aware. My attention was solely on the turnstiles.   I
   cannot recollect the big gates being open.

Q. While you were queueing, if I can use that word in a very
   general sense, waiting to get in, was there ever a time
   when .there was a sudden relief from the crowd?-- Did it - --
   feel as if something had happened to relieve the crowd
   at some stage?    A. Not that I can recollect.

Q. When you did get through the turnstiles and you were
   understandably waiting for your friends in the central
   concourse area, that would have been at a very few minutes
   to 3 o'clock, would it?    A. Yes, it was two or three
   minutes before the kick-off.




                            /Q.     While you were standing
W hile you were standing in that area, that concourse area
again can you help us as to w h e t h e r or not any of tne big
exit   cates in that area was opened and a number or people
came in? - A. I cannot rec o l l e c t that happening.

I wonder if you w o u l d just look at a^document to help us
with it w hich you w on't have seen before but I thin^ u
rria v help. It is in the bi g fat grey bundle which is the
Police Volume 1.     Could you go to Tab 4, Mr. Vaux? - A. *es.

This nr. Vau:;, I d o n ’t w a n t to confuse you, it has got
nothinc to do w i t h you at all but you may oe aple to nelp.
It is the Police d e -briefing notes looking bac.-c at wnat
happened cn that day. - A. In 1981?

    IP 1931 w h e n you were there.     The matter particularly that
    t wa n t e d your help w ith is o n the second page of tnat note,
    the Police's d escription of w h a t actually happened.    .vouLa
    you gc to page 2? - A. Yes.

    vou see the p a r agraph s t a r t i n g almost in the middle o^. ^
    the page, the second one that starts with:            "Mr. Heroic
    had already referred to the late arrival ....             Do you see
    that? - A. Yes.

    Then there is a reference to:        "The flashpoint occurred
    when Tot t e n h a m scored after only three^ m i n u t e s ." n g a m -i   _
    think you would agree w i t h that? - A. Yes.

   n.T>he spectators just e n t e r i n g pushed forward to see what
’/rwas happening and caused a crush                 Again that is
   absolutely right according to your recollection.              .

     It is the next     little bit:

             "Inspector Gr e e n w o o d als o mentioned that there
              had been two or three fights, albeit of a
              minor nature, at the same time."

     Do you remember whet h e r there was any actual     fighting m
     the part of the terrace w h e r e you   were? - a . I saw no
     fighting on the terracing.

         I am sorry to take it ou t of order. Go up to the paragrspn.
         before that, w ould you? - A. Yes.

   Y o u cee there again Mr. H e r o I d is talking about the capacity
’’ for the Leppings Lane e n c losure and the certiticate nurujerb
         and that kind of thing.

                Go or i-o the middle of that paragraph, you see the
         »rimal turnstile reading:     "     to which must be adced
         the 7 0 Spurs suooorters w h o had managed to obtain tickets
         5 H L h p«t them ‘
                          anongst the Wolves supporters." - A. Yes.

n        Tt is -he next sentence:  "These had been moved to Tappings
         Lane from the Kop        I just wondered if you coulo help
                                        10

                                                      G. VAUX



        with that.          Did you see an incident, whether or not you
        w i t n e s s e d it outside, in w h i c h a group of supporters, may
        be 50, 60 or 70, were p h y s i c a l l y moved by the Police fro.n
        one end of the ground to the other? - A. The only movement
        j "saw of that nature were fans from the Leppings Lane end . •.

Q. Going the other way? - A. To                 the Kop after about ten minutes
   into the game.

q       ~ appreciate that vou s a w . You told us about thau and x
        am sure yout recollection is right, but a number of people
        now perhaps recall that t here was an earlier movement of
        a block of people possi b l y r ound the outside cf the ground,
        and I w o n d e r e d whether that helped jog your memory as tc
        whether you had possibly see n a group or supporters being
        shepherded by the Police outs i d e the ground at any stage?
        - A. No, by the time we g o t to the ground, I don't know
        if that h a d already taken place.       What I do recollect is
        when we were in the, I t h i n k you refer to it as the
        concourse area between tne turnstiles and uhe uerracing,
        I said earlier that I saw some people who I did know who
              that the terracing wa s full, part Oi my earlxer
        evidence, though two of the people I saw had got tickets
         for the o ther end of the g r o u n d but they had come through
         the turnstiles that I h a d come through.      They had obtained
         their tickets I think f rom Wolverhampton fans on the way .
         to the ground and then h a d come in at the Leppings Lane
         end.

    Q. But you can't help us          ....     A. W ith a group of people
      •'coming through?

    Q. Even w i t h anything that   y o u m a y have heard that was saic
       •f-o you by other people a b o u t a group being seen i_o be
       shepherded around in that w a y before the accident occurred?
       - A. No, no.

                MR. GLASGOW:      T h a n k y o u for trying.            Thank you sir.


                         C r o s s - S x a m i n e d by MR. W O O D W A R D :

    Q. Mr. Vau::, was that you r first visit to Hillsborough? - A.
       No, I had b een there once p r eviously for a league game.

    Q. Where had you gone on that occasion, which part Oi the
       ground had you been in? - A. The same terracing.

    0   On ti>e occas i o n that y o u s peak of you told I-ir. Hytner you
    ' ’ expected to take about 10 to 15 rainutes to get in once
        you had arrived at the ground.         Is thau righu?     A. i:c.v
        be 15 minutes to 30 minutes, you can never really tell.
        We had given ourselves ample time, wo thought, to geu tc
        the ground hopefully for 1 o'clock, quarter-past-1•
                                     G. VAUX



. , ,n fact it took you about ten minutes to get in througn
^ e i S 4 s S l e s ? - A. About 15 minutes, yes There are s e e
advantages in being 6 'a" and 15 stone in a big crush.

v«„ uprpn't boring your way in and thrusting p e op l e ^aside,
were you? - A. No, but you don't get pushed backwards either.

And you did not encounter people being turned away from
tSe turnstiles did you in front of you? - A. do.

So vou went through the turnstiles in the order of about
10 minutes or so? - A. 10-15 minutes.

And having gone through the turnstiles you then went to
wake your way to the terrace? - A. *es.

r~culd vou have a look please at South Yorksnire Document 1,
photograph 20. Let me explain what that i s ^ T n a t is
view of the terraces as they are now. - A. -es.

 And one can see the tunnel entrance in the centre and a
 fence coming down towards the perimeter. - A. *es.

   a ftion -t-o the left and right of the tunnel entrance c&n
 be seen other fences which divide the terrace up into various
 pens? - A. Yes.
                           was the terrace divided up into pens
 T t T lT o r   not? - A. I don't recollect the lateral fencing.

      £     _ a   I don't recollect because as we came in
 behind the goal Je immediately .... I can-, recollect
 ??ere being a fence immediately in front of us. As we
 came in on to the back of the terracing we came covm to
 the right,    we would not have gone asrar over as to see
 if there was a fence there or not.
         ..pll     5v the time you came through the entrance to
  I ^      niel   had -he game Jtarted? - A. Ke literally got to
  l i t b-S" if the'tunSel as the match started. We were uiere
            asthe whistle blew and we moved our way     cown to
       “ ront    and we had just reached the front, it tool: us
  about three or four minutes getting through the crowo,
  when Spurs scored.
  was that the sort of progress you would expect to make m
  a terrace? - A. It was very slow progress.

   T1.      = tolerable situation as you found it.    I tnink

   terrace wasU t o lerable?*°The_ top                    ^



   it coincided or was sparked of a. by.
                                                           12

                                                                  G. VAUX




                  lo -

                         r:?owfii,ayj -ves wr
                                                           “..‘ifssrs s ss s&
                                                           a
                                                                             »*
                                                                           £ £ ut
                         o   f   p e o p l e did rush*in from the back when the goal is soored.

                                   i.-na». 4-npre seemed. to be on tnis occasion
                |Q - DiL r i L " n    ^ n g ^ o f t h f tlrraoes? - A. I am not aware
              B|     of that" We were only concerned for our ovm safety.




              D




                                                     /Q.   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I an
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                13



                                                 G.   VAUX



Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am not sure --    A.   When
     we came out on to the pitch, we remained on the pitch,
     on the gray --
Q.        MR. WOODWARD:   On the track.     A.    On the track
     The Police ----    There wasn't enough room to put us into
     the corner pens because I think the Police actually looked
     to see if we could have got in there and didn't. We
     couldn't get in there and that is why some were taken to
     the other end and the rem ainde r of us jjst sat around on
     that track.
Q         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    How far along were you on
     this photograph?   You were to the left of the goal as
     we are looking at it.     A.  As we are looking at it, yes.

Q. Beyond the white fencing there or into the blue or how
   far along were you, do you think?    Can you point roughly?
   A. It would be obviously the fencing, I think, may be
   different.   Where the gate is would be about there.
   There was a gate there but I don't know if it is the same
   fencing or not but we would be about in that position
   between the blue and the white fencing near the gate.
   As we got out, we then sat --     I moved to the left and
   was directly behind the goal, when I was sitting on the
   perimeter track.
                     Re-examined by MR. C O L L I N S :

Q . ‘I know memory plays tricks, slightly, does it not, on
     positions but in fact you see that gate you are referring
     to was not there then.   A.   No.
Q.   The gate that was there was the one my little finger is
     now pointing to, a little further along. A.   Further
     along.
Q.   And if you went to the right you must, in         fact, have ended
     up, I think, opposite or roughly opposite        that gate.
     A.    I will accept that, yes, sir.

Q. Because equally that lateral fence that Mr. Woodward was
   referring to was not there then either.   A.   Right.

 Q. So if you went to the right and ended up near a gate I
    think it must have been that gate.   A.   Fine.

 Q. Is that impossible    from your recollection?   A. No, no.
    We could have been    that far along.   I mean, wewere not
    there very long.      We were only there literally for a
    couple of minutes.
 Q. Indeed.     Mr. Vaux, the only other thing I would like to
    ■ask you i-s •this . You- have •described the surge and the
    problem thyt arose as a result of the surge.      Now, you are
                                              G.   VAUX



obviously familiar with terraces and standing on terraces.
The normal pattern we have heard is that if there is a
surge you go forward, may be in some discomfort momentarily,
and then it seems to go back again.   A.   Yes.

Is that the normal pattern?   A.   Yes, you re-find your
footing after maybe some 10, 15, 30 seconds at maximum.
You regain your place on the terracing.   Usually people
have reorganised themselves around you but you are generally
back in the same position.

Now, on the occasion we are investigating there was a surge
and it did not go back.   People have given the description
of that happening but not returning.   Was it like that in
1981, a surge which did not go back?   A.   Yes.

 So it was exactly the same sort of experience?    A. Yes,
 it was like the surge con tinued for two minutes, three
 minutes, until we got out through the gate in the fencing
 on to the pitch.
 So the relief was in getting out on to the pitch instead
 of in going back to the original position?       A.   That's
 it, yes.       We turned round and were shouting to people
 to move back to allow us to go back but, you know, we
 were shouting that and they were shouting, "We- canJ t ■move
 e i t h e r ."
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.   I am grateful
 to you for volunteering your evidence and for coming.
/Thank   you.

      MR. COLLINS:    Sir, that is all the live evidence
 we have for the time being. What I now propose to do is
 to take you, sir, and those who appear through the bundle
 of documents that we have had prepared.    May I explain
 what that bundle consists of?     It is our choice, obviously
 with the assistance of counsel representing the interested
 parties, of documents which have been obtained by the West
 Midlands Police amounting to some 14 files and some, I
 think, 2,000 documents.    We have extracted those which
 seem to us to be relevant and helpful to the Inquiry to
 set out the history of the Safety Certificate and safety
 considerations in relation to the ground and more
 particularly, of course, in relation to the Leppings Lane
 end of the ground, both the turnstiles and the terraces.

      We obviously will have to consider, as part of the
 Inquiry, the evidence of the various interested parties
 as to what they or their organisations did in connection
 with the Safety Certificate and so on but it occurred to
 me that it would save a lot of time and be helpful to
 you, sir, and to everyone if we went through the documents
 effectively because the documents tell the story, and
 then when-we call the various witnesses what I would propose
 to do is to have their statements put in as their evidence
 and then simply ask questions upon those parts of their
 statements which seem to me to need questions or which
                                               MR.   COLLINS



deal with matters which are not strictly covered by the
documents.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Yes.   I imagine you have
already indicated to counsel that that is what is going
to be done?
     MR. COLLINS:   I have told everyone and, as I
understand it, everyone agrees that it is a sensible
course and is happy that it should be done.

     May I make clear, of course, that some of the documents
that we see in this bundle are documents we have already
referred to and they will appear in other bundles and in
other documents but I hope you feel, sir, that it was
convenient to put them alt ogeth er and altogether in chrono­
logical order so that one has a full picture and I hope
a sensible, logical picture of what happened.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   At the  moment I do not think
we   have got the volume as bound in front of us.

     MR. COLLINS:      You should have, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I am sure it is to hand but
I have hot got it here.
     MR. COLLINS:      They have been served, I am assured.

     MR. HYTNER:   Might we inquire, have we had this
bundle that Mr. Collins is going    to --
     MR. COLLINS:   Yes.    I say categorically yes because
I know that they were handed out.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      When were they handed out?

     MR.    COLLINS:    They were available as from Monday
evening.      Your solicitors will or should have had them.
If they    have not ---    I think I can see it in the back
 there.      Actually they were available Monday evening
because    I recall telling all counsel that they should not
go home    until they had got the bundle.
      MR. HYTNER:      It was not a complaint, sir, it was
 an inquiry.
      MR. COLLINS:      I think some complained at having the
 bundle !
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Has everybody now got one?

      MR.    HYTNER:    It will be sorted out behind, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I think it is desirable you
 should have it.   J t is on its way-
                         16


                                      MR.   COLLINS



     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, what I will do as I go through
is to endeavour in going through to draw attention to the
matters which we consider to be important and which may
require some further inquiry when the witnesses who will
speak to it give their evidence.
     Sir, before I actually go to the documents themselves,
it might be sensible at this stage to remind ourselves
of the statutory provisions which apply and which establish
the requirement for Safety Certificates and set out the
responsiblity for safety at football grounds.

       Sir, the principle Act is the Safety at Sportsgrounds
Act of 1975 which came into force on 1st Setpember, 1975
and which was an Act passed as a result of the Wheatley
Report into the Ibrox — or arising out of the Ibrox Disaster
i n , I t h i n k , 1971.
     Sir, if one looks at s1    of the Act, and this has been
amended by the 1987 Act but    I am looking at this because
obviously historically this    is the Act under which the
original Safety Certificate    was provided, by s1 of the
Act:
     "The Secretary of State may by order designate
     as a stadium requiring a certificate any sports
     stadium which in his opinion has accommodation for
     more than 10,000 spe ctators."

Clearly, Hillsborough qua lifies under that provision.

     Originally it was not a designated stadium because
at the relevant time She ffield Wednesday was in the Second
Division and the original designation only covered First
Division grounds, but it was still staging large games;
Semi-Finals were being held at Hillsborough, and clearly
it was in the interests of the ground that it should be
designated and so it was that it was decided that it wouUd
be and the relevant des ignat ion order is Statutory Instrument
1978/1091, which designated Hillsborough as a ground which
required to hav e a Safety Certificate under the 1975 Act
with effect from 1st January,    1979.

      Sir, we will see that there was then an application
 made under the Act and it is to be noted as a matter of
 interest that the then cap acity of the ground, that is
 the capacity de facto before any questions were raised
 as to the capacity to be set under the Safety Certificate
 was 54,950, made up of 23,350 seated and 31,600 standing,
 and indeed it was recorded that at Semi-Finals in 1976 and
 1977, that capacity was reached.
      Sir, you will bear in mind that that figure of
 54,950 was a figure in rel a t i o n to the Kop as it then
 was, without the additional roof -- it was not then roofed
 and it did not have the additional spaces at the back
                                           MR.   COLLINS



so effectively the capacity of the Kop and indeed
the capacity of the Leppings Lane terraces was above
that which was designated when the Safety Certificate
eventually came into force.
      Sir, going back to the 1975 Act, by s2 it is provided
that:-.              .
     "Safety Certificates shall contain such terms and
     conditions as the local authority consider necessary
     or expedient to secure reasonable safety."

Then ss(2) sets out certain matters which must and certain
matters which may be con taine d in a Safety Certificate.
I should say that ss(2) has been repealed by the 1987 Act
but, of course, in relation to the Safety Certificate
which we have it was ss (2) which prevailed and, sir,
you will notice that one of the mandatory matters was
a specification of the max i m u m number of spectators to be
admitted to the stadium and a discretionary specification
under (b) of the maximum number to be admitted to different
parts of the stadium.
     And then by 2 (c) (iii) there was a mandatory provision
for terms and conditions as to the numbers, strength and
situation of any crush barriers.

     And then by ss (3) a requirement for records to be
kept of attendances, maintenance; plan by ss (4) and by
ss (5) a recognition that different terns and conditions
might relate to different activities to be held at the
stadium.   In fact, as we will see at Hillsborough it
was licensed for football mat ches and religious conventions
and one suspects that there might be slightly different
crowds at those two sorts of events.

     Section 3 deals with the application.       I would ask
you to note ss (3):
     "The local authority shall send a copy of an
     application for a Safety Certificate for a stadium
     to the Chief Officer of Police and the Building
     Authority for the area in which it is situated
     and shall consult them about the terms and conditions
     to be included in the certificate."

Now, sir, that has since been amended.     It was amended
as a result of the local gov ernme nt reorganisation in 1985/86
and the reason for the ame ndmen t is this, that at the
relevant time the Fire Ser vices were incorporated with
the local authority so there was no need to separate then
as a statutory consultee, but after the coming into force
of the local government reorgani satio n and effectively
the abolition of the South Yorkshire Council the Fire
Authority became a statutory consultee, so since 1st April,
1986 the Fire Authority has been included in ss (3) as an
independent statutory consultee.      That is the effect
of the legislation, I do not need, I think, to take you
                            18




                                             MR.   COLLINS



to the details of it; it will appear in the documents
as we go through them.

     Then s4, the local aut hority can amend or replace
and if it does by ss (3) of s4, s2 applies again, so you
have to go through the same procedures.

     By ss (8) of s4 one sees the same duty to consult
again extended as the result of the local government
reorganisation, as I have indicated.

     Then s5 deals with appeals.         That has been radically
amended by the 1987 Act,         the effect of the amendments
being that instead of an appeal to the Secretary of State
there is now an apped to the court, but one thing that is
to be noted is that there is reference there to an
interested party in ss (3) of s5 and a definition of
"interested p a r t y " in ss(5) which again now extends to the
Fire Authority but in any event would be extended probably
by virtue of (b) because a Fire Authority inevitably
was involved in ensuring compliance.

     Section 6, Regulations.       Section 6 ss (2):

     "The Secretary of State may by regulations make
provision for securing safety at spo r t s g r o u n d s ."

Sir, we have checked;     there are no such regulations.




                          /I do not think it is necessary.
                          19
                                                 MR. COLLINS

I do not think it is necessary for me to read you, I
think, any other - perhaps Section 11, Powers of Entry
and Inspection.

         "A person authorised by a local authority,
          Chief Officer of Police, building
          authority or Secretary of State nay
          enter and make inspection," etc.

      Then Section 12 is offences which include, as I
think I have already pointed out earlier in the Inquiry,
by 12(1)(d) it is a criminal offence to break any term
or condition of a safety certificate, contravene any
term or condition and, as we see by Subsection 3, it is
not a minor offence because it carries on indictment
 imprisonment for two years and an unlimited fine. As
1 say, sir, I think that is all I need refer to in
relation to this Act.   That has, as I have indicated,
been amended by the 1987 Act, that is the 1987 Fire
 Safety and Safety at Places of Sport Act 1987, an Act,
 of course which came into being as a result of Bradford,
 largely as a result of Bradford, and the Popplewell
 Inquiry.  It is Part 2 of that Act which matters which
 came into force on the 1st of January, 1988, and which
 amends the 1975 Act.  Effectively it extends the 1975
 Act to cover not only stadia but other .sports grounds
 and gives power, much wider power to certify the
 requirement or the need for safety certificates of
 sports grounds other than those which were originally
 referred to in Section 1 of the 1975 Act. We need
•not bother with that aspect of it but that was one
 of the major purposes of it.

     Section 19 subsection 2 deals with an amendment
of Section 2(2) and, as I said, sir, subsection 2(2)
had been repealed and you w i l l s e e that in 19(2)(a)
which substitutes for the original section subsection
2 of the 1975 Act, the provision there set out:

     "Insofar as an order under Section 15(a) below
      so requires as respects any class of sports
      ground a safety certificate should include
      such terms and conditions as may be provided
      for in the order."

 Otherwise the provisions of subsection 2 of Section
 2 of the Act are gone so there are no specific
 requirements as a matter of law to be included in
 the safety certificate but, as we shall see. the
 Home Office Guidance indicated that local authorities
 should effectively continue to include those same sort
 of provisions. Section 15(a) is inserted ---

      LORD .JUSTICE TAYLOR:..Sorry. ,This really .watered
 down the legal requirement, did it?
                         20
                                                  MR. COLLINS

      MR. COLLINS:    Well, it removed the need for there
to be the specific matters referred to in subsection 2
of Section 2.   It was not intended, I think, to be a
watering down.    It was intended simply to enable there
to be a wider discretion because it was a recognition
that the Act extended beyond stadia and therefore there
would have to be much greater flexibility in the prov­
isions that would be applicable to the various sorts of
sports grounds to which the Act was going to apply.     I
think it was, as I say, a recognition of flexibility or
the need for flexibility which led to the repeal. But
of course if one looks at Section 15(a) which is a prov­
ision inserted in the 1975 Act by subsection (c) of
Section 19(2) you will see that there is power given^
 to the Secretary of State to modify the provisions of
 the Act in their application to sports grounds and
 to make different modifications in relation to different
 activities and include such supplementary and transitional
 provision as he thinks expedient which gives him a power
 to make an order effectively providing for specific
 matters in relation to any ground. He has not actually
 made any orders under Section 15(a), at least not as far
 as we have been able to - I should say not as far as Lexis
 knows - but certainly there is that power given.

     Then by Section 21 there is added a subsection 2(a)
to Section 2 of the 1975 Act' that no condition of’ a
safety certificate shall require the provision of the
services at the ground of any members of a Police Force
unless the extent of the provision of their services is
reserved for the determination of the Chief Officer of
Police of the Force. What   that of course means is that
the   local authority cannot in a safety certificate
require the Chief Constable to do anything in particular,
specify that he must do something, it must be left to
his discretion as to precisely how he decides to carry
out any responsibilities.

      Sir, the only other section I think I need refer to
 is Section 25 which adds a new Section 10(b) to the 197 5
 Act which enacts:

     "It shall be the duty of every local authority
      to enforce within their area the provisions
      of this Act and the regulations made under it
      and for that purpose to arrange for the
      periodical inspection of designated sports
      grounds/' but nothing in this subsection to
      be ....
        "2.   In performing the duty imposed by sub­
         section 1 above so far as it requires
         designated sports grounds in their areas
 .... . *to .b.e inspected local authorities shall act
                          21

                                                 MR. COLLINS

    in accordance with such guidance as the
    Secretary of State may give them,"-and
    for the purposes of Subsection 1 above
    periodical means at least once in every
    12 months.

So it is made quite clear that it is the responsibility
of the local authority to enforce and, indeed, it is the
responsibility of the local authority to set the require­
ments, relevant requirements, in the safety certificate.

     Sir, you   will note by Subsection 2 of Section 10(b)
the reference   to guidance from the Secretary of State.
The Secretary   of State has given guidance and, sir, if
I may ask you   to turn somewhat out of order to page 423
of the bundle   you will there see the guidance that he
has given and   I think it is convenient to refer to it
at this stage   as we are looking at the statutory back­
ground .

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      These statutes apply England.
Wales and Scotland?

     MR. COLLINS: Yes, they do.   It does not extend to
Northern Ireland and does not extend to the Isles of Scilly
except by an order provided under the section.  I was
going-to say* it may be there are not a great number of -
stadiums.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Mo.

     MR. COLLINS:   Page 423 of the bundle is the letter
from the Home Office which includes the guidance. I
think we can look at 425 which is the statutory guidance.

    "The following guidance is given by the Secretary
     of State in pursuance of Section l0B(2)" and of
     course this has statutory effect or at least it
     has binding effect by virtue of the statute.
     "The local authority should be satisfied that
     inspections are carried out by a person or
     persons qualified." And in the Scope of the
     inspection, ".... should, where practicable,
     include .... certificates of testing and
     records .. .." which are set out.

 (b)  records of spectator attendances, accidents, maint­
enance, tests and checks on lighting, public address,
fire warning, etc, emergency evacuation and steward
training.

      Then 3, should normally include inspection of
 items, part of the ground where an accident or incident
•has ■occurredrecorded def-eet or deficiency, major
                                    22

                                                          MR. COLLIKS

remedial work, public stairways, egress routes, fire
fighting equipment, accumulation of litter, emergency
lighting, first-aid facilities and equipment. That
has some *relevance here.  Then 10 per cent of crash
barriers, balustrading and hand-rails for overt signs
of weakness which might signal the need for further
testing, remedial action or additional restriction on
number°of spectators, 10 per cent of terraces or
viewing slopes for general surface condition, even­
ness, slip resistance, anchorage, fastening of 10 per cent
of fixed seating, provision for the disabled. And then
where the inspection of a sample of matters gives rise
to serious concern for safety the authority should go
on to inspect all the crush barriers and so on. So if
you find a number you must go, with a badge, you go to
 inspect the rest.  Testing of equipment is then set out.

     If one goes over to page 428 one sees the Home
Office has included supplementary advice and
explanatory notes which of course are not part
of the statutory guidance under the Act but are - or
should be taken into account.  There sets out in para­
graph 2 the Objective of Inspections, to monitor the
suitability of the terms and conditions of the safety
certificate where issued in the light of any change in
the condition of the ground and, secondly, to assist
lccal authorities in enforcing compliance with the
terms and conditions of the safety certificate or
other notice served on the ground occupier.

                 "3. Local authorities may wish to note that
                  the inspection is not intended to shift
                  responsibility for spectator safety away
                  from the holder of any safety certificate
                  or ground occupier, but rather to help
                  see that he succeeds in achieving (and
                  maintaining) the safety standards intended
                  to be set by any certificate for the number
                  of spectators authorised to enter the ground
                  for a specified activity."

I assume what that is intended to indicate is that as a
matter of law of course   the responsibility for those
who attend at any stadium is that of the occupier of
the stadium.   He has the primary responsibility to
ensure their safety. But of course the local authority
has the power under the Act to require certain
provisions in the safety certificate_as a precondition
of allowing people to go to the stadium at all and,
of course, it has emergency powers which I have not
specifically referred to under Section 10 of the 1987
Act to issue effectively prohibition notices if
satisfied there are any immediate dangers which
 r   e   the stadium to be shut down or part of it not
         q   u   i   r   e
                         23
                                                MR. COLLINS

to be used at any specific time.  Sir, I_do no t t h i n k it
is necessary to read any more of this guidance in detail.
I would simply ask you to turn over to page 429 and
note paragraphs 6 and 7, that the concept of the inspection
team is encouraged.  First sentence of paragraph 7:

    "Local authorities are also asked to bear in
     mind the potential advantages of a team
     approach to inspections under the Statutory
     Guidance and the role of the fire authority,
     building authority and the Police.^ Local
     authorities in London and metropolitan counties"
   • - we are of cosurse in a metropolitan county -
     "may therefore wish to arrange at least one
     inspection per year to be carried_out with a
     representative of the fire authority in
     attendance," and so on.

  You will see, sir, from the approach of the South Yorkshire
 Council up until 1986 and thereafter the City Council
 that they*have approached it in that way with a team
 covering all the relevant disciplines.      I note while I
 am here°- someone behind me can do something about it,
 perhaps - my page 430 is merely a duplicate of page
 429 and there is thus an error in my bundle.      I do
 not know.whether that is the same in everybodys_...........

        So that is the statutory background. As I say, I
   hope it is helpful to have gone through that because at
   least then we all know the framework within which we
■" are supposed to be operating.

      May I go back to the beginning of these documents
 because what, as I said, I propose to do is to give
 effectively a historical exposition and we can see
 how the matter develops? May I say that the pagination
 to be taken is that at the top, in the middle of each
 page at the top? There are various other numbers,
 bundles from which they have come, that is the guiding
 one.




                              / Page 1 is
                          24
                                         MR. COLLINS

      Page 1 is simply Notes for the Guidance of Applicants
for Safety Certificates, but there is attached to it at
page 3 some notes - and I think this comes from Mr.
Eastwood’s file, so I think that is in the writing of
someone, I think,'in Mr. Eastwood’s employ or possibly
Mr. Eastwood himself;   I am not certain of that, but we
will no doubt discover it from Mr. Eastwood - and they
would appear to be notes made by reference to the then
Green Guide which, of course, would havebeen the 1976
edition.
      I do ask you to note that there is a reference to
ramps and the requirement that ramps should be less than
one in ten, in the middle of the page.

      LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:   Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS: Amongst various other references.
At the bottom there is a reference to an exit time of
eight minutes or less. At page 4 there is the Home
Office Circular on the coming into force of the 1975
Act.  I am not going to ask you to read through all of
it, but I would ask you to note on page 5, the first
full paragraph beginning "It is suggested..."

      "It is suggested in paragraph 3 of the. annex
      that local authorities will wish to keep in
      mind the guidelines set out in the Guide to
      Safety at Sports Grounds when framing the
      additions which they consider should be included
      in the safety certificate.  Some of these
      recommendations have been revised in the light
      of the experience gained in the prime guidelines
      during the past year or so. The guide has been
      reprinted and should be available well before
      the first designation order becomes effective.
      A copy will be sent to you as soon as it becomes
      available."

 And then they say that they are going to set out the
 amendments.   Then page 6, paragraph 3:

       "The local authority is required, by section 3(3)
       of the Act, to send a copy of any application for
       a safety certificate (general or special) to the
       appropriate Chief Officer of Police and building
       authority, and must consult them about the terms
       and conditions to be included in the certificate.
       In framing such conditions, local authorities will
       no doubt wish to keep in mind the principles or
       guidelines set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports
       Grounds.   In this connection local authorities are
        reminded that, as was pointed out in paragraph 6 cf
      • the Aimex toHftome Office Circular N o ;150/1975, this
        non-statutory document is not a set of requirements
        to be rigidly applied regardless of individual
                             25
                                              Mr. COLLINS

       circumstances.   The maximum flexibility should be
       maintained to take account of the different
       circumstances at individual grounds deriving from
       differences in such matters as age, size and mode
       of construction.  In this regard, it should also
       be noted that the Act provides that the terms and
       conditions should be such as 'necessary or expedient
       to secure reasonable safety1 and it would be
       unreasonable, even if it were practicable, to seek
       the absolute safety of everyone attending the sports
       stadium."

That of course, as a matter of common sense, must be right,
but it does create the problem that it may sometimes encourage
the best possible steps not to be taken.  Paragraph 4:

       "It is envisaged that there will be a good deal of
       consultation between the local authority and the
       stadium representatives in the process of drawing
       up the certificate conditions."

Does that substitute page 430?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  It has not got a page number at
the top.  It is 430, is it?

       Mr. COLLINS:   Yes,, that is the substitute for page
430.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Very well, I will just put it
in before it gets lost.

      Mr. COLLINS: We will reach it in due time. Now
back to page 6. I was coming on to paragraph 4, which
reads as follows:

        "It is envisaged that there will be a good deal of
        consultation between the local authority and the
        stadium representatives in the process of drawing
        up the certificate conditions.   In this way, if
        evidence is advanced that a ground is rarely filled
        to capacity, t)ie local authority may consider it
        proper to base its requirements on actual levels of
        attendance over a given period rather than on
        maximum capacity.   On the rare occasions on which
        a capacity crowd could be expected, separate provision
        might be made for this contingency()on the lines
        indicated in paragraph 7 below     "

 and so on.   Paragraph 5:

        "It will be apparent from theforegoing paragraphs,
        the form and content of a safety certificate is
        likely to vary according to the circumstances of
        the-individual case. Accordingly, a standard form
        of certificate would not be appropriate.   It m u s t ,
        however, contain full details of the terms and
                              26
                                              Mr. COLLINS

       conditions imposed including, in particular, the
       matters referred to in section 2(2) ..."

and you will remember those requirements.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS:  Sir, over the page, I draw attention to
paragraph 7, about two-thirds of the way down at the bottom
of that paragraph after the two insets:

       "In order to overcome this difficulty,   it would seem
       desirable for local authorities and stadium
       authorities to seek to work out in advance the
       modifications to the normal terms and conditions
       which might be appropriate to such occasions, e.g.
       the admission of increased numbers to certain areas
       on the condition that extra stewards and police are
       employed, that notice is given to the local authori t y ,
       and so on, and to provide for their incorporation in
       the general safety certificate."

That is to say, where you have activities of a fundamentally
different nature or likely to draw a fundamentally different
sort of crowd.   It was more relevant at the time that we
are thinking of, sir, because Sheffield Wednesday's normal
crowds at that time were, I think, in the region of 9,000,
 10,000 or 11,000, except for the semi-finals when they
would expect a full house, so there was some relevance in
 that approach, although it was not actually specifically
.a crowd.

        Then at page 8, paragraph 11:

        "In this connection, Regulation 7 requires a local
        authority, on issuing or amending a safety certificate
        or refusing to do so, to give notice to certain
        specified interested parties and also to advertise
        their action in the press.  It is regretted that it
        has been necessary to incur the trouble and expense
        of advertising,  but, since Section 5(5) of the Act
        is not specific in the definition which it provides
        of 'interested party', no other means could be found
        of ensuring that all persons who might validly claim
        to be 'interested parties' within the mean of the
        Act should be able to acquaint themselves with the
        local authority's decision ..."

   Sir,   the importance of that is this - and I refer to it
   for'this reason - that there is the right of an interested
   party to appeal against the grant or indeed the failure to
   grant a certificate in any particular case;            and, as we shall
   see as we go through the history, there was a failure to
.,.comply-,with ...those..Regulations, in r.elation, .f.or. .example,....to
   the extension to the Kop and the capacity, and in certain
   other respects.      There was indeed a similar failure, in so
   far as it was afailure - and I am not pre-judging that               at
                           27
                                             Mr. COLLINS

the moment - in relation to the putting in of the pens
on the terraces.  Therefore, it may be that those who
might have been interested in appealing were deprived
of the opportunity of so doing.  The Regulations referred
to are the ---

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  This is what I am looking for
at the moment.  Which are they?

        Mr. COLLINS:   I forget the number of them in 1975,
but   they were effectively   the procedural regulations on
how   to apply for certificates and how to appeal against
any   refusal.  They are referred to somewhere - forgive
me,   sir - in this Circular.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I would have thought they would
be.

      Mr. COLLINS:  But I have not noted, stupidly, precisely
where they are referred to.  It is page 5. It is the
paragraph under the one that I read:

        "Section 6(1)(b) of the Act enables the Secretary
        of State to make regulations authorising local
        authorities to determine the fees which may be charged
        in respect of ..."

and so on, and then it refers to a particular regulation.
It is paragraph 2 on page 4 where the reference is made
to the regulations:  SI 1976 No.1263.

•’      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS: We have not actually put them in the
bundle, sir. We have put the up-to-date Regulations in,
which are the 1987 Regulations.  They are, in fact, included
in the City Council bundle, which I do not know that you
have yet had and I do not think it is necessary to refer
to them specifically at this stage.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: All right.

      Mr. COLLINS:   Then on pages 9 to 11 there is a
specimen application form.  On page 13 there is an
indication of the amendments to the Guide. Paragraph 4
on page 13 says:

        "The main amendments in the attached list are as
        follows:

        a.   Exits from each area of spectator accommodation
             should enable the spectators to leave that area
             in 8 minutes or less.

        b.   Every spectator on the terrace should be within
             12 metres of a gangway or exit.
                         28
                                      Mr. COLLINS

     c.   Railings and fences dividing sections of the
          ground should be of the same strength as handrails.

     d.   Depending on the condition of the individual
          stand, the time specified for the evacuation
          may lie between the prescribed maximum and
          minimum.

     e.   A recommended distance from terrace to touchline
          is now given only for a terrace gradient of 30
          degrees or more.

     f.   The recommended flow rate from all sections of
          the ground has been increased to 60 persons per
          minute per unit of exit width except in the case
          of stands (where it remains at 40).

     g.   Recommended strengths are given for handrails in
          various situations.

     h.   Recommendations of the Working Party on Crowd
          Behaviour.

     5. It is again emphasised that the recommendations
     made in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds are
     essentially guidelines and should be applied to
     existing football grounds with the necessary .-degree...
     of flexibility to take account of the particular
     circumstances at individual grounds. The aim of
     securing a reasonable degree of safety should be.kept
     uppermost in mind;  it would be unreasonable, even
     if it were practicable, to seek the absolute safety
     of everyone attending a ground."

Sir, that is reflected in paragraph 8 of the latest edition
of the Green Guide in very similar language. Then there
is a list of the amendments.  I am not going to take you
 through those.  I go on to page 21. This is the Fire
Service Order, "Scheme for Peacetime Major Disasters".
I do not propose to take you through it in any detail,
but I ask you to note page 22, Section 5, that it is there
indicated that it is-the police who will normally act in
accordance with the major disaster scheme because they
will normally be the body to be first notified.

      "The Police have a responsibility on site to control
      and to co-ordinate aspects relating to the disaster
      so as to enable Emergency Services and other bodies
      to discharge their responsibilities.

      The extent to which each of these services is
      involved will depend upon the nature of the disaster,
      but, whatever form the incident may take and
      notwithstanding the size of the task facing each
      of :these services, the isenior pdlice officer on
      site will be responsible for control and co-ordination
      of action at the scene so as to enable the Emergency
      Services and other bodies to discharge their
      responsibilities".
                                       Mr. COLLINS

And the same point is made on page 24, Section 9(a):
"The Police are the co-ordinating service." On page 27,
a document produced by the South -Yorkshire County Council
on the implementation of the 1975 Act, there are set out
the primary areas of responsibility, and they say:

      "In order to avoid duplication and division of
      resources, the primary authority has been designated
      for the carrying out of inspections, reinspections
      and making final technical recommendations necessary
      using the headings given in the contents summary of
      the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds' with some
      additions.   Where there is an overlap of the spheres
      of control, the primary authority responsible must
      consult the other authorities concerned before
      finalising any recommendations.   The following
      abbreviations have been used ..."

and  then we see     various headings.  So far asingress to
the ground is concerned,  the primary authority's the
building authority in respect of 'structural' and to be
consulted are the Fire Brigade and the Police. On means
of escape, it is the primary authority of the Fire Brigade,
and those to be consulted are the building authority and
the police;    egress from the ground is similar. Then
terraces are dealt with:    Structural is the building
authoritv as' the primaryauthority, with the consultation,
of the Fire Brigade and the Police; means of escape is
the Fire Brigade with the consultation of the building
authority and the Police.

       So far as the building authority and the police are
 concerned, sir, you will recall that by sub-section 3 of
 Section 3, they have to be consulted on everything. The
 Fire Brigade does not specifically independently have to
 be consulted, but clearly it was sensible that they
 should be.

       Over the page, the primary authority for access for
 emergency vehicles is the Police with the Fire Brigade to
 be consulted;  t h a t i s the second one. Perhaps slightly
 oddly--
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    No reference to ambulance.

       Mr. COLLINS:   No reference to ambulance, sir,to
 be consulted.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    No.

        Mr. COLLINS:    Then a little lower down, "Terrace
 to touch-line distance" and the primary authority there
 is the Police.     "Estimation of safe ground capacity" has
 the •Council. 33.,the .primary...authority, in .consultation
 with the other three.      "Communications" has the Police
 as the primary authority in consultation with the Fire
 Brigade.    I think the rests speaks for itself, sir.
                                                    Mr. COLLINS

      Then we have a letter from the Council to the Chief
Constable, July 1978:

       "You will be aware that the County Council has
       delegated its responsibilities under the above Act *
       to the Fire Service Committee.  I enclose a copy
       of the draft Safety Certificate which I propose to
       submit to the Fire Service Committee at its meeting
       in September and shall be grateful for your comments.

       If approved, the draft will form the basis of the
       Safety Certificate to be carried by the County
       Council in respect of any stadium in South Yorkshire
       which may be designated under the Act ..."

I will be corrected if I am wrong, but I think that at that
stage there was no stadium in South Yorkshire which was a
primary designated stadium, that is to say, one in the
First Division at that time.  I do not think Sheffield
United was in the First Division.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Is there any particular reason
that you know of why the First Division should excite
interest in safety but not the Second?

      Mr.- COLLINS: I think probably because it was
 anticipated that larger crowds would come to the First
Division and it was recognised that it simply was not
feasible to expect everyone to do its updating at once
and it was a question of implementing it piecemeal.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Yes.

       Mr. COLLINS:  I      should say - and it must be obvious -
 that there are plenty      of documents in between but we have
 only picked out those      that are relevant, so you will find
 that I will jump some      in dates.

       The next document is a letter of 1st December 1978,
 the Club resolving Dr. Eastwood to act on their behalf
 in relation to the designation of the ground. You will
 recall that it was designated as from the 1st January,
 1979.
           Then we have the notes of the first meeting of the
  Officers' Working Party concerned with the safety
  certificate.       One sees that the representatives of the
 Working Party, apart from the Club, of course, include
  two from the Fire Service - I am sorry, three from the
  Fire Service - one from the Police; a representative
  of the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council;
  a representative of the Architect's Division of the
  South Yorkshire Council;          another police representative;
■ M r . 'Sher t iff of -the" City -of Shef f ield Metropoli tan -Dis t~ric t
  Council;       and then two more from the South Yorkshire
  County Council.         I think Mr. Vaughan was the lead so
   far as the South Yorkshire County Council was concerned
  at that time.
                         31
                                        Mr. COLLINS

      "1. On behalf of the Club, Mr. Whitehead" (who
      was the director) "welcomed the Working Party and
      gave the apologies of the Chairman. Mr. Whitehead
      stressed that the Club wished to see the Stadium
      used for big matches as regularly as possible.

      3.   During the course of the discussion, the
      following points were made:-

      (a) the Stadium had been used for many capacity
      matches over the years and its safety record was
      the equal of any in the country;

       (b)   if   the Code of Practice were to be applied
       literally, then there would probably be minor
       discrepancies such as in the width of the steps
       on the Spion Kop and in the width of the gangways
       and exits in the Stands;

       (c)  in order to form a base from which to work,
       all of the crush barriers would require to be
       tested initially, with up to 20% tested annually
       thereafter;

       (d)  it was likely that the fire risk in the North
       and West stands would be minimal, but the main
       stand'would "probably require more detailed attention:
       however, only a detailed inspection by the Fire
       Service would reveal the true position."

/Sir,   that, as far as the minimal fire risk in the West Stand
 is concerned, is of some importance, as we will see later;
 and that indeed was something that the Fire Service
 accepted, because it is basically concrete.

       "(e) the police would be happy with the existing
       position of the Police Control Centre, but felt
       the present structure would not meet their
       requirements;

       (f) the North and West Stands were modern structures
       but the main Stand had originally been built some
       50 years ago and there were now no records, which
       would mean a complete survey would be necessary;

       (g) the only activity which normally took place
       at the Stadium other than football was the
       annual Jehovah's Witness Rally, and an endeavour
       would be made to make provision for this in the
       General Safety Certificate ..."

 as we will see in due course it was.    I do not think I need
 to read the rest.

       Then the City write to the County Council in
 December, 1978, saying:
                                     Mr. COLLINS

    "Following the joint meeting ... it was agreed that
    Dr. Eastwood would prepare and submit a comprehensive
    survey report on matters relating to the above Act.

    You may consider it advisable before receipt of. that
    report that members of my staff make a joint survey
    of the premises under consideration with
    representatives of the Fire Service and possibly
B   the Police."




D




E




H                             /Then we have a note ....
                                   MR. COLLINS


     Then we have a note or a memo    from the Chief Fire
fficer to the Chief Executive:

     "I thank you for your letter dated 22nd December,
     1578,* and the copy letter of the Building Surveyor
     of the Sheffield Metropolitan District Council.

     It would seem essential that the officers of the
     County Council and Metropolitan District Council
     involved in the production of the general safety
     certificate required by the Sheffield Wednesday
     Football Club under the above Act, undertake a
     comprehensive survey of the ground. I feel sure
     that it would be beneficial to the Club if,_
     initially, each department acted in unison in
     this resDect rather than separately and I would
     make the*necessary arrangements with my officers
     for this to be achieved."

That is of course following up the suggestion made in the
previous letter and clearly a very sensible suggestion.

     Then a little lower down:

     "It is my opinion that the necessary comprehensive
     survey could not be undertaken satisfactorily
     Without plan drawings.  In this respect I refer
     to paragraph 1.3 of the 'green code1:

      "The problem of crowd safety at football grounds
      t_s complex and cannot be solved simply by ensuring
      that each component of a ground, such as stairs,
      passages or sections ox terracing, is satisiaci_0iy
      in itself.   The inter-relation of components is
      essential:   they should be compatible and combine
      to form a balanced unit".

      Following the receipt of drawings ± suggest, that
      Q‘Pr*icgi‘s meet to acrree on identification procedures.

And so on.   Then he says:

      "There should be further visits .... bindings
      from visits other than the survey referred to
      will be limited and if we involve ourselves
      in consultation with, the Club follov/ing tjie
      submission of Dr. Eastwooc's report v/ii_h limited
      information this could prove unfortunate in the
      long term."
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: What essentially, Mr. Collins
 are the issues which are going to arise on all these
 documents?
       1JR. COLLINS: Sir, the issues that are going^ to ari
 I think really are these:  a consideration as to whether
                               34


                                      MR. COLLIMS


the ground was, first of all v/hether the ground did conform,
to the Green Guide requirements.

      Secondly, insofar as the ground did not comply with
the Green Guide requirements, v/hether those failures were
causative.

       •Thirdly if, and to the extent that any such failures
we re causative, v/hether they were matters which were recognised
by any of the relevant Authorities.    If they were recognised
why was nothing done about it. If they were not recognised
why were they not recognised.

      I think that, putting it broadly, is the relevance of
this aspect of the matter.

       Sir, of course what we are not concerned with in going
through this is apportioning blame in any way or seeing
whether and to what extent any individual party was or nay
have been liable in perhaps civil terms, but what we are
concerned tc do is to see where there v/ere failures so that
we can, if we identify them, you sir can see whether there
are matters that need to be tightened up in due course
v/hether by legislation or in the Green Guide.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes, thank' you. ......

      MR. COLLINS:  Then we have Dr. Eastwood's report.
This is a report to the Club, January 1575. It is described
as an "Interim Report".  He says on page 36, second paragraph:

       "The green guide has been used as a basis for
       our calculations, although as with probably all
       existing grounds, it will not be possible to
       satisfy"all the recommendations in the guide.
       Reasonable compromise will be needed on the part
       of the fire officer and the police."

 Then he deals with the Xop and I ask you to note in the^ middle
 of 37.that of the barriers tested on the Kop, no less than
 35% proved to be defective in one way or another.


       He deals in some detail with the capacity of the Kop.
 I am not going to go through that in detail because we are
 not directly concerned with it although we are indirectly
 in some respects, but on page 40 (b) he deals with the
 Leppings Lane terrace.  He says:

       "The v/est terrace is not quite so well endowed
       with barriers as Spion Kop. The present layout
       is shown on the attached drawing 1610/2. Our
       measurements show a total of area or 1480 sc.m.
       but there are no gangways.   We feel that some allowance
       s   h   be made for circulation space as spe‘ctstors
               o   u   l   d


       have to move quite considerable horizontal distances
       to achieve good packing.   The full area would
                                                   35

                                                          MR. COLLINS


                         justify about 3000 spectators ...."

                    T fact if my arithmetic is correct 8192 is the precise figure
                    taking the 54/10 sq.m. but I don't guarantee my arithmetic.

                          ••__ _ V/e suggest it would probably be appropriate
                          to allow 10% as the equivalent of gangways giving
                          a capacity of 7200 spectators.    The barriers should
               B          be designed to match this figure approximately."

                    Si r , of course as is perhaps obvious, tnat does not include
                    the'north-west area that we have heard about.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  It does include, does it, the
                    south-west corner, does it?

                          MR. COLLINS:  Yss, it does.  It includes all along rron
                    the south-west to the edge of the West Stand, tne ilortn end.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  It just does not cover what has
                    been called the "cantilever" bit.  Is that right?

                           MR. COLLINS: That is right. That is my understanding^
                    t   am aot" sure whether it includes that bit Mr. Poole is pointing
                D   out.    I think it doesn't but I will check.

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     including lower level of norLh-
                    west.
                            MR. COLLINS:  I beg your pardon, it does include that.
                     I -am wrong.  It is just the cantilever bit.
                E           "The barriers should be designee to match t_his
                            figure approximately.

                                 shaded area on drawing 1610/2 is uhau whiCn
                            ma,r be counted if the existing barriers are Oi
                            Class A. About 15 of the existing barriers are
                            likelv to need strengthening to achieve this
                            standard.   Even with this strengthening only
                            4 300 spectators-could be accommodated, representing
                            a'loss of nearly half.   We presume this would be
                            unacceptable.

                            The extra barriers required to achieve approxi­
                            mately 7200 capacity are shown in red on the
                            second copy of drawing 1610/2. You may feel that
                            some of the proposed new barriers which are close
                            to the entrances might restrict the passage of
                            spectators undesirably.  In that case they could
                            be omitted.

                             "The three exits ....

                      That of course would be the three tunnels, one at each end
                      and one in the middle.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                               36

                                        MR. COLLIHS



      "The three exits have a total width of about
      11.5m which would permit about 1250 people per
      minute to leave the ground.  Thus the stand
      could empty in about six minutes which is, very
      satisfactory.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Somebody has written:       "What about
perimeter gates"?

        MR. COLLINS:  Indeed.  It is important       and we shall see
tl*
  1rouc:h consideration or exit flows i>roiu the     terraces, tnc.u
the oerimeter gates have not been taken into         account,  it
has been assumed in all considerations, even         alter the ....

      LOAD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  No, no, I think we are talking
about perimeter gates on the pitch.

      MR. COLLINS:  Even after the construction of the racial
fences that the perimeter gates would not be taken into
account in assessing exit times.

      I am told that my learned junior Hr. Goldsack confesses
to that note and thus it is not a note which is on the original
document, so that can perhaps be expunged.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.

      MR. COLLINS:     It continues:

       "The guide suggests that everyone on a terrace
       should be within 12m of a gangway or exit. There
       are no gangways and some spectators will be 25m
       from an exit.  But we feel this is or no con—
       seouence as movement horizontally along tnis
       terrace will be easy and quick."

That of course, sir, is of importance because there we re t!hen
no radial fences.

       Then there is a reference to the north-west corner.

       "Unfortuantely, the crush barriers in this area
       were shown to be very inadequate when tested
       in 1973."

 They did not test any others because they thought they were
 in such poor condition and they are liable to collapse.
 He goes on:
       "Assuming that the barriers are strengthened
       it will be seen from the drawing 1610/2 that they
       also need considerable supplementation.            The
    „ -scheme shown -on the s.eoorid ..copy o .a. .this .dru.*/iriQ
       does''not quite justify the whole area being taken
       in the calculations.    Eut it would be reasonable
                                        MR. COLLINS



     to count say 2900. This would bring the total
     standing at the Leppings Lane end to 10,100."

I think I need to refer no more to his Interim Report.    1 go
on to page 48'which is the report which I think was procuced
or in the form it was produced to the Council. Page si ana 5-
deal with the VJest Terrace and you v/ill see, sir, that it
contains in a rather shorter form of the material that we have
looked at in the Interim Report.

      "•The west terrace has a total of 1430 sq.m. buc
      there are no gangways.   We feel that some
      allowance should be made for circulation space as
      spectators have to move quite considerable
      horizontal distances to achieve good packing.
      The full area would justify about 8000 spectators,
      but we suggest it would probably be appropriate
      to allow 10% as the equivalent of gangways
      giving a capacity of 7200 spectators. The
      barriers should be designed to match this figure
      approximately.   Those barriers which cannot
      withstand the higher force should be appropriately
       strengthened, and extra ones provided where
       necessary."

p 0 £eals with the extras on the plan.

      nrnv-,0 three exits have a total widuh; of 11.5m
      which would permit about 1250 people per
      minute ... coulc be emptied in about six
      T.inutes which is very satisfactory.

       The guide suggests that everyone on a terrace
       should be within 12m ....

 The same point we saw before.

       Pace 57   is a record of   the   meeting following the
 submission of   that report of   the   Officer WorkingParty.

       Page 58 at the top:

       "It was AGREED that the plans supplied had
       inaccuracies and inadequacies.  In particular, tney
       lacked indications of cross sections, profiles,
       etructural stability, position of handrails <=.nd
       balustrades ___    Where appropriate, these could,
       as an alternative, be described in a Report.

       The County Council's hope was that, in vie;? of
       ignited resources in the Architectural &
                                       MR. COLLINS


      Sir, that is I think a real problem, the question as
to who in these instances should be responsible for the
detailed drawings.
      All I can say is that I have noted that in the Liverpool
Certificate I have seen the drawings appear to have been done
by the Local Authority, whereas here of course they were
drawings which were produced by the Club. I am not sure tnat
it need make any difference.

      Then "General

      It was recognised that the criteria set out in
      the Home Office "Guide to Safety at Sports
      Grounds (Football)" required new work or re-_
      construction to be to a standard not lower tnan
      the standard set out in the Guide, and that in
      existing situations the criterion was that of
      a reasonable degree of safety. As the Guide
      stated, it would be unreasonable, even if it
      were practicable, to seek the absolute safety
      of everyone attending a ground.

      With these factors in mind, both the Fire Service
      and the Police felt that the flow of spectators
      was the most important criteria to be adoptee.
      Whilst not disagreeing with this viewpoint, the
      Building Authority suggested it would be
      useful to know the reasoning behind the
      recommendation in the Guide that gangways should
      not be less than i.l metres wide. The County
      Council AGREED to try to find this information
      out, and the Fire Service AGREED they would
      contact their colleagues in other areas who had
      been involved in the Certification process to
       ascertain how nearly the 1.1 metre gangway
       r e c o m m e n d a t i o n had been observed in existing
       situations in their respective areas.

       At the request of the Fire Service, the County
       Council also AGREED to try and find out if there
       was any general recommendation on reduced
       admission if a ground were used at a night time
       instead of during the day time."

 "•■’hen over the page reference to the Kop. The third last jara
 on page 59 may be of some interest, with reference to the Pol

       "For the purposes of crowd control, the Police
       suggested there should be some form of lateral
       separation.  The Working Party AGREED, and it was
       suggested that three metal fences sited centrally
       in the blocks (as opposed to adjacent to the
       gangways) should be provided, with acess between
       each limited to a padlocked gateway under the
       control of the Police."
    c\
                                                    39
V
                                                            MR. COLLINS


                               t don't think that ever actually was put into erfect
                        although it appears to have been agreed to in the documentation,
                        but is oerhaps of some interest because it shows the Police
                        th^nkinc, very understandable in connection with crowd control,
                        that* it"is easier to control .crowds on terraces if you are aole
                        to split them up into smaller units.

                              It is perhaps worth saying here that we would suggest
                   B    that the Police input is fully understandable and reasonable
                        because what they must have most in their mind is the question
                        of disorder and crowd control.  That is at this scage or
                        proceedings when we are concerned with the input into the
                        requirements of the Safety Certificate.                —

                              Insofar as the Police requirements or input on crowd
                        control contain elements which for other reasons are unsafe,
                        cuch as i:or example questions of capacity, questions c, egress
                        and cuestions of the mechanics of packing, that we woula
                        suggest was primarily for the other parties who were involves
                        in"the certification process.

                              So at that   stage we would suggest that it is as I say
                        not unreasonable   for"the Police input to be very much angled
                        or towards crowd   control, which after all is their expertise.
                   D
                               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: How it is resolved in the    end
                         is a very difficult equation.

                               I1R. COLLINS: That is a matter for the whole forking
                         Partv and obviously other matters are material and at the
                         end of the day it is of course the Local Authority that has
                         the responsibility of deciding what are the requirements tr.at
                    E    ought to be in any Safety Certificate having of course taken
                         the appropriate advice.

                               Then "(d) The West Terrace

                               jrj view of the lacK of depth of tnis terrace,
                               the Club's offer ----" in fact it is I think I
                               am~right in saying 13.1m from the mouth of^the
                               tunnel as it were, fron the bottom of^the V;est
                               Stand to the front of the terrace.     "±n view
                               of the lack of depth of this terrace, the Club's
                               offer to reduce the spectator limit to 7,200,
                               and the discharge time of 6.6 minutes, the
                               r,-forking Party AGREED that it would be unreasonable
                                j_o insist that gangways or additional e-cits must
                               be provided.
                                However, even if the existing crush barriers were
                                to pass the tests, the Working Party AGREED rnac.
                                the barriers v/ould require special attention in
                                view of the apparent sharp edges, corrosion,
                                etc."




    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                           40

                                   HR. COLLINS


      Nov; it is not entirely clear, but you will recall from
Mr. Eastwood's report, certainly from his Interim Report although
it"was not contained in the final report, he was saying that
as the crush barriers stood, without any new ones, the figure
of 7,200 should go down to something in the order of 4,3 00.

      Now unless I am rais reading this, it would seem that
the Working Party agreed to the 7,200 capacity without the
need to make any modifications to the crush barriers other
than attention about sharp edges, corrosion etc., that is to
say the Working Party was not requiring the erection of further
crush barriers, so that they were accepting apparently a breach
of the Green Guide on the capacities- in relation to the
existing configuration of tne barriers.

      I d on’t think I need read any raors of that Working
Party, save to era;/ your attention to page 52 which sets oat
the capacity of the ground, where we see:

      "If additional exits are not provided cn the
      Spion Kop, this will have the effect of
      reducing the ground capacity to 45,140 ...."




      LOUD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Can you give me, a know     am
going ahead, the date of the addition to the l\op and the
roofing?




                        COLLINS:   Sir, 1936 ---
                                            MR. COLLINS

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, 1986.   I am not sure, off the
top of my head, when it was completed.   No doubt someone
will tell me but I think it is August or September, 1986 -
anyway in time for the season commencing 1986/87.
     Sir, page 63 is a letter indicating acceptance by
the Health Authority of advice on First Aid and medical
facilities.   A note on the next page from the Chief fire
Officer to the Chief Executive indicating timing of
meetings and the last paragraph:
     "However, because of evident differences of
     opinion on me?ns of escape, the original time
     and date of 10.00 a.m. on 30th March ... is
     being retained to discuss these differences, prior
     to meeting the Club."
     Sir, I think those differences relate to the Kop,
in fact, so that it may be that that is not of importance
as was thought.
     Page 65, note of a me.eting of 30th March.           Paragraph
3:
     "Report.
      General
      The County Council had contacted the Home Office
     but had been given little information additional
     to that contained in their various Circulars.
     Basically, they had said that anynew work or
     reconstruction had to be to a standard not lower
     than that set out in the Guide.   However, the
     maximum flexibility had to be maintained in the
     case of existing structures and differences in
     such matters as age, size and mode of construction
     had to be taken into account."
 I am tempted to say it sounds like the usual helpful
 advice.
      "The Fire Service had contacted four other Brigades with
      designated grounds, and only in one case had the
      recommendations of the Guide been strictly adhered
      to"
 which may or may not be a matter of concern.    And then
 there is reference to the Kop, third paragraph:
      "The Fire Service queried the exact form of
      the lateral separation discussed at the meeting
      on 12 t h F e b r u a r y , as this wouldnaturally have
      a bearing on the means of escape recommendations.
      After .dis.c.u,s.s.ion» 4-t was .agreed .that...the metal
      fences should not be of the climb-proof type
      and it was not intended that they should obstruct
      the gangways and that in consequence the padlocked
      gateway recommendation should be dropped.
                                            MR. COLLINS

     "However it was agreed that it was still desirable
     to seek 3 x 2 central barriers but if the Club
     really resisted the suggestion, 2 x 2 could reluctantly
     be conceded..  The Bui lding Authority stressed that
     whatever barriers were provided would have to pass the
     appropriate strain tests."

     Sir, that is of interest and importance because it
illustrates the point I was seeking to.make-earlier that
the Police input is on the crowd control;    they wanted the
lateral barriers, but here we have the Fire Service saying,
"Well, wait a minute, because that has a clear effect upon
egress and you have got to take that into acount." And
then:
     "The fact that the height of many of the existing
     crush barriers was below the recommendation in the
     Guide, in some cases well below, was pointed out
     by the Building Authoirty.   The corrosion point
     mentioned at the last meeting was also reiterated.
     It was agreed that these points must be drawn to '
     the Club's attention."

Again I refer to that bec ause on the West terraces as
we shall see, the height was and still is below the
recommendations in some cases in the Green Guide.
     "The West Terrace

     As well as the con dition of the crush barriers
     mentioned at the last meeting, the Building
     Authority drew att ention to the poor condition
     in places of the ter racing in small areas near
     to the stand.   The cross-fall on the steps on the
     north-west corner exit would also require attention
          The height of the crush barriers mentioned in
     regard to the Spion Kop also applied."

And then on page 67 at the bottom, "General Requirements” --

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am bound to say I do not myself
quite see how having the crush barrier   at any particular
height is going to --     it cannot be ideal for everybody;
we are not all --

     MR. COLLINS:    We are not all the same height.    No,
I think, sir, and I emp hasise that this is my view and
no-one else's at this stage, as I understand it the purpose
in not having them too low is that if they are too low
for an average person it means that they operate as a
sort of fulcrum - if you come up against them, if there
is any pressure behind, you tip over, if they are below
the centre of gravity of the body.    If they are too high
and are at chest level, as it were, or perhaps even higher
for smaller people then there is liable to be damage to
the lungs and the ribs up here and it may be thought that
if they catch you in the stomach, that   is the least vulnerable
part, and the average stomach or lower abdomen of the a\erage
                                                     43

                                                            MR. COLLINS

                    person expected to be on a terrace comes at about 1.1m,
                    but whether that is right or not, I do not know.   That
                    appears to be consistent with Paragraph 110 of the Green
                    Guide, although that says:
                         "In order to locate t'he top rail against that part
                         of the body most able to tolerate pressure.    The
                         height of crush barriers should be between ..."
               B
                    I do not know the part of the body most able to tolerate
                    pressure is necessarily there but th± appears to be the
                    thinking.
                         Bottom of 67 (h):
                         "As well as the Fire Service pointing out that
                         the present temporary structures used for police and
                         first-aid purposess would need removal from a
                         means of escape point of view if the capacity of
                         the North Stand was not to be reduced, the Police
                         stated that they were ready to discuss with the Club
                         the facilities they would require.    Briefly, they
                         envisaged a permanent structure almost twice as large
                         as the existing temporary structure..."
               D
                    and so on.
                         "So far as First-Aid was concerned, the Sheffield
                         Area Health Authority had confirmed their willingness
                         to ..."
                    assist with Dr. Bailey.
                         Page 69, minutes of the next meeting:
                         "Mr. McGee" - the Club Chairman, I think - "welcomed
                         the representatives, and stressed that the Club were
                         ambitious and wanted to make the Stadium the best in
                         Europe.  Crowds had been averaging 11,000 this season
                         and, viewed purely as a football operation, the
                         Club had been losing money since 1967. Commercial
                         ventures had made the Club viable and it was hoped
                         to expand this side of the Club's activities."

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: What does that mean?    Is that
                    letting off the gymnasium or what other commercial - - - ?

                          MR. COLLINS:   May be that but I think largely that
                     if they could attract other events - pop concerts, I
                     suppose, is the sort of example, or whatever.    Obviously
                     if you have a sell-out you get more money.    And Semi-
                     Finals, in the football context.

                         .And .then .at,.7.1.:

                H         "B. West T e r r a c e .

                          It was agreed -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                 44

                                                                      MR. COLLINS

                        1. That the Club's proposals for the installation
                        of additional barriers and the reduction in capacity
                        ...without the need for additional gangways should
                        be implemented."
                    So here we do have the additional barriers.  It may be
                    that I was wrong in the earlier one; it certainly was not
                    specifically referred to but it is now.
               B
                         "2. That the question of the cross-fall on the steps
                         on the north-west corner exit" -

                    that I do not think we need worry about             And then on
                    page 73:
                         "It was agreed that consideration would be given
                         to the installation of an improved public address
                         system, with the Police having a c c e s s ... together
                         v/ith its use as a fire alarm system, subject to
                         an emergency back-up."

                        "First Aid Facilities
                         2. The Police would supply the Club Secretary with
               D         a copy of their initial sketch plan showing the
                         facilities they wished to see and that Dr. Bailey
                         would inspect the existing ...and then discuss
                         future facilities."

                         "Future Action
                         The Club stressed that they wished to carry out as
                         much work as possible before the issue of the
                         Certificate by the start of the 1979/80 Season."


                    Then the next meeting, 18th April, 1979, page 74, over
                    on 75, although it refers to the Kop it is referrable,
                    too, because it deals with the height of the barriers.
                    Paragraph 6:
                         "It was agreed that the question of the height of
                         some of the crush bar riers be considered again
                         after it was seen which of them failed on testing.''

                    I suppose there is not much point, it is true, in dealing
                    with_the height of a barrier which is going to be replaced
                    because it fails anyway.   I imagine that was what was in
                    mind.   Again, the same in Paragraph 2 in respect of the
                    West Terrace.
                         The   bottom of page 76 - "Communications":

                         •*'.. :u p g r a d i n g . -.. It was agreed ttrat the Police
                          should have the over-ride facility...               Dr. Eastwood
                H         u n d e r t o o k to look into the possibility of achieving
                          this through radio rather than wire means."

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                            45

                                           MR. COLLINS

        "Police and First Aid Facilities

        The Police stressed that it was essential that
        there was no gap in the provision of Police
        facilities when the temporary structure was
        replaced by the permanent structure. With this
        in mind, they were happy for the safety aspects
        to receive first priority and to wait for the
        1980 close season for the work to be carried out.
        It was understood that Dr. Bailey had not yet
        completed his investigations."

Then 1st May, 1979, we have the Building Surveyor of
Sheffield City's input into the certificate and on the
West Terrace he refers to the downward slope of the exit
steps and:
        "2. Limitation of numbers as agreed between Police
        r epresentatives and club.

        Subject to these twp points this area is acceptable."

Then under "General" at the bottom of 79, Paragraph 1, he
refers to:
        .."All crush ..barriers, balustrade walls, fences and
railings to be tested and replaced or strengthened where
n e c e s s a r y ."

      Then there is the input from the Fire Service Department
'although page 81 is headed, "South Yorkshire County Council"
 it is in fact from the Fire Department of the County Council.

     You will see, sir, that in relation to the Kop the
gates on to the perimeter fence were to be taken into
account in consideration of exit points because Paragraph
2   :
        "To secure a crowd capacity of 16,850 people the
        following work to be undertaken, in addition to
        item 1.
        (a) Provide four gates of at least 1.1 metre wide
        from the radial gangways to the perimeter track of
        the ground area."

Because they were to be used as exit gates, they were
required to be the 1.1 metres because that is the width
in the Green Guide, the minimum width for gates which
are to be used as means of egress. We will hear in due
course that the gates in the perimeter fence on the
Leppings Lane end were not of 1.1, they were in fact under
1 metre width 0.8 something or other and 0.9 something or
o t h e r • res’pec-tively. 'Anti then -(b) '- pro visio n -of-am
additional exit.
                                                46


                                                                     MR. COLLINS

                    Then, at the bottom of page 82:

                          "West and North West Terrace.
                          The exit routes from these parts of the ground
                          are satisfactory"

                    and, as I emphasise, not including the perimeter fence.
               B
                          The Fire Brigade also refer at the bottom of 83:

                          "Training of Staff.

                          To ensure that the staff are conversant with the
                          safety precautions they will be expected to administer,
                          a meeting can be arranged with this Department
                          suitable to all parties."

                    And on 84:
                          "Access for emergency Vehicles

                          Adequate roads should be provided to ensure that
                          speedy and direct access can be obtained by emergency
                          vehicles to all exterior parts of the stadium.

                          2. Ensure that parked vehicles will not obstruct
                          emergency vehicles on these access roads."

                    Crowd capacity is then set out in somewhat more detail:
                          "The following numbers are considered to be
                          satisfac tory to the Fire Authority providing that
                          the recommended work as detailed above is carried
                          out"
                    and then we see the two figures for the West Terrace,
                    North West Terrace, 7,200 and 2,900 making a totalof
                      ,
                    10 100   .
                         Then the Police input at page 85.   The requirements
                    the Chief Constable requires are existing crush barriers
                    to be tested to a load of 400 lb./ft., the maximum required
                    by the guide to the Act.   This is to be done immediately and
                    thereafter 20% of the crush barriers chosen at random to
                    be tested.
                          "2. Vertical barriers be placed on the spion Kop
                          to prevent lateral mov ement of the crowd.

                           3. Gateways in the exi sting perimeter fencing be
                          realigned with the gangways of the Spion Kop.

                          4. The Police have t h e facility to override the
                          public address system.

                          5. A suitable Police room be provided.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  HR. COLLINS

    "Representatives of the Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Club have accepted these proposals without demur and,
    with the exception of item 5, will be carried out
    during the close season of 1979.   The police room
    will be provided during 1980."

And then there is a sketch over the page of the required
police room.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:              But "2" never was.
     MR. COLLINS:   "2" never was, so far as one can t e H
and there is no indication in the documents that I have
seen indicating why it did not happen; it just did not
happen for some reason.
     Then, 31st May, 1979, this is Dr. Baily indicating
what he would require, after consultation with St. John's
and over the page on 88 he sets out the requirements:

     "Structure
     The existing facilities are much below an
     acceptable standard and I would suggest the
     Club consider providing a more permanent
     structure which is not likely to require upgrading
     for a very long time."

     "Treatment A r e a .
     The Treatment Area should be sufficient to acc om­
     modate two or three patients at any one time and
     consider ation should be given to the needs for
     privacy ...bearing in mind that the three patients
     may well be lying on couches."

Supply of hot water and cold water.
     "Storage facilities are required for six stretchers
     two sets of wheels for stretchers, blankets and
     other bed linen.

     "Equipment.
      The following is a m i n i m u m list to provide a basic
     service.    Treatment couches with lift up ends,
     -two or three in number depending on space available
      and/or number of cubicles, if the accommodation is
      cubicled.   Six stretchers.         Two sets of stretcher
      wheels.   20 blankets.         6 pillows.   One Minute-Man
      resuscitator.

    -Telephone F a c i l i t i e s .

      A telephone facility would appear to be basic in
      1979.   This can be achieved by an extension from
      the main switch, or sharing with Police."
                           48


                                       MR. COLLINS

     Sir, it is perhaps interesting to recall that despite
that there is or was at the afternoon in question,
according to the evidence we have heard, no Minute-Man resusc-
itator and there was no telephone either in the-room.
I am not sure whether we have heard specifically about
the number of blankets, etc.   There were, I think, six
stretchers, is the evidence and two sets of wheels.
     And then at the bottom, "Ambulances":

     "Access for ambulances at the present time appears
     to be adequate but must not be overlooked in any
     redesigning.   It is understood that fe+ie perimeter
     track is insufficient in dimension to easily run
     the ambulance around the football pitch."

      Then the letter from the County Council in June
sending the comments to the Club in the form of a schedule
which is at pages 91 following.    92 (e) refers to the
limitation of numbers as agreed and additional barriers
as indicated on the plan.    "L" on 94 requires training of
staff, safety stewards.    "0" on 95 requires the access
and "R" requires or sets out, really, in extenso the
requirements that Dr. Bailey set out that we have already
looked at.    And then the numbers capacity is set out
at 97.

     Then on 98 we have an internal memo from Eastwood
& Partners.   In fact that is a memo written I think by
Mr. Strange who was the gentleman in Eastwoods who was
largely concerned, together with Dr. Eastwood, dealing
with the football club.

     There is a reference to perimeter fence found the
pitch wants testing and strengthening.    Is it "Don" or
"Dan Sherriff", I am not sure which "wants to witness
tests."   Mr. Sherriff is or was the South Yorkshire
County Council or was he the City Council, I forget
which.   City Council.

     "Barriers, General.

      Replace barrier 8 1 , . far too low, only about 730
high.    OK had already ins truct ed this one to be
removed.    Corrosion, all dangerous items to be repaired
that could cause injury, e.g. caps on ends of corroded
tubes" and so on.

     Then we have the Working Party, 12th November --

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Then it adds, "Thin plates welded
over corroded gusset plates."

     MR. 'CHLL'INS: Indicating what work had been carried
out.   At (e) on page 100 you will see that the West Terrace
requirements had been carried out.    (q) 102, "Police
Facilities and First Aid Facilities":
                                            MR. COLLINS

    "As agreed, a suitable permanent Police Room would
    be provided in 1980.   Club explained that it would
    be preferable from a building point of view for both
    the police and first aid facilities to be in the same
    overall building, although physically separated.
    The police representatives reserved their position
    on this point, pending the outcome of detailed
    discussions with the Club.
     The question of parking for both police and St. John's
     personnel purposes would also need to be looked at
     in detail."
And then "T" over the page, 103:
     "The Club were anxious that the Certificate should
     be in force by the derby game with Sheffield United
     on Boxing Day morning."

Meeting of the 18th December, the purpose, in "1", to
check that outstanding matters referred to in the Note
of the meeting had been completed or were in the course
of completion.  Various minor matters.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Mr.   Duckenfield was in on ttiat.

     MR. COLLINS:    Yes, he was.  "Major matters, emergency
lighting and South Stand structure" which we do not, I think,
need to go into and then we have the certificate itself
on page 107, the terms and conditions, dated, you will see,
21st December, 1979.
     "3. The terms and conditions hereby imposed are
     those which the South Yorkshire County Council consider
     necessary or expedient".- that is, of course, following
     the wording of the Act."
It comes into force on 21st December for an indefinite
period, sub-paragraph 6.
Page 110, I am not going to read through all the general
terms and condition's.    (3) is the numbers. If we
look at page 117, and may I emphasise, sir, that this
is the certificate still in force, unamended.  117,
Schedule (3) Part 1, crowd capacity, note the Kop, 16850
and, of course, the West Terrace and North-West Terrace
7,200 and 2,900, and those are the figures we have seen
in tfte reports hitherto.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   So there was no change made
in 1986 when the Kop was enlarged.
     MR . COLLINS:         Not to the Safety Certificate.  As we
will see, there was a note which indicates the County
Council a p p r o v e d it but it never was amended on the
Safety Certificate and never formalised.


                         /(3 ) we have dealt with.
                                                50


                                                                        MR. COLLINS

                    3 we have dealt with.     Then 5(2).

                          "If whilst the Certificate is in operation it
                           is proposed to alter or extend the Stadium
                           or any of its installations in a manner men­
                           tioned in Section 8 o'f the Act the Holder
                           shall at least 21 days before thecarrying out
                           of the proposal give notice in writing of the
              B            proposal to the Councy Council."

                    I did not refer you to Section 8. I ought perhaps to
                    have done because that requires or that states, 1975
                    Act of course-, if while a general safety certificate
                    is in operation with respect to a stadium it is proposed
                    to alter or extend that stadium or any of its install­
                    ations and the alteration or extension is likely to
                    affect the safety of persons at the stadium the holder
                    of the certificate shall before the carrying out of the
                          Subsection 1 in particular requires notice when
                    it is proposed to alter the entrances to or exits from
                    the stadium and so on.    Over the page ....

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is relevant simply
                    to the extension of the Kop, is it?
               D
                         MR. COLLINS:   No, because on the face of it
                    putting in the radial fences would be an alteration
                    within Section 8 because ....

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Not an extension but an
                    alteration.

                         MR. COLLINS:   .... it would affect the safety
                    or potentially affect safety.  I may say it is not
                    suggested the club did not give the necessary notice
                    to the local authority in respect of all these
                    extensions.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.

                           MR. COLLINS:   . Or alterations.    6(1).

                          "The Holder shall agree \*ith the Chief Constable
                            at least 21 days (or such shorter time to which
                            the Chief Constable may consent) prior to every
                            Specified Activity the methods of admission to
                          — be employed .... and (in relation to a Football
                     •:     Match) the methods to be used for the segretation
                            of home and visiting supporters.

                            (2) The Holder shall refuse admission to, or
                            evacuate spectators from, the Stadium or any
                            p a r t ' thereof at a-ny 'time before o r ’
                                                                       during a
                            Specified Activity upon receiving instructions
                            so to do from the Chief Constable.




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                           51


                                                    MR. COLLDIS

    7. The Holder shall at his oxm expense
    arrange for the attendance at every Specified
    Activity of an adequate number of Police
    Officers to secure the orderly and lawful
    behaviour of the spectators and the number of
    Police Officers shall be agreed between the
    Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21
    days before.”

Note the requirement to secure orderly and lav/ful
behaviour because that appears so far as the safety
certificate is concerned to be the role of the Police.

    “8(1).  Subject to such interim arrangements as
     may be agreed by the County Council the Holder
     shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to
     the satisfaction of the County Countil a
     suitably equipped First Aid Room." Adequately
     signed, capable of being lit by emergency power.

    "(2) The Holder shall ensure that during every
     Specified Activity a physician employed or
     retained by the Holder is available to attend
     at the First Aid room if required and that his
     whereabouts are lcnov/n to those in the Police
     Central Control Room at the Stadium."

Sir, there was in fact a doctor present, as we will hear
in due course. We have not yet received direct evidence
about it. A Dr. Purcell.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       He is the club's doctor?

     MR. COLLINS:     The club's doctor.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Who we see on the video?

     MR. COLLINS: Indeed.   Whether his whereabouts
were known to those in the Police Central Control Room
I am not sure.  I am not sure we have had any specific
evidence about that.

    "The Holder shall arrange for the attendance
     at every Specified Activity of such numbers
     of qualaified First Aid assistants as the
     County Council shall require but without
     prejudice to the foregoing the Holder shall
    "ensure that at every specified activity there
     is at least:one First Aid' assistant for every
     2,000 spectators."

Then the question of stewards.         The holder shall■arrange
for .the .attendance... a.t eve^y;:specified .activity, of .such
number of Safety Stewards as may be required by Part 2
of. Schedule 3. Page 117 gives the minimum number of
    SS NN*
I   \
                                                         52


                                                                                          MR. COLLIUS

                             stewards to be required.    That is 26 for the exits.  That
                             is of course the exits from the ground to the public roads
                             outside or to the road down by the river. 26 to the main
                             exit, a Control and •direction of spectators leaving the
                             stadium 38.   One per vomitory.   Patrolling the stadium
                             and dealing with any emergency 2. And they should be
                             distributed at each main exit 26, South Stand 12. West
                             Stand 8j North Stand 18, under South Stand 2. And
                         B   going back to paragraph 9, they shall be:

                                  "(a) fit and capable to carry out their duties
                                   (b) properly trained and instructed (c) ident­
                                   ifiable by dress (d) provided with written
                                   instructions as to their general duties in order
                                   to carry out the followingt manning of exits,
                                   control and direction of spectators entering,
                                   using or leaving the stadium" - which of course
                                   may be of importance - "patrolling the stadium
                                   and dealing with any emergency including raising
                                   an alarm and extinguishing any small fire."

                             Then page 113, paragraph 14, sub. 3, there is a requirement
                             that there should be provided to the satisfaction of the
                             Chief Constable inter alia a public address system auaitle
                         D   in all parts of the stadium which the Police may override.

                             114. 24, inspections by suitably qualified chartered
                             engineer.  25 deals with the requirement     inspecting
                             the crush barriers   28 on 115 reauires the keeping of
                             records and notification of accidents    29 at the top
                             of 116.

                                   "The stadium shall be maintained with the
                                    facilities and structures including all
                                    crush barriers, entrances, exits and means
                                    of access tothe entrances and exits in the
                                    number, size, position and strength existing
                                    at the date of the Certificate and indicated
                                    on the plans and no alteration shall be made
                                    thereto unless prior notice in writing is
                                    given to the County Council in accordance
                                    with paragraph 5(2) of this Schedule."

                              That is -6f course a reflection of Section 2 (2)(c)(3)
                              of the 1975 Act.      So that, for example, the crush
                              barriers that were altered when the radial fences
                              were put in and the crush barrier which was removed
                              from "the mouth of pen 3 - that is the tunnel end of
                              pen 3 - notification of that would have had to be
                              given to the County Council under the provisions of
                              the certificate.      Then we have details on 119 of the
                              evacuation procedure.       Rather than appears in the middle
                             •of -that- page j- you will- s e e , .sir,, ,.rather .than ,an. -anaaun.ee-
                              ment in the form that we have seen playing of music was

                         H


        J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    MR. COLLINS

 anticipated.  I-am not quite sure whether the tune was
 changed for musical reasons or for other reasons but,
 any way, I do not think we need go into the details.

      Then on the 28th Janjuary, 1980, we have Dr. Eastwood's
  formal report on the load tests on the crush barriers
 carried out between June and December and he says over
 the page (b) Leppings Lane, page 122, "In the first
 series of tests six barriers had failures of the tube
 retaining clips.   Five barriers suffered permanent
 deformation of the horizontal rail. All were repaired.
 In addition 13 -new clips and five rails which were badly
 corroded were replaced and any protruding or sharp edges
 removed.  After construction of the new barriers they and
 all the repaired barriers were tested and all withstood
 the test load satisfactorily."

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   At some stage, I imagine, we
 may be going to look at a safety certificate from else­
 where?

      MR. COLLINS:     We have some, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLORi- I leave it entirely to you
 how you do it but a comparison might be of interest.
 Maybe better to do it later on.

       MR. COLLINS:    Yes.  We have in fact got the Liverpool
  one which can be compared and we have also got, I tninlCj
  the Aston Villa one which, as you know, was the other
/ ground used for ....   Page 125, County Council to
  Eastwood, July, 1980, thanking him for his letter.

      "After consultations with the Building Authority
       and in view of the fact that all of the barriers
       were tested prior to certification, the County
       Council is able to agree this year with the
       course of action which you propose.  I would
       stress this agreement is conditional .... accepted
       without prejudice as to what may be required in
       future years."

  That is the question of retesting under the certificate.
  Then he deals with that over the page, Eastwood.          "In
  July I made inspections and had approximately one-fifth
  of the crush barriers tested by members of my staff
  under my control." You will see, sir, there were a
  number which failed of that one-fifth. Perhaps the
  importance of that it indicates that in a period of
  12 months the possibility of the failure of a sig­
  nificant number of the barriers because of course
  all had been tested as we have seen prior to the
 ■safety...oe-rtifieate. •Whe.th.er..that.is because..of .the
  age of some of the barriers I do not know. But we do
                                                          MR. COLLINS

know of course some of them are fairly ancient and
indeed the one that failed was pre-1931.

           .127.    Minutes for debriefing of the semi-final in 1981.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:*     We have seen this document.

     MR. COLLINS:   We have seen this document. Yes, I
think we have seen it. This is the one that was referred
to •   •   •   •




           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Tab 4 or something.

     MR. COLLINS:    Tab 4.  I would as well as it
happens to come here in the bundle draw your attention
to the fourth paragraph.

       "The Chairman invited views on this point.
        Superintendent Chapman said that the
        entrances to Leppings Lane were controlled
        to ensure an even distribution of:fans.
        However, as the ground lfilled up the usual
        packing problems occurred.  There was space
        in the centre of the enclosure but fans
        refused to move over and fill it."

The only reason I draw attention to that is it perhaps
is an indication that left to themselves fans do not
actually always even themselves or put themselves evenLy
on terracing and, indeed, there is a recognition in
that paragraph by the Police Officer that that actually
did not always happen.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You mean even when you do aot
inhibit them by putting fences?

     MR. COLLINS:   Exactly.  Exactly.  Unless they are
made to move in some way then you get the problem or the
potential problem of them not standing in the places
which perhaps give slightly worse views. One can
understand that.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Also rather strange that it
seems-to suggest contrary to all we have heard it was
the centre that they ....

     MR. COLLINS:   Indeed.  Then we have this, "Police
Officers were placed in the crowd to ensure that the
best use was made of the available space." So there is
a recognition there or apparent recognition of the role
certainly being carried out then by the Police in
ensuring even packing of the terraces.

               Over the page, 128, third paragraph, Mr. Herold
                       55


                                                   MR. COLLIUS

said that the capacity for the Leppings Lane enclosure
stated in the certificate is 10,100,must contain a
safety margin.  The actual turnstile reading was 10,435
to which must be added 70 supporters making a total of
about 405 over the authorised limit. Assuming that there
is a safety margin in the-10,100 it is not a large increase
over the capacity that one had on that occasion.

      The bottom of the page, 128, and this no doubt is a
natter we will have to ask Inspector Calvert who will be
giving evidence - there is a reference to Inspector
Calvert expressing concern about the central entrance to
the Leppings Lane area because it always causes delays
and blockages.   It would benefit from reconstruction'.
Not entirely clear from that which is being referred to
because central entrance to the Leppings Lane area
could mean the tunnel but I do not think it is likely
to mean that or it could mean, I suppose, outside at
the gates.   Of course, that was a configuration which
has since been checked but, nevertheless, no doubt we
will find out precisely what was meant by that in due
time.   I do not think I need go through more of that.

     Next is the report on the same incident by
Sheffield Wednesday to the County Council in accordance
with the certificate, required to report accidents.
Actually they were a day or two late but that, I think,
does not matter.   It gives the details of the injuries.
Board minute, relevant Board minute, on page 134.
"Concern was expressed at the crushing which occurred
at Leppings Lane end of the ground and further
investigation into making it more comfortable should
be looked into. Then there is the internal Police
report, another internal Police report, from the Chief
Superintendent to the Assistant Chief Constable.
Fourth-paragraph. ' "I have informed Mr.England" - who
was the then club secretary - "that our consensus view
is that the 10,100 crowd figure specified in the
safety certificate is too high.     Understandably, he
refutes this and defends the position by stating that
the former capacity , prior to the implementation of
the Safety of Sport's Grounds Act at Hillsborough in
December, 1979, was 11,100 and that on a number of
occasions in previous all-ticket matches the terracing
has accommodated that number.    Certainly, at the 1980
semi-final, when we again had a opacity crowd of 50,174, we
also had some hundreds o f :forged tickets, all for the
Leppings Lane end, and apart from one very minor
crushing of spectators there was no problem."


                            / M r .-'England has
                              56

                                              Mr.    COLLINS

        Mr. England has been acquainted with our view that
        the Leppings Lane terracing should be sectioned
        vertically front to back to produce pens to enable
        more accurate crowd control and prevent sideways
        movement, and heis already actively considering
        this.  He has also considered using turnstiles 1
        to 4 for one part of the terracing and 5 to 6 for
        another, controlling the crowd entering through
        those turnstiles by the placing of safety barriers
        in that open area between the Leppings Lane
        turnstiles and the back of the West Stand terracitig.
        I agree with him that for most matches that would
        possibly work but have grave reservations as to
        its efficacy for the potentially trouble_some games.
        Additionally, to implement it he would have to find
        some way for spectators to enter the West Stand
        without crossing the other corridors that support
        it.”

 Then there is the report from the Chief Constable to the
 F.A. at pages 138 and 139.  In the second paragraph of
 page 139, the Chief Constable says:

        "The capacity at the. Leppings Lane end is 10,100
        and this obviously contains a safety factor. At
        a previous match some 400 holders of forged tickets
        gained entry into this part of the ground and were
        absorbed without any apparent difficulty. However,
        on this date turnstile readings showed that 10,435
        people were admitted to this part of the ground."

; With regard to the first part of that, one is entitled to
  perhaps comment that that is not wholly consistent with
  the views expressed in the internal memorandum that we
  were just looking at.

        "A policy of packing spectators occurs at most
        football grounds where large crowds are in
        attendance so that all the available space is
        utilised.  On this occasion the Tottenham Hotspur
        fans, who had arrived early in the day and taken
        up advantageous viewing points, refused to move
        into the centre of the enclosure, thereby creating
        a jamming effect at the extremities of it. The
        late arrivals caused an immediate problem ..."

 and so on.  The policy of packing spectators means, I
 assume, that .they should be, as indeed it says, they
 should be spread out evenly, and it is pointed out that
 that did not happen.

         Page 140 is a copy of the Police letter to the
 Club.    I think we have already seen that. In the middle
 of .the. second ,,p,arag.ra.ph -..and ;I .am -.s.orr.y.. it -i-s -not .all
 that    legible - is the reference to the Chief Constable's
 only criticism of senior officers for                not opening the
 gates earlier, "thus avoiding the emergency measure of
 allowing and helping spectators to climb over the fence".
                                        Mr. COLLINS

      Sir, what happened was that the gate was opened as
described by Mr. Vaux earlier, but some people did escape
by climbing over.  The Club were criticising the police
for allowing people climb over, the police making the
point "We only helped people to climb over who were
escaping from the emergency".

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

        Mr. COLLINS:    Sub-paragraph (b) at the bottom says:

        "The Leppings Lane end is not  constructed to give
        maximum aid to the packing and control of the cro-wd
        and the accepted crowd capacity is such that there
        is no safety margin."

Again one sees the slight inconsistency in what is said
to the F.A. and what is said to the Club for internal
consumption.

         Then, over the page, at the top, about three lines
down:

         "I consider it advisable for the Safety and
         Grounds Committee of the South Yorkshire County
         Council to visit the Leppings Lane end to discuss ;— -

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I suppose the letter to the
F.A. may mean that the capacity is 10,100 and that that
is obviously intended to contain a safety factor?

         Mr. COLLINS:   Yes, sir, to be fair, that may welL
be so.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Anyway, there it is.

      Mr. COLLINS:   At the top of page 141, sir, I was
just reading as follows:

         "I consider it advisable for the Safety and
         Grounds Committee of the South Yorkshire County
         Council to visit the Leppings Lane end to discuss
         the problems encountered at the semi-final with
         a view to taking further preventative measures.
         I do not wish spectators again to be climbing
         over the fence and it is therefore important that
         the construction of barriers and the arrangements
         of the crowd at the Leppings Lane end should be
         looked at critically to ensure that the police and
         the stewards are able to control and maintain order
         more effectively within the terrace.     I am in favour
         of a free zone on the terraces behind the goal to
         whith' spectators can be m'oved in “an emergency".

 He then talks about getting the whole matter into
 perspective, considering a crowd of 50,000 and the
 problem that there was not a wholesale condemnation.
                         58



                                        Mr.COLLINS

              Then we come to the penultimate paragraph,
which says:

      "I have tried to be constructive in this letter.
      I have not attempted to seek relief from the
      responsibility of ensuring the safety of spectators
      at Hillsborough.  I regard this to be a joint venture
      and I suggest that when we do get problems, as
      inevitably we will, we should stand together and
      refrain from blaming one another, especially
      before all the facts have been marshalled".

So there is-indeed, one would suggest, an obvious sensible
approach being put forward there, that each has a
responsibility for safety and each must work together.


      Page 142 is a meeting of the 8th June, 1981, and
at the bottom you will see a reference to the West Stand
which says:

      "Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Semi Final,
      the Club were considering revised arrangements on
      the terracing in front of the stand. An assurance
      was given that the Officer Working Party would be
      consulted when these had substance." ■

Then we have another internal police memorandum of August
1981 from, Ithink, the Chief Superintendent, Mr. Herold:

      "You are bott^ware of my feelings that Club Stewards
      at Hillsborough often do less than they should and
      are at times not aware of our function and operation
      and our respective roles."

Then the fourth paragraph:

      "We should stress to the stewards that the admission
      of spectators and the packing of those spectators
      at the bigger games under the terracing is primarily
      their functipn and not a police one".

A little lower down:

      "We should co-operate fully with them and they with
      us, and not pull in opposite directions".

145 is a letter from Dr. Eastwood to the County Council:

      "We have been instructed by the Club to organise
      the installation of two radial fences on the
      terrace at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

      It is intended that these fences are so positioned
      that they divide this section of the terrace into
      approximately three equal areas, each served by
      its own entrance".
                                       Mr. COLLINS

Effectively, sir, what was proposed then and indeed what
was carried out in the event was the fence dividing 2
from 3 and the fence dividing 4 from 5, and those were
theonly two that were originally to be installed.

      "By dividing the terrace,more control over
      supporters should result.   A visiting team with
      only a few followers will be allocated one section,
      with the other two sections retained by the home
      supporters.

      Larger contingents of visiting spectators could
      be accommodated in two or all three areas as their
      numbers dictate.

      A 1.15 metre wide gate is proposed at the rear of
      each fence to give access for maintenance and
      also policing during a game.    The gate could be
      left opened but fastened back to connect the areas
      during a game if adjacent ones are occupied by
      supporters of the same team. When establishing
      the height we have considered that the views to the
      corner flags should not be restricted any further
      than they are at present by the perimeter fence.
      We therefore propose that the top of the fence
      should be approximately 1680mm above the terrace.

      This may not prevent the odd spectator_climbing
      the fence but should eliminate a mass invasion
      from one area to the other.  Fences this height
      appear to work successfully at St. James's Park,
      the home of Newcastle United."

 Then there is an internal note by Mr. Strange referring to
 possible alterations of arrangements at the turnstiles
 and indicating, on pages 149 and 150, possible new plans.
 The only point that I think is of perhaps some_importance
 out of all this, sir, is that it is an indication that
 there are ways of increasing the turnstile capacity at
 the Leppings Lane end which have been considered. This
 one, as you can see, sir, includes the possibility of
 some new turnstile.s with a queueing area along the side
 road running beside theriver ; and also the possibility of
 a double system, that is to say, original entry points
 through the turnstile and then a further turnstile
 allowing those into the stand who might want to pay ex:tra
  to get into the stand.   Those possibilities are all
  considered.

              Page 151 is dated 9th September, 1981;  further
 crush barrier tests in 1981, and one or two showed signs
 of distress “ again an indication of the need for the_
 a n n u a l , test because crush barriers did go in that period,
 this time two years since all the tests, of course.
                                         Mr. COLLINS

      Page 152 is a Police internal minute, at the bottom
of the page of which there is a reference to attending z
meeting:

        "Members of the Fire Service and Buildings Department
        were in attendance and the only reservations
        expressed were by the Fire Service, who indicated
        that the security gates - which will be open
        during football matches - should not in any way
        restrict the egress routes which they feel are of
        minimum width as it is."

That, of course, is of some importance, sir, because there
is the Fire Service saying "You have got to keep those
gates at the back available and clear for exit if these
fences are to be put in".

        153 is a Working Party Meeting of t;he 11th September,
1981.    Item 2:

        "Whilst there were drawbacks to the division of
        the terrace into approximately three equal areas,
        each served by its own entrance, the Working Part/
        felt that increased control on the Terrace should
        result from the proposals.   For instance, there
        could well be problems with the opposing fans
        mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the
        final exit gates, but the police consider they
        could cope with any problems of this nature.

        The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be
        installed at the rear of the radial barriers was
        also discussed, as well as the use of the existing
        gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the
        front of the Terrace.

        It was noted that the plans submitted did not
        indicate the amount of headroom which would be
        available at the rear of the Terrace should the
        radial barriers and gates be installed.

        It was agreed that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs.
        Eastwood and Partners that the Officer Working
        Party sees no objection to the proposals to instal
        two 1680mm high radial barriers, with 1.15 metre
        wide gate at the rear, on the West Terrace at the
        Hillsborough Stadium, subject to:-

         (i)      the further calculations required by the
                  Building Authority being satisfactory;

         (ii)     confirmation that adequate headroom will
                  .be .available at the rear of the Terrace, and

         (i.ii)   the new gates at the rear of the Terrace
                  also being under police control."
                            61

                                           Mr. COLLINS


Then item 4:
       "It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory
       -police and first aid facilities under the North
       Stand had been accepted on an interim basis.   The
       Club had undertaken- to provide purpose-built
       facilities ... during the 1980 close season.
       Whilst some progress had been made in discussing
       details of the facilities, no firm indication had
       yet been given as to when they would actually be
       provided.   It was agreed that Mr. D. Vaughan would
        press the Club."

And then there is an indication of those decisions written
to the Club in the letter at page 155 and 156, and I do_
not need to go through that, sir, because it is repetition.
I am sorry, sir, that is wrong.  I said that it was sent
to the Club.   In fact, it was sent to Messrs. Eastwood
and Partners.  Eastwoods send a copy to the Club at page
157:
        "I enclose a copy of a letter from David Vaughan
        dated 14th September from which you will see that
        the proposal to instal the radial barriers on the
        West Terrace and to provide security gates round
        the North Stand are accepted, although with some
        reservations' ..."

 Then in October 1981 he refers to the test, which I do
 not think I need go into.  At 160 there is an internal
 memorandum, or rather an telephone message from the
 Club Secretary.  Blessvale are the contractors who dealt
 with the installation of the radial barriers:

        "Blessvale have cut existing barriers on each side
        of fences.  Is it the intention to put rails back
        or leave off?

         Explained that if left off, some capacity will be
         lost (theoretically).  He said that putting then
         back would provide a jumping off point for
         spectators. ' Agreed. Which does he consider more
         important? Agreed to discuss."

 The point there, sir, is that if you remove the barriers
 you create a gangway down either side and that affects
 the capacity in accordance with the Green Guide;  and the
 point is made, "Otherwise they will jump over."

         Then we have a letter referring to a drawing of the
  standing capacities of the five areas at Leppings Lane
  end.    I am not sure that we have got that. Unfortunately
--we' do -not .have .that .drawing,, s,iir,, and, I...am not,,quite sure
  which are the five areas.        There are three in the front.
  I imagine he is either including the corners as separate
  areas or some part of the north west as being a separate
  area as well, but I do not think it matters.
                                   Mr. COLLINS

Then there are further telephone calls from Mr. England
to Mr. Strange:
      "The police have been to inspect fences at Leppings
      Lane.  They are not happy that existing barriers
      go through the fence.    Barriers can be used as a
      jumping off point. '* Eric and I had discussed this
      last week. We agreed to let the police make first
      comments.  Eric thinks that barriers should be cut
      away.  I explained about calculated loss of spectators
      would bring capacity below 50,000. He said that
      crush during last semi-final made him suspicious
      of crowd calculation at that end anyway".

I think that is a record of Mr. England, the Club Secretary,
speaking.  It goes on:

      "Said that perimeter fence was cause of this.
      Suggested that Kop could take more because area
      is larger to dispose those affected by fence.
      Agreed to leave barriers in position for QPR game
      to see what happens.   Ring Monday".

Then on the same day Mr. England was ringing to say that
there had been no sign of Blessvales, but I do not think
we need worry with that.  I will simply ask you to note
the Club's reservations, or at least Mr. England's
reservations about capacity.

      On page 163 there is another message on the same
day, Mr. England to Mr. Strange:

       "Asked him if Police had passed any adverse comment
       about operation of fences at Leppings Lane end. Ho.
       All went well on Saturday.   Chief Constable has seen
       them.  Agreed that we would leave barriers going
       through for time being.   If they do cause trouble,
       then cut them down.  OK."

 Then we have Eastwoods saying that there is no comment
 yet from the Working Party.

       Page 165 is the 18th January 1982, from the Police
 to the County Council, the second paragraph:

       "Dealing now with the radial     fences which have
       recently been installed on the Leppings Lane
       terracing, I can confirm that the fences are
       working particularly well and proving to be most
       satisfactory in effecting the segregation of
       opposing groups of fans.    Since the fences were
       put up there has been no fixture at the ground o £ _
       sufficient interest to result in that entire section
       of terracing being given' ’to -one -group of -fans and
       so I am unable to comment in that respect, but I
       s<2e no problems whatever".
                        63

                                               MR. COLLINS

At the bottom of the page, about six lines up:

      "I would point out that Mr. England totally agrees
      with police observations regarding the construction
      of the radial fences but I understand from him that
      it is being suggested that any alterations could
      conceivably result in a reduction in the capacity
      of the Leppings Lane terracing.  I am not aware
      of the thinking behind that but for my part see no
      reason why that should be."

That is on the.question of cutting them away so as not
to allow people to jump over.

      Then we have a letter from the County Council to
Eastwoods with Mr.Strange's comments thereon, about the
various comments:

      "(a)    Radial Barriers on West Terrace

      The matches played at the stadium since the
      installation of the barriers confirm that they
      appear to be working well and satisfactorily effect
      the segregation of opposing groups of fans. However,
      the entire section of the Terrace has yet to be j
      given to one group of fans.

       The police inform me that, on installation of the
       new radial barriers, the existing crush barriers
       have been extended in some places up to and
       completely through the new radial barriers at a
       height of 4'  6" or so from the ground."

 Mr.   Strange points out that they were left there and it
 was not a question of them being extended:

       "The effect is to make it very easy for fans to
       climb from one pen to another.  In other places
       the existing crush barrier rails have been cut
       off short of the radial barriers in a manner which
       leaves dangerous pieces protruding into some of the
       gangways". .

 The note that he has put on is, "Not intended to be gangways.
 If counted as gangways, then you lose capacity".

       Then we have a copy of a letter from Eastwoods to
 the-County Council in reply to that, on 169, the third
 paragraph:
        "Turning now to the radial barriers on the West
        Terrace, it is of course accepted that where there
        is a crush barrier passing through or close to the
        radial "barrrer 'it' will- -make -it- easier ,f,or anyone
        who so wishes to climb over. Nevertheless we
        believe it is not unreasonable to leave the crush
        barriers as they are.       If all barriers were removed
        back to a distance say 1.2m from the fence, it would
                                      64

                                                     Mr. COLLINS


                    mean a 2.4m wide gap which is not protected by
                    barriers.  There would be a consequent loss of
                    calculated spectator capacity which is undesirable
                    from the Club's point of view. However, from the
                    point of view of safety a strip of that width without
                    a single crush barrier would be a major hazard.

                    It should be kept in mind that the introduction of
                    these radial barriers has affected a very great
               B    improvement from the point of view of segregation
                    of spectators but to achieve perfection from the
                    point of view of segregation brings with it other
                    disadvantages.  I believe that what we have done is
                    a reasonable compromise between trhe various interests



               c



               D




                E




                                           /Meeting, 4th February
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                              65

                                         MR. COLLINS


      Meeting 4th of February on page 172 where the point
is discussed and then it was agreed, at the bottom of the
page:
      "That, on balance, it was preferable from a
      safety point of view to prevent crov/d surge by
      the existing barriers being extended up to
      and/or through the new radial barriers than to
      completely prevent persons being able to climb
      from one pen to another ....

Then go over to 174 there is reference to the Police and
ITirstJAid Facilities:   _
      ".... the Club would shortly be in a position
      to*formally notify the County Council that the
      new Police and First Aid facilities «70uld joe
      provided in the iortncoming close season.

175 D^. Eastwood again to the Club about tne "annual
r0r<-i ficate of Ground Safety", testing the barriers on the
Koo     Tl^e only reason ± refer to it is about six or sever.
lines in the sentence:     "It is inevitable --- this is
referring to the retaining clips:

       "It is inevitable that water gets under these
       clips and they rust chus becoming weal-e-i. V;i^..
       the passage of time."

 Then the Club's reply to that:

       "Many thanks for your letter of the 12th July
       re barriers on Spion Kop and Leppings Lane,
       and I agree that you put the work in hand as
       detailed in order that we have no dangerous
       barriers for the start of the season."

 ^hen Mr Eastwood's record of inspection on 173 and 17S, a
 copy o f ’the same on 130-131 and effectively 182-133.
 Then 184 is the next meeting in January. We move on now
 to January 1985.
        Perh?ps T should pause there and simply mcike Lnis
 comment-    you will have*noted, sir, that no one seems to
 heve taken account of the potential effect upon the capacity
 and the question, apart from the barriers going througn.ne
 radial fences, as to whether there should be any r e c o n s i d e r a t i o n
 q-? the" capacity of the ground at the Leppings Lane enc, parci-
 cularlv having regard to the comments in 1931 not only               ^
 the Police but also apparently the view of Mr. £nglanc, t n a u
 the figure of 10,100 may be a figure which ought to t>e
 reconsidered.
        We would suggest that the putting or the radial fences
  made it imperative to reconsider it when you couple that
I   .
                                                       66

                                                                 MR. COLLINS


                            v/’th the crushing that had occurred without any radial fence:
                            at the Tottenham/Wolves match, but for some reason or other
                            that appears not to have been taken into account at all.

                                  184    at the bottom:

                                  "The Club recalled the practice followed in
                                  consultation with the South Yorkshire Police of
                       B          separating home and visiting supporters at the
                                  rear of the Stand at certain matches (such as
                                  with Liverpool) by erecting temporary barriers.
                                  This worked well but on all other normal occasions
                                  it was the policy of the Police to aim for
                                  exclusive use by visiting supporters of the West
                                  Stand and Terrace.  On those occasions when the
                                  number of visiting supporters v/as small and the
                                  weather was inclement, it v/as obviously desirable
                                  to allow home supporters access to a sheltered
                                  area.

                                   IT ’
                                      WAS AGREED -

                                   (i) That the    Club would consider at some future
                                   date a scheme   for permanent barriers at the rear
                       D           of the Stand,   subject to any proposals being
                                   submitted for   prior approval by the Officer
                                   Working Party   in the usual way."

                            At the bottom of the page there is reference to an improved
                            public address syten.

                                   Then we have at 187 through to 204 the Ambulance
                        E    Hajo^ Incident Plan.   I hope I will be zorgiv-en by
                             Mr. Kallipetis if I don't take you through that because
                             it"can of* course be referred to in due course insofar as it
                             is relevant, but it is not specific to Hillsborough, of
                             course, it is the general Ambulance Emergency Plan.

                                    <"■*, the letter of the 4th of February, the Police to
                                   20
                             the Club.
                                   "With reference to our conversation of last week
                                   recarding improvements required to the West End
                                   of"the ground, I forward herewith our thoughts.

                                   You will see that we favour the erection of a
                                   stone wall on the ground side of the current
                                   terraces, with such wall housing a oank o_
                                   turnstiles. Our beliez is that once u. spccucto.
                                   goes through the turnstiles he should then be
                                   segreaated from the other fans, and this can
                                   be achieved by the erection of permanent high
                                   metal railings on 'that1-concrete' -area--at--present
                                   behind the Stand.   Similarly, there should be a
                                   high metal railing- down the centre of the West
                        H


        J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                  67

                                              MR. COLLINS


        Stand. What is then created is total segregation
        of all three portions of the Terrace and the two
        areas of the West Stand, with each of these
        segregated areas having its own refreshment and
        toilet facilities."

The effect of course being you. go tnrougn the correct turnstile
and you are automatically segregated in going to a particular
part, either of the terrace or of the Stand.

           Then a letter from the Club to Eastwood asking for
discussion and we have tnen in tne beginning o* iip^il 1-35
E a s t w o o d ’s sketches of a possible layout segregating visiters
from home supporters.
      If we look at the plan, sir, page 207, drawing 67 05/2
there is possible modification which leads, as you see, to
29 turnstiles in number.  I think it perhaps speaks tor itselz
as to how the division is proposed.

      Effectively 1-6 would go to the North Stand, as at
present; 7-12 home supporters to the north-west terrace;
13-16 home supporters to the West Stand; 17-21 visiting
supporters down the tunnel in the middle to the central
terrace; 22-25 visitors to the West Stand and finally 26-29
visitors to tne souti’-vi'e&t L®rrc.ce dree;.

      9th of April a letter to the County council saying:
"The club is anxious to segregate" and prepare the scheme
for the Working Party.  Please consider that scheme.

       Then a note from, a telephone call I think, from
t-
 jt-.Strange to Hr. Chester who had become oy fcnen uiie Cluo
 Secretary.
         "Turnstile    at back of West Stand.

         1) H e    " that is Mr. Chester I assume "... will
         speak to his colleagues to decide how many turn­
         stiles are required.   (Fundamental to scheme)

         2) I n c l u d e in the scheme, new toilets and
         refreshment areas. Keep it basic ....

 I don't think we need bother with tne rest or that.

         Over the page there is a note.                   Sharon I t m n . : is
 the S e c r e t a r y ' s Secretary at the Club. A call f r o m Hr.            Strange
 to Sharon a b o u t t u r n s t i l e s . An i n d i c a t i o n of the total numbers
 wanted.       In fact a t o t al of 34 r a t h e r than the 2 - j t n a t w e r e
 in the pla n.           As he says:
         "••je had 29 in ’our scheme , turns tiles have
         to be in pairs.     Said I will re-do our scheme
         and submit it to Dick.
                                                       68

                                                                 MR. COLLINS


                          Then we have the Officer Working Party meeting of 18th
                    of April.
                          “i .   purpose of Meeting

                          The ourpose of the meeting was to consider t*ie
                          letter dated 9th April and plan from Messrs.
                B         Eastwood £ Partners relating to the proposals
                          of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
                          construct two new banks of turnstiles c.nd
                          various runs of fencing and new gates in order
                          to achieve segregation . ... "

                    That of course was the 29 o n e .

                           "2.   Consideration of Proposals

                          ■r-he Police representatives pointed out that the
                           proposals had been prompted in the main by cornier*ts
                           thev had made to the Club. At one time, botn tne
                           West Stand anc Terrace had been regarded as
                           exclusively for the use of visiting supporters,
                           but recent"patterns of attendances at the Stadium
                D         made it necessary to allow for some element of use
                           by home supporters as well.

                           The proposals now outlined by tne ....

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:             When did Sheffield go into z.ie
                     First Division?
                E         m r . COLLINS: I think it did not go in till 1536/67.
                     I think at this stage it was rising and it believed Lhat it
                     would get into ....
                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:             It was on the up and up?

                           IIR. COi-iLnjS :   ISii •

                            "The proposals now outlined by tne Cluo weie
                            Ge nerally acceptable to the Police representatives,
                            subject to:-
                            (a) additional gates being provided between the
                            turnstile numbered 16 and the wall of the inne j.
                            access road;
                            (b) the central area of the Terrace (indicated
                            as the neutral area or visiting supporters' terrace)
                            beinc divided in half by a new central radial
                            /?once running from the tunnel entrance to the
                            pi-.tchsi.de .security fence with gates erected so as
                            *-o permit entry to be diver tec to eicner nal~ as
                            appropriate (the proposed new secondary radial
                H           f e n c e " adjacent to the existing fence indicated
                            on the plan to be abandoned);


J. L. Harpham Ltd
       f
<                                                          69

I \
                                                                     HR. COLLII’IS
t
I
I

                      A             (c) the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated
                                    as home supporters' terrace) also to be divided
                                    in half by a new central radial fence running
                                    fror.i back to front with two gate (the existing
                                    radial fence dividing the present two Terrace
                                    areas - neutral area and home supporters - to
                                    have a second gate installed;

                      B             (d) the existing pitch perimeter fence to have
                                    additional exit gates installed - one in the
                                    neutrai area and one in . the home supporters
                                    area.

                                    The County Fire Service saw no objection in
                                    principle to the proposals, subject to more
                                    detailed investigation of the means of escape
                      C             aspects, and the Building Authority similarly
                                    sav; no objection, subject to submission of
                                    detailed plans . .. .

                                    IT iJAS AGREED:-

                                    (a) That R. Grinshaw should investigate as a
                                    matter of urgency the means of escape aspects
                      D             of the proposals and lat D.I. Vaughan know the
                                    outcome.

                                    (b) That, subject to satisfactory clearance
                                    of these aspects by the County Fire Service,
                                    the outline proposals .... be agreed as new
                                    amended by the suggestions of the South
                                    Yorkshire Police ...."
                          E
                              A letter of the 19th April, Eastwood to Club:

                                    "After speaking to Sharon last Uednesday about
                                    the number of turnstiles ... we have altered
                                    our proposed layout.

                          F         The eighteen existing turnstiles will remain.
                                    Ten will serve the North Stand and eight the
                                    terraces for the home supporters......
                                    Four each of these will be for home and away
                                    spectators .... We understand the Police have
                                    suggested a central fence to divide the middle
                                    section rather than provide a 2m wide sterile
                                    area to one side. This may work  providing youare
                      G             happy having home and away supporters in the
                                    same area outside."

                              Then we see on page 215 the proposal which increases the 2'-j
                              to 34. Effectively it is done, by increasing what v/as 1—1<3
                              to "I-13' adding tv/o 'extra- t:here' -and Ti-umb'ers -23-36- there -etc
                              there 12 instead of the8 that were in the original.                That
                              is where the extra ones show. What of course it does indicate
                      H


      J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             70

                                        M R . COLLiNS


is th?t thought had been given to the possibility or increasing
the number of turnstiles at the Leppings Lane ena and an
indication that in the viev/ anyway of Eastwood anc Paruners^
it v/as feasible that there should be the increased nuraoer cr
turnstiles.
          Sir, if you care to work out the numbers or speci_a_ozs
t-iio w o u l d ' go through the various turnstiles, I think the
maximum c o L s to a figure and that is the ones wno are going
to the visitinc supporters to the south-west terrace, or sarae-
thing around 500.per turnstile. About 300 is tne ma::inu:a
otherwise they are all at or arouna or below cne 7CL level,
 taking account of course of the lact tnat the iiorw -           one
would n o r mally have the 12 ones on the Penistone «oaa as well
 as the 10 here.
         There are some rough drawings on the next pages v;nicr.
i d o n 1fc for the iTiOiYien_ eel   it —is necessary
                               ----- —      —         to refer
                                                          ^    to
                                                               _  and
then a repetition on page 220 of the original scnene .cr ui


       On to 227, a note of call from Mr. Strange to Hr. Caes-ce^

       "Asked him about central fence down terrace.
       v*es, seems a reasonable idea. Do it that way to
       s a t i s fv police^ He isn't worried about loss of
       capacity.
       He still isn't satisfied • that the numbers or
       turnstiles are rignt.  Lez’c it v^iuit nxm.

       R e m i n d e d me about e s t imate for fences along front
       of stands.         0i\. — will do one.

 Then 26th of April, over the page, it starts on tne nght-nanu
 side this message:
        "Discussed copies of our drawing ....           tnis is
        again Strange and Chester.

        "(I didn't agree with what he wants but in essence
        it is)
        1) Area wanted in front of turnstiles to hold
        early visitors. Gate them in.

        2) 4 banks of three turnstiles & gate to let
        peoole in if all ticket.   (Disaster)

  B(r, I think what that refers to, if you look at page 230
  vou will see that in the banks of turnstiles, what original^
  had been banks of turnstiles, there is ynat is cescrioec
       ca^'e1 1 tiie'iE'are four-'Oi -theiu, in tnos-e.f.wUtii».tii.e«>
                                                     71


                                                                 HR. COLLINS



                    closest to the back of the Stand, and I think what v/as being
                    suggested and what Mr. Strange very rightly I think consicered
                    to be a disaster, v/as that if you had all ticket matcnes you
                    would not need to use turnstiles, you could let people tnrcugn
                    those gates.
                           "Don't put partition across 1st floor level.
                           Couple of (?) will do.
               B
                           4) fiay be 13 turnstiles to North Stand.

                           5) OK to use old Ladies toilets ....

                           6) Put new radial fence down centre pen.                OK.

                            7) Ho separation on seating.

                           Agreed to alter drawing.  Send him a copy and
                           then hold meeting with SY Police early ne::t week
                           to discuss."

                    Then he does indeed do the new drawings. That is the one on
                    230 we just looked at. Then on 231 we have the Fire consents
                D   to the County Council:
                            "Further to the joint meeting on 18th April 1>35,
                            to discuss the proposals for new crowd_control
                            arrangements, the means of escape implications
                            have now been considered.   The scheme would appear
                            to be satisfactory providing that certain gates^
                            have the minimum widths (in metres) as indicated
                            on the enclosed plan.   It is understood that these
                E           crates will be supervised by either the police or
                            club officials."

                     cir t^e gates that are being referred to in that letter are
                     the*rear gates. Can I ask you to turn on to 237 lor the
                     moment. You will see the widths and the gates rererrec -co.

                             If you look on this drawing for example, sir, where
                     you see River Don and there is a gate just above "Visiting
                     Supporters, South West Terrace" there is a figure^os o newreo
                     a n d you can see similar figures relating to all tnose ga-es
                     at the back, all those new gates at tne back.

                           Sir, this does not refer in any way, as indeed as one
                     would expect, because it is only concerned with the turnstiles
                     -ccess, it does not relate to the gates or tne proposec now
                     radial fence down the centre of the terrace.

                             Page 232:
                     ...... "VfbuTc'"li1ce-"a' note ■
                                                    -from -us •-wi-th--a ■-guess- -.&t ^cost
                            of work at Leppings Lane end. OK. Can't go it
                            accurately. *iio matter.
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     72

                                                              MR. COLLIKS



                              Also agreed that we include all the other bits
                              & pieces requested to be done by SYCC in t m s
                              contract i.e. pointing ....

                              Hake sure note is with .him by no late^ than
                              tomorrow p.m. Board meeting @ 7.00."

                        •-•’--at is dated the 1st of May for the purpose of a board nesting
                        ; r £ h e 2nd of May and then we see the estimate in writing on
                B        -’ •'O ?nd O* Ha'7 and a total i n d u c i n g some L . U - -o*
                         and liecll iri addition required comes to -2130,000 at the e m
                         of the letter on 234.
                               There v/as in fact, sir, a board meeting on the
                                                                           tl    2nd May
                                                                              to  the 22:id
                        19S 5 and it v/as decided to adjourn consiceiduion
                        of May




                D




                    E




                G




                                                /There is a letter on the 2nd of H£\
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                       MR.   COLLINS



     There is a letter on 2nd May from the County Council
to Eastwood indicating to Eas twoods what the reaction was
of the Fire Service and really that repeats the matters
that were set out in that letter from the Fire Service,
but it is important to note (b) "the central area of the
terrace" - because this, of course, goes beyond the
gates at the back:
     "(b) the central area of the Terrace (indicated
     as the neutral area or visiting supporters'
     terrace) being divided in half by a new central
     fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
     pitchside security fence with gates erected so
     as to permit entry to be diverted to either half
     as appropriate (the pro posed new secondary radial
     fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
     on the plan to be aba ndoned)."
Sir, I think I have misled you.  This letter, of course,
incorporates all the comments. Police and Fire, and this
particular one, of course, is the Police requirement.
     "(c) the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated
     as home supporters' terrace) also to be divided into
     half by a new central radial fence running from back
     to front with two gates (the existing radial fence
     dividing the present two Terrace areas -neutral area
     and home supporters to have a second gate installed).

Someone has written "Why?"   I gather that could be my
friend and over the page (e) --    I think actually it is
not, he is blaming himself wrongly here, I think it is
Mr. Strange.
      "(e) certain gates to have the minimum widths (in
      metres) indicated on the attached plan and to them
      being fully supervised."
 Again, i t is q u i t e plain from the letter from the Fire
 Service that that relates not to the gates in the terrace
 but to the cjites behind.
      Telephone message, 238, Inspector Calvert phoning
 Mr. Strange:
      "Discussed proposals for fences and terraces and
     "gates.   Gate wanted by Fire Brigade.   I do not
      see why.   He exp lained about extra fence.   Would
      like to meet tomorrow."
 Then Mr. Strange obv iousl y- tel ephoned Mr. Chester, tells
 him about the discussion with Mr. Calvert:
      "Dick thinks that Board won't go along with spending

 I cannot read that.
                            74




                                                    MR.   COLLINS


     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         £110,000.
     MR. COLLINS:       Looks, like, yes.

     "Let him think about-it for a while.    Okay we won't
     meet Police for now.    I will tell them."

Then there is an important letter, 240, from Eastwood to
the County Council:

      "Thank you for your letter...     In the interim period
      several of the points which you raised had already
      been incorporated in our latest scheme which has yet
      to be considered by the Club Board. However I would
      ask that further con sideration should be given to
      the request in paragraph (c) of your letter for
      a second gate to be installed in the radial barrier
      and for the new radial barrier which you have asked
      for to have two gates. If these • gates   are meant
      for use in emergency it would mean having a steward
      in att endance on each occasion, the expense of which
      would hardly be justified.     It is our view that
      in the event of emergency, spectators can be
      eva cuated quickly enough by the gates on to the
      pitch and by the normal exit gates at the rear.
    . We will of course be prepared to discuss the matter
      with the Fire Off icer's staff should you so wish."

 Two comments on that.     First of all, expense is hardly,
•one would have thought, a relevant consideration when one
 knows that stewards are paid, I think, £9 now a match for
 their services but, perhaps more importantly, there is
 reference to the eva cuati on by the gates on to the pitch.
 You will recall, sir, that those were never intended to
 be, nor were they, eva cuati on gates taken into account.
 Indeed, they were too small to be such and the normal
 exit gates at the rear, of course, are the tunnel effectively
 and pre sumab ly the gates at the back of the radial fence.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Yes.

     MR. COLLINS:   And then there is a copy letter to
the Club.   If one looks in fact at the reference on both
those letters these are letters that appear and indeed
clearly are written by hr. E a s t w o o d himself. 8th May:

     U I understand, following John Strange's telephone
     con v e r s a t i o n with you yesterday, that South Yorkshire
     County Council did not send you a copy of their
     l e t t e r ... H o w e v e r , I do not think that it is realistic
     to ask for the gates in the radial fences and have
     wri tten to David Vaughan a c c o r d i n g l y ."

Then Mr. Vaughan writes back, 10th May, page 242:

     "...the extra gates referred to in paragraph (c)
     were included primarily at the request of the
     South Yorkshire Police.   Provided that the remainder
                        75



                                   MR.   COLLINS



     of the points raised by the Officer Working Party
     are incorporated in the latest proposals (yet to be
     considered by the Club), the Police are prepared to
     concede the request for two gates per radial fence
     in the right hand are a.of the Leppings Lane End
     Terrace (indicated as*home supporters' terrace on the
     plan)."
Then at the bottom:

     "Agreed over the phone with Inspector Clive Calvert
     and station Officer Tony Vickers"

who I assume to be the Fire.   Copy to the County Council,
the City Council I suppose that would be, Chief Fire Officer
and the Building Authority.   Chief Constable, yes, quite
right, I am sorry.
     Then we have a further copy of the drawing of the
proposed arrangement on 244.

     13th May, 1985, a letter on 243:

     "I would be obliged if arrangements could be made
     for us to meet on site to consider the full
     implications, ope ratio ns and costings of the above
     contained in your Drawing.     Please confirm one or
     two suitable times and dates."

Mr. Glasgow reminds me that was written two days, I think,
after the Bradford fire and so that was something which
no doubt would begin obviously to come into the equation.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Is that a good moment to
break?
     MR. COLLINS:   Good enough, sir.       We are about
half way through, as you see.

                  ( Luncheon adjournment)
N Q U I HY   into     the        HILLSBOROUGH

        STADIUM           '^DISASTER




                     Before


               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                  MR. B. JOHNSON
     (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                        and

                 PROF. L . MAUNDER.

                    (ASSESSORS)




                        At

                  The Town Hall.

                    Sheffield,

                         on

             Thursday, 15th June, 1989




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                 {Afternoon Session)



        From the Notes of J.X. Harphara, Ltd.,
             Official Shorthand Writers,
         55, Queen Street, -Sheffield S1 2DX
r




                            INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                            (AFTERNOON SESSION)

                                 •".-'I •.        Page

    MR.   COLLINS (cont.)                          76
    ALAN KEITH SEAMAN, called
          Examined by MR.      COLLINS            138
’I                                                                                                         II

                                                     76
               *




                                        TWENTY-SECOND DAY'S PROCEEDINGS
                                            Thursday, 15th June, 1989
                                                                                                   '"^4f
                                                (Afternoon S e s s i o n )               '

                                  MR. COLLINS:    Sir, be.fore I go on, there is one
                         matter that perhaps I ought to have referred to in the
                         Safety Certificate and did not specifically, and it is
                    B    on page 114, Condition 24, but it rather looks as if the
                         d r a f tsma n.of the Safety Certificate may not fully have
                         appreciated what he was doing because if one reads
                         Paragraph 24, it reads thus:
                              "The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to
                              be inspected by a suitably qualified chartered
                              engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
                              a representative of the County Council within
                              7 months of the date of the Certificate and at
                              least once in each period of 12 months thereafter
                              and the Holder shall as soon as possible after
                              each inspection supply to the County Council a
                              Certificate by the said Chartered Engineer as
                              to the current compliance or non-compliance
                              with good engineering' and building practices
                    D         and with the relevant British Standard Specifications
                              and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate
                              provisions and recommendations of the Guide cf
                              all structural parts of the Stadium excluding the
                              crush barriers and handrails."

                         So there should have been an indication, it would seem,
                         from the Certificate provided - I think Dr. Eastwood
                     E   appears to have been the person who was providing the
                         Certific ates under Paragraph 24 - as to whether the stadium
                         complied with the green Guide in all structural respects,
                         not of course the crush barriers and handrails.    One of
                         the aspects there, of course, is the ramp or gradient of the
                         tunnel, which is never referred to anywhere in the documentation
                         apart from that reference to ramps generally that we saw
                         at page 3 of the bundle.
                              May I now go back to page 245, which is where we had
                         reached, which is Dr. Eastwood indicating to Mr. Chester
                         that discussion would be needed about the gates in the
                         radial fences.
                                Sir, there is then a Board Meeting of 22nd May, 1985.
                         It is- I fear a document that perhaps ought to have been
                         but was not included inthis bundle.               it may perhaps be
                         c on venie nt for you to note, sir, that it appears in the
                         Sheffield Wednesday volume at page 257 which is a record
                         of the relevant part of the minutes of the Meeting of the
                         Board of 22nd May and if you look, sir, at 2 (c) towards
                         the iajot.tomp.f that pag.e .y.ou w i l l ..s.ee that there is
                         ref erence to reo rganisation-of turnstiles and new toilet
                         facilities at Leppings Lane end.               "Matter left in abeyance
                     H   pen ding further discussions.           Initial estimated price
                         deemed to be excessive."

     J. L. Harpham Ltd
                         77



                                           MR.   COLLINS



     Then we have on page 246 the letter of 4th June
from Mr. Eastwood to Mr. Chester in providing the
relevant drawings showing two possible alternative
arrangements for the turnstiles and toilets at the
back of the West Stand arjji^tfvose two possibilities are
at pages 248 and 249 respectively.
     The point was made that on 248 there is the
possibility of a sort of - I think it is described
as a pinch point where y o u h a v e to go round a corner
to get to turnstiles 17-19~and so it was that the
alternative at /8 - and that is the one, of course^
that was eventually constructed, as we know.        The
only relevant amendment which we will see coming is you
will note that the new wall inside does not have any
gate in it.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      No gap, yes.
     MR. COLLINS:   Or any.-.-gap in it and, in fact, there
is now, and we will see in the correspondence that there
was a decision and this I think was a decision which came
as a result of Police input, if I remember correctly,
which led to the ins tallation of that gate.
     250 and 251 are duplicates of those pages.   Then we
have a letter on 252 which is from Eastwood to the Club
referring to a meeting with Chief Superintendent Moseley
and the second paragraph:
      "Superintendent Moseley was very concerned about
the segregation of the two lots of spectators on the
West Terrace on those occasions when the centre of the
terrace will be filled by visitors.             He said that on
the occasion of the Liverpool match he had had to
station policemen in pairs down the full length of the
dividing fence and this had been a very uncomfortable
situation for the Officers.          Not least of his difficulties
was that it was not easy for the officers to get in and
out of tht particular area if the ground was packed with
spectators.        He felt that a higher fence than the present
one or a double fehce was necessary.              I suggested that
we should have a double fence with a gap between so as
to keep the spectators apart and to provide a space in
which his Officers could -stand.           Fewer policemen would
be needed if the spectators had a gap between them.
It so happens that right alongside the existing fence
there' is a gate on to the pitcH' and that is, of course,
Gate 5 or what is now Gate 5 - "and if the second fence
were placed on the other side of the gate it will provide
an easy access gangway for the police and they will be
 able to move in and out of the gap depending on the
 siutation.       Mr. Moseley was clearly very pleased by
.this-.s.ug.ges.tion. and subject .to. .y.pur app.ro.v.a.1 ,w.e .Are
 including the work in the.-c-ontract for segregating
 the spectators at Leppings Lane end.
                                        MR.   COLLINS



     "I should point out that it will mean losing about
     a metre of advertising space because the hoardings
     carry straight on past, that particular gate at
     present.    There w i l X h a v e to be a gap in the
     hoardings to enable %+v-e-police' to get in and out
     and of course to evacuate the crowd in emergency."
Well, it may be important to consider the effect on the
advertising hoardings but, of course, the effect of
creating that area was to .reduce the amount available for
spectators on the terrace and no-one seems to have taken
into account that this might affect the capacity of the
terrace and, indeed, of the pens.
     The other thing, of course, is that if there was an
advertising hoarding in front of that gate at that time it
rather suggests that no-one thought of using that gate,
certainly as a matter of routine, for any evacuation
purposes, but that may not be a fair point.   It depends,
of course, on how the advertising hoarding was set up.
It may be that it was possible to open it, notwithstanding
its existence.
     Then there is a telephone note, a call from Mr. Strange
to Sharon on 17th June:
     "Did Dick give agreement to reorganisation of
     Lepping Lane?   Yes, in principle. Which scheme?
     Don't know."
Then there was a confirmation in a letter to Inspector
Calvert of the suggested provision of the double fencing.
On page 256 a note of a call from Inspector Calvert to
Mr. Strange, 27th June.
      "He has looked at our drawing of the proposal.
      1. Could personnel doors be fitted into the two
      new walls.    Don't see why not.  (Not a bad
      idea, otherwise ground staff have to go all the
      way round if they want to go from one side of stand
      to the other . )
That is, of course, the door in the internal wall and
Inspector Calvert does, indeed, seem to have made a very
sensible suggestion.
     _"2. Wants central radial fence to be added to
      the one 2 metres away from the right hand
      fence.   Don't necessarily agree.   He said that
      Inspector Moseley and Dick said yes.
      3. Gate in perimeter fence between 2 metre gap OK."
 Then we have the application on 5th July for planning
 permission for the s c h e m e : -" The plan we see on 258, the
 plan of the situation as it now is.          The application
 then follows, and the relevant copies 8a, 9a, etc., we
II                                                                                         1

                                                 79



                                                                 MR.   COLLINS



                         have not put in but we know what the scheme was.
                              On 16th July, 1985, again not in the bundle there
                         is another Board Meeting yyjiiph records, this time at page
                         258, the very bottom of 25U- ;--    I'am sorry, sir, this
                         is the only other document.-.that I am having to go outside
                         our bundle for but it is really just to complete the story,
                         it does not add anything particularly material.     It just
                    B    records quotations received for the alterations at the
                         Leppings Lane end and agreement to accept a quotation in
                         the sum of some £73,000-odd.     "Secretary requested to
                         urge early completion and formulate claim via the Football
                         Grounds Improvement Trust."
                              Sir, then I go on to a letter at 262 in the main
                         bundle from the County Council to Eastwoods.   The third
                         paragraph:
                              "The Officer Working Party considered and gave
                              approval in principle ;rto the rear of the West Stand
                              reorganisation proposals in May but other than
                              brief mentions by the Club or yourselves at routine
                              meetings of the possibility of the Spion Kop being
                              enclosed, no o u t l i n e 'plans or details of such
                    D         proposals have be^nconsidered to date."
                         Now, the proposals or the approval given in principle
                         in May refers back to the letter on page 235 and of course
                         the scheme involving 29 turnstiles and not the one that
                         they were actually applying for, and so it is that on
                         25th July the County Council get details of what is
                         in fact going to be done, although by then the die had
                     E   I think been cast.
                              Sir, somewhere in your bundle - I do not quite
                         know where - there should be copies of drawings 6 7 0 5 8 A
                         and 6705/6.
                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     In this vicinity?
                              MR. COLLINS: , I am not sure where they have been
                         put.    I am told they are right at the front.   I do not
                         think it is necessary to --     It shows the scheme at
                         the turnstiles in slightly more detail, that is all.
                               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     That is of the existing        ?

                             "MR. COLLINS:     No, that is the proposed, /8A.


                                                             /Drawing 6705/8A




     J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          80



                                                   MR. COLLBSS

 Drawing 6705/8A is what v/as proposed at the turnstiles.
6705/6 are details of the new central fence on the West
Terrace.
     LORD JUSTICE T A Y L O R - Y e s .

     MR. COLLINS:   And the other one is an indication
of the existing crush barriers at the time that I - I
forget the exact time which that one is ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:--       ---     1980.

     MR. COLLINS:      But updated.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLAOR: I see that on that         there are
marked capacities for thevarious pens.

     MR. COLLINS:       Yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: ... Central pen, presumably
 that had not yet been divided.

     MR. COLLINS:   That is right. All I can say, sir,
about the capacities of the pens, whether divided or.un­
divided, is this. We have been given the figures of -
2,200, I think, for the ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        3 and 4 as they now are.

       MR. COLLINS:    3 and 4as they now are and that
 is aivided into one thousand and twelve hundred and
 those are figures which seem to have been accepted by
 everyone, indeed, appear on the original plan of the
 ground which was - those are plans that were put in at
 the very early stage of the Inquiry, including, you will
 recall, the plan of the barriers on the terrace. There
 was a little bundle of plans which included one of the
 ground.which had those capacities.     There is nothing La
 the documentation which I have been able to find which
   indicates who assessed those quantities, how they were
 assessed or when they were assessed.     It appears that it
 may have been - I ’know not - simply a question of someone
 when the railings were put in effectively working out
  the areas and dividing the figure of 7,900 by the
 relevant areas or 10,100 .-if you include the whole but I
 am afraid I cannot help any more than that because
  certainly so far as the documents are concerned there
  does-not' appear to be any indication of anyone re-_
  considering in detail the capacity.    Indeed, that is
  one of the matters which will have to be considered
  in relation to the approach of the City Council and,_
  indeed, of the County Council before it to the question
  of the proper capacities for the terrace and for the
  pens on "the 'terrace. Tt -certainly has -never been
                              81



                                                                        MR. COLLINS

reflected anywhere in the safety certificate which, as
you~lcnow} simply refers to the totality of the terrace.

          265, the w o r k i n g p a r t y of the 29th of July.
C o n s i d e r a t i o n of p r o p o s a l s - •• These,.p l a n s . 2(a)
Plan /6 - for both security access and emergency
egress purposes, a pitch perimeter fence gate to
be provided.   That in fact would be or would become
the gate to pen 3 because one of the requirements, as
you will recall, or one of the matters that was done,m
was to divide that central' pen into what is now 3 and
4 as part of the proposals. When that was done that
would have meant that there would be no exit gate in
pen 3 at all through the perimeter because the gates
as they originally were went from 2 to 4 and that of
course also explains why the gate in pen 4 is positioned
not central to*that pen but, if you look down from the
 tunnel, to the right of the pen because that was the
original gate in the original perimeter fence before
 there were any pens at all.and was roughly towards the
middle of the pen.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                 Composite pen.

      MR. COLLINS:   Of the composite pen. When pen 3
was created it was necessary, so the working party
quite rightly believed, to add a gate in that perimeter
fence and that was done roughly centrally but of course
the pen 4 gate was not central.   That sounds a bit
muddled but I hope it is clear enough. Then (b) /8A -
the new handrail by Turnstile 23 to be either shortened
or re-aligned so as to maintain the exit width between
the outer (river) wall and Turnstile 23 - that is of
course G - and the exit width between Turnstile 16 and
 the new handrail not to be less than the width of the
roller shutter gate between Turnstiles 16 and 17.
The purpose of that of course being that you cannot let
people out of the gate and then have a narrowing because
 that will cause congestion at the exit. And then (i)
 over the page, stewarding of new gates - a s mentioned in
my letter of the 2ndof May, it is essential that all
 the new gates are-fully supervised by Stewards, who
must be fit, able and properly trained.

      Again, sir, it is plain in context, one goes back
 to the letter of the 2nd of May, 1985, that is
 referring to the outside gates and not to the gates
 in the new, or in any of the radial fences on the
 terracing.

      267 is simply that being passed on to the club.
 269, Eastwood to the County, referring to receipt of
 the’working Party comments.
                                                 MR. COLLINS

   "(a) We are not sure of the location on
    the West terrace of the proposed extra
    security gate.  There is already a gate
    in the 2m wide gap formed by the new
    radial fence for u s e ^ y the police. This
    same gate will stilT^be available for the
    spectators in emergency as there are gates
    into the 2m gap from the terrace which
    will be under the control of the police.
    This point may perhaps be clarified during
    the Working Party's visit."

And he says the fence is invany event aligned.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is contemplating peopleg
going out of pen 4, round the gate in the radial fence
at the back, down 5 and out on to the pitch?

     MR. COLLINS:   That is precisely.      From 3 too, from
3 rather than from 4, yes._.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     From 3?

      MR. COLLINS:   I am -sorry. Well, from 4 and froa 3
perhaps.   Certainly ....   Then we have 271. meeting of
"the Working Party.  Ground inspection.   Leppings Lane.
Progress of the works to segregate visiting supporters
behind and on the West Terrace and stand were inspected
with particular reference to the points raised at the
meeting on the 29th of July.    Then there is a reference
lto alleged poor workmanship on the wall. That is the
wall at the rear of the stand.    And certain comments
about irrelevant matters.    Then over the page, fourth
paragraph:

    "On the terrace itself it was noted that there
     was an existing gate in the new 2 m. wide gap
     formed by the new radial fence for use by the
     Police.  This gate would still be available
     for the use of spectators in an emergency as
     the gates at the top of the terrace under the
     control of the Police would enable spectators
     to be directed down the 2 m. wide gap.
     However, it was agreed that steps or a longer
     gate would be required.  It was also agreed
     that a new gate would be required from the
     new South Central Terrace Pen."

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      That is 3.

     MR. COLLINS:      That is 3. Then reference on 274 in
a aletter from the council to the club referring to the
discussion and the Interim Popplewell Report and over
the .page .after .reference -to-safety -stewards -and require­
ments arising from Popplewell we have:
                       83


                                                   MR. COLLINS

        "(c) adequate first aid and first aid room
         facilities should be available (NOTE - para­
         graph 8 of your Club’s General Safety Certificate
         requires that a suitably equipped First Aid Room
         must be provided anehaaaintaianed, that such First
         Aid assistants as tfiTe- Chief Constable may
         require - and not less than one such assistant
         for each 2,000 spectators - shall be available,
         a doctor employed or retained by the Club is
         available to attend at the First Aid Room if
         required and that his' whereabouts are known
         to those in the Police Central Control Room,
         and that the First Aid Room is adequately
         signed and capable of being lit by the
         emergency power supply)."

So despite what was being said, as we saw in relation
to the 1980 season it does not appear the first aid
room had got properly off the ground. We have the
letter in reply to that on.page 276.    It confirms
arrangements have been finalised with South Yorkshire
Police  for the staff concerned to be briefed on
matters relating to safety/emergency prior to the
 first home game on the 17-th of August and I think
the rest is not relevant.

      Then there is a letter, copy letter, at 277.
This is a letter written by Mr. /Eastwood as one can
see by the reference at the top right.   Indeed, it
  is signed W.E.  There is a note at the top.   "I hadn't
seen this until after I had estimated" - is it -
"Gleesons" - oh, no - "instructed Gleesons to do a"
something "different to the one Dr. E wants." Fencing
I think it probably is.   "What about letting me see
letters before they go on file?" That, I think, is
in the writing of Mr. Strange.   This is a letter, copy
of a letter, rather, from Dr. Eastwood to Mr. Chester,
the Secretary of the Club. He deals with the complaints
about the brickwork. And then the bottom of the page,
"Turning to matters on the second page:- 'It was agreed'
My comments on the points you have in mind are as
follows:-    (b) This refers to the existing gate
between the new 2m wide gap formed by the radial
fence which will be used for police access only.
You will notice from the wording of David's minute
I persuaded them that steps could be used.    I have
 interpreted this as being from the inside only which
means that we will not lose any of your advertising
space.   We have added the provision of some timber
 steps on the inside to the work being carried by
a   ^    11
Gleeson.

         From that it looks as if the advertising board
was able to be opened, that is to say, if the gate    opened
so the advertising board would swing away and thus    one
would not lose any space.  That perhaps is of less    import­
ance. What is perhaps significant is what appears     now.

    "(c) The other radi'at" fence forming the small
     visitors pen has left a length of terrace
     without a direct access on to the pitch. There
     is of course a gate at thh top o£ the terrace
     connecting into the next pen and we had hoped
     that the police would accept that as an adequate
     means of exit in emergency.   However at the
     meeting they made the point very strongly that   -
     if someone had to be got out of the pen which
     has no gate or if there was misbehaviour the
     police would only be able to get in via the
     neighbouring pen, passing up the terrace through
     the gate at the back and then down again in the
     isolated pen. They considered this unacceptable.
     I think that this particular item can be paid
     for out of the contingency sum and suggest that
     it be added to Gleeson's work."

So one canonly perhaps express some surprise anyone
should have thought it was acceptable and recognition ;
the Police were clearly right in thinking that it was
unacceptable.  I do not think I need read any more of
that letter.

     Then there is a plan on 280 which shows - I am
not quite sure what it shows.  I think it is the effect
of the new fences on the existing crush barriers and
what should be done to the existing crush barriers.

     282 there is Mr. Lock, memorandum, requiring the
new gate in the separation wall to have an inspection hole
and a boltto the gates at the bottom of the West Stand.

     Then we have a letter about the roof of the North
Stand.   The only reason that is there, I think, is to
indicate that the club suddenly had upon it an un­
expected major expenditure as a result of the need to
carry out repairs to the roof of the North Stand.
It does not have any direct other relevance to these
natters.

     Copy of a letter on the 26th September at 289 to
Corderoy & Company who are the advisers to the Football
Grounds Improvement Trust setting out the works because
of course they would and did give a substantial grant
to the cost of these works.

      291, Working Party in November, 1985, largely
;concerned wit-H provision o f ,disabled-..-facilities and
 the enlargement and roofing of the Kop which was then
                                              MR. COLLINS

being proposed but at 5 there is reference to crowd flew
at the Leppings Lane end.

    "The Police reported on the continuing problems
     caused by the merging^of•spectators from all
     parts of the stadium "at the Leppings Lane end.
     It was difficult to see how this .could be
     overcome, as the physical restraints to achieve
     this could conceivably be more of a danger than
     allowing the present position to continue."

Then it was agreed that the draft of a Booklet prepared
by the South Yorkshire Police outlining the duties of
safety stewards was acceptable and should be distributed.
That, I think, is South Yorkshire Police document 23.

     LORD JUSTICE' TAYLOR:  I do not quite follow that.
The merging of spectators from all parts of the stadium
at the Leppings Lane end.  Does that mean outside?

     MR. COLLINS:  I am not sure, sir. Yes, whether it
means at the end of the game everyone comes out there E
am not sure.  I think that may well be so.

     Sir, then we have a document from the Football
Association which is referred to in fact in paragraph
203 of the Green Guide in which the F.A. sets out some
of its requirements.  Revised memorandum on crowd
management.


    "This document sets out to amplify and clarify
     the responsibilities of clubs in relation to
     this most difficult problem.  Both our bodies
     are fully aware of the enormous amount of time,
     money and energy expended by our clubs in
     ensuring that the public can attend matches in
     safety."




                            / With the eyes
                 86

                                    Mr. COLLINS

     With the eyes of the world on us, however, we
     cannot afford to relax for one moment. We ask
     you to study the memorandum in great detail.
     Failure to act on any of the recommendations
     may be taken into;account should a club
     subsequently be fc^atg’ed with misconduct under
     Football Association Rules 23 and 24".

That is signed by Mr.. Croker and Mr. Kelly.

     295, A, "Admission of Spectators":

     "1. Clubs must, in consultation_with the Police
     and visiting Club, consider whether any match
     should be made 'all ticket'.

           b. Under no circumstances should tickets
           be sold on the day of the match.  Maximum,
           publicity should be given to this fact
           in the areas of both clubs.

           c. Clubs are entirely responsible for
           the distribution of tickets allocated to
           them and must take all possible steps to
           ensure that -tickets are not sold to supporters
           of the opposing team."

Of course,  that was a matter which, in part, caused
the problems in the 19 81 crushing.

     "B.   PRIOR PLANNING:

     1.   Clubs must, in addition to the above, undertake
     detailed liaison with the police, opposing club,
     rail and coach operators and supporters' Travel
     Clubs at least 10 days before a match to determine
     the likely movements of spectators and any other
     relevant matters. . In the cases of Cup ties, due
     consideration must be given, at the time of the
     Draw, to possible replay arrangements.

     2.   The number of police and stewards to operate
     at each match must be agreed with the Police.

     3.    Clubs should consider, in the interests of
     control at particular matches, reducing capacity,
     even when agreed with the competent authority
     under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, either for
     the ground as a whole, or for a particular section.

     4.   Clubs should consider, if necessary, closing
     a particular section or sections of the ground.

     5.   Clubs should consider in full consultation
     with Police,  the Football Association and the
     Football League,-varying the kick-off times or
     even requesting permission to change the day of
     the match".      --
                  87


                                        Mr. COLLINS

Then 296, "Segregation" ---

     LORD. JUSTICE TAYLOR:  When it says "varying the
kick-off times”, what does that mean?

     Mr. COLLINS:  I understand that to mean when the
Football Association of--whoever” in any fixture says
that a match is going to be, say, at 3 o'clock, the
Club can in advance say "Well, we know that such and
such is happening around that time which makes 3 o'clock
an awkward time. Can we put it back?"

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     So it is not talking about
postponement? _               _

     Mr. COLLINS:  It is not talking about ad hoc
postponement, certainly not as I read it, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS: Then we come to the section entitled
"Segregation" on page 296:

     "Clubs must make adequate arrangements for the
     segregation of riyal supporters. To ensure
     segregation, it will be necessary to reserve a
     section or sections in the stadium for visiting
     supporters.   It is essential in this process
     that adequate information on the likely movements
     of visiting supporters is obtained by the Home
     Club in consultation with the visiting club and
     the bodies listed in B 1 ."

Then Section 5:

     "Contingency plans must be made to move supporters
     situated in the wrong section ..."

and so on.

     "6. Wherever possible, segregation should be
     effected by permanent structures such as wall,
     barriers or fences....

     D.   PROTECTION OF PLAYING AREA:

     An adequate number of police and stewards must,
     be available to restrict access to the field of
     play.  Clubs must protect the playing field
     by means of a fence, moat, double-barrier, waLl
     or other system capable of denying access to
     spectators. Any form of protection must incorporate
     an adequate number of exits, manned at all times,
     to allow access to the field of play in emergencies.

     The Football Association may instruct a Club to
     instal such a fence, moat or,barrier, subject to
     any designation order under the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act which may be in force at the Club."
                                            MR. COLLINS
Over the page:

         "OTHER MEASURES:

         A sufficient numb.ex.pf police and adequately trained
         stewards must be.-an .duty before, during and after
         the game.  Steps must be taken to ensure spectators
         do not bring objects into the ground that may be
         used in acts of violence."

There must be no missiles, there must be plastic cups,
they must exclude drunks and troublemakers, they must
staff gates properly;  there must be electronic or
other surveillance systems to allow police to direct
personnel to problem areas.

         "9. All efforts should be made to provide spectators
         with pre-match or half-time entertainment" --

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Incidentally, do we have
the programme for this match?

     Mr. COLLINS:  I have not seen one, no. I am sure
there must be one available somewhere. Mr. Glasgow
is very kindly --

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I only mwention it because
somebody said that there was pre-match entertainment
advertised but not provided.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Yes, sir, I think that is right.
Certainly we know that there is a document in the
bundle in which the Football Association indicated
that they were going to provide the youth competition
which they then for some reason cancelled.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Perhaps it is slightly ironic in
those circumstances that they required all efforts to
be made to provide entertainment and it would seem,
from the evidence that we have had so far, then go on
to cancel that entertainment.

         "F.   FURTHER PRECAUTIONS:

         Clubs should take active steps to prevent the
         operation of ticket touts.  Clubs should take
         active steps to prevent ticket forgeries" ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I do not know whether you have
covered 12. That might be of some importance.

         Mr. COLLINS:   I am sorry, sir.   I should have read
'that:

         "Clubs should take whatever steps are necessary to
         ensure the comfort" of spectators before, during and
         after the game."
Il < s / o *                              89



                                                                      Mr. COLLINS

                      And, at 11, there must be an effective public address
                      system.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Yes.

                           Mr. COLLINS:        On .^siCge 298 ,--'over the page, half-way
                      down the page:

                           "MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED BY THE AWAY CLUB:
                 B
                           3. Clubs should appoint stewards to help manage
                           and inform spectators at matches and to accompany
                           parties of supporters travelling away."

                      Of course, that is of limited application in a semi-final.
                      One accepts that it is directed to ordinary League
                      matches.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Yes.

                           Mr. COLLINS:        Then-we come to the bottom of 2 99,
                      Section I:

                           "Failure to implement any of the precautions
                           outlined in this Memorandum may be taken into
                 D         account in the consideration of any charge brought
                           against the Club or may, in itself, lead to such a
                           charge."

                      Then there is a letter on page 301, against which I
                      have put a question mark and the note "Why is it in?"
                      Having made that note, I will go on to 305.  It is
                      about disabled facilities, sir.
                  E
                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Yes.

                           Mr. COLLINS:   305 is a note which I think we have
                      seen before, from the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
                      Officer of January, 1986:

                           "As a result of several incidents during the
                           recent past, involving casualties within Sports
                           areas, I.hive decided to delegate one of my
                           Officers the specific task of liaison with the
                           Football Clubs within the South Yorkshire
                           boundaries.  This'officer will have the task
                           to ensure that advice and, if necessary, training
                           can be provided by this Service to members of
                           your staff.  It is also to be his responsibility
                           to ensure that the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service are totally aware of the geography
                           of your ground and of any Incident Plans which you
                           may have drawn up in order to ensure the safety
                           of the general public..."

                      andasking for communication and co-operation. There is
                      a reply to that, on the next page, from Mr. McCee, the
                      Chairman:


 J . L. Harpham Ltd
                        90


                                                         Mr. COLLINS

      " T h a n k y o u for y o u r r e c e n t letter, a n d of course
      w e w o u l d like to c o - o p e r a t e w i t h y o u in an y w ay
      p o s s i b l e to i m p r o v e y o u r se r v i c e at g a m e s pl aye d
      a t o u r st a d i u m " .

A copy was sent to Mr ^ C h e s t e r There is then a Circular
from the Home Office irv relation to the effect of the
Local Government reorganisation. The relevant bit is
308e, where you will see:

      " R i g h t s of various, i n t e r e s t e d b o d i e s (police,
      b u i l d i n g a u t h o r i t i e s or, in the M e t r o p o l i t a n
      c o u n t y a r e as a f t e r ’a b o l i t i o n ' , fire au tho r i t i e s )
  ~   to consultation, access to grounds and information
      adn to the appeals procedure".

Sir, that is the amendment that I was referring to
earlier.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   I do not think it is necessary to
look at the remainder of that. I will     go on to 3L2,
which is   a letter to the Chief Fire Officer from the
City of Sheffield:

       "I enclose for your information a copy of my
       Report to the General Purposes Panel on 6th May
       19 86, together with a copy of the Panel's
       Resolution in relation to that Report.   I would
       like to make the following comments:

       (a)   Although it has been decided                       to carry on
       with the old administrative system                       organised by
       the  County Council, I wish to make                      it clear that
       the  system is under review and may                      be adjusted
       in the future;

       (b)         I w i l l s h o r t l y w r i t e to the othei D i s t r i c t
       C o u n c i l s in S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e w i t h a v i e w to
       e s t a b l i s h i n g a b a s i s for c o n s u l t a t i o n as
       d e s c r i b e d in t h e R e s o l u t i o n ;

       (c)   the re-drafting of the Certificate conditions
       will shortly be completed and I will then be
       asking for your comments on them.

        If you have any questions to ask on this matter,
        please do not hesitate to contact Mr. Bownes on
        the number given below."

 Then there is the report on 313. This, of course, is
 in the context of the takeover by the Sheffield City^
 Council of the responsibilities following the abolition
 of the -South Yorkshire' Council. Page 313 , second
 paragraph:
                                       91

                                                            Mr. COLLINS

                           "The Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
              A            was designated as requiring a Safety Certificate
                           in August 1978 and such a Certificate was issued
                           by the County Council on 21st December, 1979.   The
                           stadium is currently undergoing major works which,
                           when complete, wi-li-form a.roof over the Spion
                           Kop and thus substantially improve the
                           accommodation for 'Spectators."

              B     Then    314, "Safety Certificate Standard Conditions":

                           "At the moment the'Safety Conditions attached to
                           Safety Certificates are standardised throughout
                           South'Yorkshire and both the Police and the Fire
                           Service have indicated that they woud wish this
                           situation to continue for reasons of administrative
                           simplicity.  The Conditions do, however, give
               C           some cause for concern, as they appear to be
                           inadequate or inappropriate in some areas. The
                           drafting of these Conditions is of particular
                           importance as it is.a serious criminal offence
                           to contavene any of them punishable by the
                           Statutory maximum fine (currently £2,000) or 2
                           years' imprisonment, or both."

               D    Actually, there is no maximum fine on indictment.

                           "It is proposed to re-draft the Certificate
                           Conditions where appropriate and to submit then
                           to the panel for approval. Sheffield Wednesday's
                           Certificate would then be replaced in accordance
                           with Section 4(1)(b) of the Act. Sheffield
                           United's Certificate could then be issued with
                E          the new conditions before the start of the 198 3/7
                           season.  The re-drafted Conditions would, of
                           course, be submitted to the Fire Service, the
                           Police and Building Surveyor for comment;   other
                           authorities in South Yorkshire could also be
                           involved in this process."

                    Sir, I note, as you obviously did, inadequate or
                F   inappropriate reference to some of the conditions, and
                    I ask you to note the date of this, which is 5th June
                    1986. We are now the 15th June 1989 and there is still
                    no new Safety Certificate.  Perhaps to be fair, one
                    can say that they are awaiting the outcome of this
                    Inquiry, so I will then say that as at the 15th April,
                    1989 there was no new Safety Certificate.

                G         On page 315 there is a reference to the Health
                     and Safety Executive.   There is an indication, as is
                     indeed the position, that the Health and Safety
                     Executive have made what I understand to be a policv
                     decision that they will not involve themselves with
                     football grounds, 'as the responsibility-is >on- the local
                     authority under the 19.75. Act.

                H           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                         Mr. COLLINS

     Mr. COLLINS: Then there is a record on 317 and
318 of the Resolution of the Council to adopt the
proposal set out in that report. In particular, on
318, sub-paragraph (c):

      "    the Head of .^ministration and Legal
      Department be requested to draft new safety
      certificate conditions in consultation with
      other appropriate authorities for approval
      by the Council."

On pagie 319 we have a record of a meetinct between the
Police and the Club on 18th June, 1986:

      "Matters Raised:

     Stewards:  The Club will update Stewards’
     Instructions to take in relevant details from
     the Popplewell Report..." -

and I think by now this-would be the final PopplewelL
Report -

     "Representatives from South Yorkshire Police would
     attend the instructional evening for stewards which
     will take place on the 19th August. South
     Yorkshire Police will brief stewards prior to
     every home game.  This will be done by the
     Inspector in charge of each area ofthe ground” .

We heard evidence about that being done.

     "South Yorkshire Police requested that all turn-
     stiles, but particularly those at Leppincs Lane,
     to be opened earlier.  The Club agreed to do
     everything possible to ensure this."

Then we have, under "Access at Leppings Lane":

     "Mr. Chester agreed to discuss with Dr. Eastwood
     and the Board the possibility of a wider door in
     the wall inside the Leppings Lane area and more
     permanent barriers for use on limited areas" --

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I was just wondering about
this:    ... all turnstiles, but particularly those at
Leppings Lane, to be opened earlier." This does not
appear to be in relation to anything in particular?
This is in general.

     Mr. COLLINS:    This appears to be general, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  That may suggest an awarsn.ess
that the number of turnstiles there..r e q u i r e s that they
should be in operation for longer to get the numbers
through;  I do not know.—
                                        Mr. COLLINS


     Mr. COLLINS:  Indeed, sir, that had occurred to
me.  It may be that we will find out more about that
in due course.  I do not know.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Yes.
                        i
                        -
     Mr. COLLINS:  It continues:

     "West Stand:  South Yorkshire Police requested that
     a steward be made available to patrol the front of
     the West Stand to prevent visiting fans throwing
     their tickets over”.   Sheffield Wednesday Football
     Club to sell tickets from Rov; 7 upwards. The
     possibility of removing certain crash barriers
     at the Leppings Lane standing area was discussed,
     as this would assist the flow of fans into the
     ground.  This matter would have to be taken up
     when the inspection of the ground relative to the
     issuing of the Safety Certificate takes place."

Then there is a reference to correct money at the turn­
stiles, keys and plans.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Some barriers were removed,
were they, as a result-of this?

     Mr. COLLINS: As we will see, yes, sir. There was
one important one removed at the mouth of Pen 3.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS:  Then we have a letter of 25th June,
 1986, on 320, from the Chairman, Mr. McCee to the
 Secretary, Mr. Chester, referring to a seminar for the
 stewards, attendance of the police, and the confirmation
 by the police to Mr. Chester of the 3rd July about the
 proposal for the meeting, and giving "details of the
 points we would wish to discuss", which were "1. Stewards
■2. Access to ground - turnstiles, Leppings Lane end in
 relation to away supporters", and so on.




                            /Then there is reference ....
                                              94

V'
                                                            MR. COLLINS



                            Then there is reference, 323 onwards, I thinl: it is
                      an Ambulance Document relating  to the ambulance requirements
                      in relation to liajor Incidents at Sheffield Wednesday.

                            If you   looh on324 sify_you will see, I thin’: it is
                      Ambulance, I   will be corrected if I an wrong, it is provided
                      by 5:
                 B
                            "On arrival at ground, Station Officer Higgins,
                            after consultation with-Police, will establish
                            patient treatment and loading point at Gymnasium
                            which is located at rear of north stand off
                            Penistone Road i-iorth.*'

                      Then there is a map as you see on 325 of the ground and of
                      where the ambulances are supposed to go. There is another mav
                      on 326 showing the surrounding area.

                            Then on 327 there is an indication of the ne     s or
                      evacuation.

                            Then a letter on 3 23 from Superintendent Marshall to
                      Hr. i/ilkinson of the Ambulance Service enclosing Appendi:-: *L'
                 D    of the Force Standing Order which relates to evacuation, 1
                      contingency plans for evacuation and which wo have already
                      seen within the Standing Order.   I an not going to take you
                      through it sir at this stage, save that I think I would note
                      at the bottom of 330:

                            •'Details of Deployment, Duties and instructions
                            to Stewards
                  E
                            These details should be' drawn up by the Club in
                            consultation with the Police and Fire Brigade,
                            v/ith particular reference to stewards1 responsi­
                            bilities in assisting police in evacuation
                            situations."

                      8 deals with communications and then on 334 at the top
                      paragraph 1: ■

                            "The prime responsibility for the arrangement
                            of affairs at sports grounds lies with the club.
                            To that end they should ensure that stewards are
                            suitably qualified."

                      On 336-7a.

                             "Specific Duties of Stewards

                            Specific duties to be undertaken by Stewards
                            include:

                             a) Preventing overcrowding, ensuring that
                             crowd liraits in various parts of the ground are



 J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                              95

                                                         HR. COLLIHS



                            complied with and that gangways and exits are
                            kept clear."
                      So there is the Police, or there are the Police indicating that    ^
                      insofar as their Standing Oilers' are concerned they arc placing
                      the dutv upon the Club Stev/ards to prevent overcrcv/Ging ana _
                      ensure that the limits are complied v/ith and the gangways ana
                      e:;its are kept clear. That of course is what was in writing
              B
                      in there.
                            Then we have a letter at 338, 14th July 1986 from
                      Eastwood to Mr. Chester relating or referring to the update
                      of the Green Guide, the 1936 version, the one that is now
                      in force.
                            "I have read through the part of the document
                            which deals with Sports Grounds. I do not see
                            any grounds for objecting to any of the ^
                            recommendations. There will be little ii any
                            change in the procedure- already established at
                            Hillsborough. The document envisages that far
                            more grounds for various sports will be
                            designated, but in appropriate circumstances
                            the procedures will not be so onerous as those
               D             relating to Hillsborough."
                      I am wrong, it is not the new Green Guide, it is the forecast
                      I think of what eventually became the 1937 Act and the_Horne
                      Office views on Fire Safety and Safety at Sports Grounas.

                            "There is a welcome statement on page 11 that
                             due account should be taken or the need to
                E            keep the costs to clubs and local authorities
                             to reasonable proportions. There are also
                             various references to Safety Certificates
                             reflecting the circumstances of each particular
                             ground and the number of spectators who are
                             likely to attend. These words may be useful
                             to us in the future, although we can expect to
                             have more stringent requirements compared with
                             some of the smaller clubs.

                             It is comforting to know that the new Green
                             Guide will not become a statutory code and will
                             continue to be subject to interpretation."

                       It may-suggest slightly the wrong attitude to the Safety
                       Requirements in the Green Guide, but that may be unfair to
                       Dr. Eastwood and no doubt he will explain that m     due tame.

                              340 is the Ambulance Service writing to Mr. Chester,
                       referring to the visit of Mr. Wilkinson on the 16th of July.
                       •Second paragraph:


                  H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                      MR. COLLINS



      "The meeting was held with Mr. Ward, Senior
     Groundsman. After touring your complex and
     discussing evacuation plans with South Yorkshire
      Police, it was felt that the Ambulance Service
     would normally only .become involved in any
      events after they had,already occurred and
      therefore, slight delays could be experienced
      on occasions in responding to the incident.
      To avoid this I would ask if two passes could
      be supplied to the Ambulance Service which
      would enable us to ensure that an Ambulance
     _Officer was in your ground at all home fixtures.

      There would be no cost to the Club for this
      facility, and it would improve ground safety.
      In the event of any untoward occurrence my
      Officers would be in a position to identify
      problems prior to them happening and would
      therefore be in a much better position to
      respond to any emergency."

Someone has written ....

      MR. KALLIPETIS:    Sirj'that is my writing.

      Perhaps while I am on my feet I should say that the
documents at page 322-327, which is the SYMAS Plan for
Hillsborough, were prepared after the meeting of the 18th.
of July to which this letter refers.

      MR. COLLINS: I am grateful.

      I think though Mr. Kallipetis' comment is an accurate
one, the two season tickets were indeed not made available.

      Then at 341 we have a manuscript reference,  I think
this is Mr. Strange's writing again, to the inspection
by the Working Party on the 7th August 1986.

      "Items of safety work requested to be carried out.

      1) Remove three barriers on Leppings Lane end
      terrace. Add new barrier."

2 refers to the removal of another barrier. Nov/ I think
sir it is 2 that is the relevant one because that should
show .and does show, I think, the exit from the tunnel
on to Pens 3 and 4 and if you look at the right-hand side
where it says "OUT" that goes altogether. The left-hand
the part of the barrier which goes up to the fence is
removed.

      If yjau .would be good .enough sir .to. look at. t’
                                                        p
of the barriers that we have somewhere, you will r
that the one in question isf'the one, or what is
                                   MR. COLLINS



that one described as "Design 3. Height 3'11", 1.2 metres"
nearest the tunnel entrance in Pen 4.

       That originally was barrier 14 4 and was originally
stretched across what is now= the central fence, and effectively
there was a barrier across~the mouth of the tunnel.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It went all the way, did it?

      MR. COLLINS: All the way across the mouth of the tunnel.
What is removed effectively -is the remnants of that barrier,
effectively that position of the barrier in Pen 3 which should
have corresponded to what is now left in Pen 4 is removed.
The proposal was to remove it altogether and indeed it was
removed and the bit that linked up with the fence in Pen 4
was also removed.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   If the drawing at 341 is correct
itlooks as though the Pen   4 bit was continuous with what
remained up to where the fence is, dividing fence is, but
the other one was not joined on. Is that right?

      MR. COLLINS: That would appear to be the case.   I
suspect the reason for that-may have been when they put in
that central fence, and I think we can see this actually
if we go back to the plan, they took a bit of it out when
they put in the central fence.  I forget the page number
of the plans but it perhaps does not matter for the moment.

      I don't think it is necessary for ;ae to read any more
of that.

      At 342 onwards there is a submission by Mr. Eastwood
relating to the application for increased capacity on the Kop.

      Sir, we have put that in not because it is in itself
of direct relevance, but it perhaps worth noting on page 3 50
where there is a discussion of the fire requirements because
there were arguments about the evacuation times, there is
a note in the middle of 350 in the paragraph beginning:
"The present Chief Fire Officer, Mr. Harry Wright" it goes
on about four lines1in:

      "He was prepared to count the exits onto the
        pitch as part of the evacuation system in an
      emergency (each gate is controlled by a policeman)."

That you will recall, sir, was the difference between the Kop
end and the Leppings Lane end.

      Mr. Eastwood takes that up on 351:

      "With this as background the Club has been
      quite shocked by the suggestion that 'the gates
      onto the pitch should-be ignored in the
      calculations of evacuation times, and that
                                             98

                                                        MR. COLLINS



                           eight minutes should be achieved by means of
                           ordinary exits. They feel this change of view '
                           cannot be justified."

                     Sir, I think all the relevajft•'documents were included for
                     the sake of completeness, bu/t we can in fact go on to page 368,
                     that still refers to the Kop and is referring to the HSE.
                B          369, the reason for the inclusion of that newspaper
                     extract is the point I made earlier: you will recall the
                     regulations require advertisement in the newspapers.  You
                     will hear in due course from the City Council that they accept
                     that they did not advertise or did not require an advertise­
                     ment as they should have done, but they say:  "Well anyway
                     everyone knew about it because it was given a lot of publicity"
                     and there is the publicity being given.

                           I am not sure that is a very good excuse for failing
                     to comply with statutory requirements but still.

                           Page 37 0, a letter of the 27th August 1S86, or a copy
                     of a letter from Mr. Bownes to Mr. Chester:

                           "I refer to the meeting of the General Purposes
                 D         Panel of the City Council which took place on
                           Thursday 21 August 19 86 which you and other
                           representatives of the Club attended.

                           I am writing to confirm that the Panel agreed to
                           increase the capacity of the Kop to 21,000
                           spectators subject to the following conditions:-
                 E         (a) that the infilling of crush barriers takes
                           place prior to the match on 25th August;

                           (b) the other work referred to before the Panel
                           be completed within 2 weeks (i.e. by 4th
                           September 1936);

                           (c) extra stewarding be provided during the
                           next 2 matches to the satisfaction of the Fire
                           Service and the Police.

                           Obviously, all work is to be carried out to the
                           satisfaction of the Certificating Authority and
                           the Panel authorised me to take any necessary
                           action to secure compliance with the above
                          "conditions."

                     Well they got that permission but no one ever thought to
                     change the Safety Certificate.

                           1st October 1986 is the next letter, 372. Eastwood,
                     or somebody in Eastwood’s 'firm on behalf o'f Eastwood to
                     Mr. Chester:               ~--—




J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                            99

                                                       MR. COLLINS



                         "During the summer inspection Inspector Calvert
                         asked for some of the barriers at the Leppings
                         Lane end of the ground to be removed so as to
                         allow easier access into the various pens.
                         Rather than ask —    s-u^-.contractor to do the
                         work, who were at tha^-time working overtime, we
                         instructed a firm to have the work completed
                         before the Everton game. This they did and today
               B|        we have forwarded a certificate ....      Payment
                         should be received by them no later than 16
                         October 1986."

                    There  was a reference you will recall when-that, was mooted to
                    it having been put before the Working Party and notification
                    given. There was no record that we have been able to find
                    that it ever was put up in that way.




               D




                                             /On"‘the face of it
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                        MR.   COLLINS



On the face of it there is a breach, therefore, of
the terms of the Safety certificate and no-one at any
time seems to have considered the effect of removing
that barrier upon the cap.a^JL.ty of Pen 3 or upon the
likely effect of people ctra-ing into' Pen 3 and their
means of access because, o-f- course, the removal of that
barrier as becomes clear from looking at the plan
of the configuration of the barriers means that there
is a channel from the mouth of the tunnel down effectively
to the barrier that collapsed.      I do not say that
the two are necessarily connected, one perhaps does not
know, but it is a_t least significant _that there was the
capability of a surge down in that way.      There is evidence
that we have of people going diagonally or being carried
diagonally down that pen and it is a fact that the collapse
of the barrier was in such a position that was consistent
with pressure being applied through that diagonal and, of
course, that is the effect, or one possible effect, of the
removal of that barrier and it was, therefore, we would
say of the most vital importance that this removal should
not be carried out without considering what effect, if
any, it would have upon the safe capacity or the safe use
of that pen.
     373      is the internal Police memorandum in which the
relevant Superintendent writes to his Chief Superintendent,
who I think at that time would have been Mr. Mole, saying:
     "I have gone through the whole of this extremely
     comprehensive document" - that is the revised
     edition of the Green Guide - "and whilst a con sider­
     able amount of the contents is applicable to ma n a g e ­
     ment of the Club, engineering problems and fire
     officers, certain paragraphs are worthy of mention
     in relation to Sheffield Wednesday's Football
     Ground at Hillsborough.

      Paragraph 16 relating to crowd pressures.    As you
      are aware the Kop has had a tendency at recent
      matches to produce this wave effect and it is
      necessary that when a large match is anticipated
      in the future we should ensure that the numbers
      allowed onto the Kop strictly adhere to the capacity
      allowed.   it is imperative therefore that the
      automatic counting system is always in working or tie r
      for 'A' and *B ' category matches, such as the visits
    __of Manchester United, where almost capacity crowds
      can be expected."

Interesting to note that capacity on the Kop is there
emphasised but there is no similar emphasis in relation
to the Leppings Lane end.
     "Paragraph 23 onwards lays down the management
     responsibility very ’clearly and is to be welcomed,
     since there have in the past been grey areas as to
     who is responsible for crowd control etc."
                            101


                                                   MR.   COLLINS



I fear that not only in the past, in the light of what
we have been hearing in the course of this Inquiry.
      "Paragraph 28 recommends the appointment of a
      safety officer and idJEnti f ies-'his duties. I can
    •only presume that the .safety officer is in fact
      Mr. Lock"
actually, no - as we shall see in the later documentation
the Safety Officer is M r . Mackrell

      "although I have never heard him designated as
      such, and this should be clarified with the club.
      Furthermore, in the discussion of a central
      control point being designated (other than then
      police c o n t r o l ) o n e would assume that the central
      control point designated in respect of the Sheffield
      Wednesday ground would be the video viewing room
      in the south stand.
      Paragraph 43 relates to records of tests kept and
      examination of the ground.   I am not aware that
      these are kept by the club.

      Paragraph 199 relates to exercises of stewards
      regarding emergency procedures and I am not aware
      that the club have ever carried out exercises in
      this respect.
      In conclusion, Sheffield W e d n e s d a y Football Club
      have complied with the guide to a very large extent,
      more so I would suspect, than the majority of clubs
      in the country, and it is only on minor points as
      identified above where improvements could be made
      so far as police procedures are concerned."
Then we have, on 18th February, 1987, the Fire input in
relation to the proposed new Certificate.    Sir, the
letter of 3rd November, 1986, is merely a letter requesting
that the Fire Service do the necessary checks and make
the necessary recommendations. . For the record, it is
Exhibit 67 in the Fire Service bundle.    It is not included
in this bundle.   It says:

      "An inspection of the'ground was carried out on
      17th November, 1986.    Comments appended below
    _ do not take into account the numbers of persons
      using individual areas, lateral and radial gangways
      or units of exit widths, as it is assumed that
      from various cor respondence and documentation
      that the various working parties and committees
      have adequately dealt with these items."

Then i t d e a l s w i t h e s c aping' f i r e , and then "B” on t h e
Spion Kop:
      "It is understood th§t the gates in the pitch perimeter
      fencing form part of the emergency exits.   The gates
                                          MR.   COLLINS



    for reasons of security, fasten with barrel bolts
    secured to the gate both top and bottom and open
    in a sideways direction.    It is doubtful that if
    it were necessary tq_eva.cuate the stand onto the
    pitch in an emergencyl-that the' gates would open if
    pressure were generated by a crowd.     No record can
    be found in respect of discussion on gate fastenings.
    It is recommended that a satisfactory security
    device easily openable from the pitch side should
    be found and fitted to all perimeter gates."
And then, a little lower down, "West Stand" under "B":
     "Exit gates to the pitch perimeter as item B under
     Spion Kop above."

It may be said that that implies an acceptance as at that
date that the perimeter gates at the Leppings Lane end
were to perform the same function as the perimeter gates
at the spion Kop end and that, of course, may as a
natter of fact be so but I again repeat that quite clearly
from the earlier correspo ndenc e those were not treated
as evacuation gates for the purpose of deciding on the
timings in relation to the safety at the Leppings Lane
end, although undoubtedly they could and would be used
if circumstances made it necessary.

     Sir, I do not think it is necessary to go through
any of the other items.  They are all very detailed matters
but do not, I think, relate to matters which are vital to
this Inquiry.

     379 is a note of a message from Sharon to Mr. Strange
and to Mr. Eastwood:

     "Subject: Ground Capacity for possible Semi-final.
     Dated 26th February, 1987.
     Sharon has been sent a form from the Football
     Association to fill in for Hillsborough to be
     considered for this year's semi-finals."
After 1981 and t he’ problems of 1981 Hillsborough was not
considered by the F.A. and it was not until 1987 that
it was put back into favour.

       MR. GIBSON-WATT:   Sir, that is not quite right.
It w.a_s considered for a replay in 1986.

     MR. COLLINS:   I am sorry, I had forgotten that.
It took place there, did it?

     MR. GIBSON-WATT:    No, the replay was not needed.
     MR. COLLINS:
     "1.   She wanted to"know present capacity of
     Spion Kop - 21,000.  • v
                          103


                                                         MR.   COLLINS



     "2. What is the live reading under the floodlights"

We do not need to bother with that.
     "3. Has any account.t.^e'eri taken for alterations
     done cn Leppings Lane ..over last few seasons?   Is
     the 10,200 or so figure still correct?      I said
     that in my opinion it needs to be adjusted, better
     to do it now than later.      It could also affect
     ticket sales for Coventry game.      She will speak
     to Graham."
Graham, I think, Is Mr. Mackrell.   That is Eastwoods-
Mr. Strange effectively indicating that the figure at
leppings Lane is too high because although adjusted could
mean either way in the context of what we have been seeing
before he is quite clearly thinking in terms of an
adjustment down rather than up, and that is February, 1987.
     2nd March, 1987, telephone message on page 380
from Mr. Strange to Sharon:
     "3. Dr. Eastwood says leave the capacity at
     Leppings Lane end as 'it is, providing police
     have gates under West stand open so that people
     can distribute throughout the terrace evenly."

Now, there we have I won't say the genesis but a
reflection of the policy which appears to be universal
from the evidence we have had that all you need do is to
let the fans settle themselves on the terraces.    Very
strange philosophy in the light of what we saw in relation
to the 1981 match and comments thereafter and, of course,
on the face of it nothing to do with the point which is
being made which is, is the capacity to be changed,
because it does not matter whether they can distribute
themselves evenly or not; if the capacity is too high,
then however they distribute themselves there are going
to be too many of them and if there are too many of them
there are going to be safety problems.    But, anyway, that
matter was raised, as you see, sir, in February, 1987, but
was effectively, on the face of it, sat upon by Dr. Eastwood
on 2nd March.
      Then we have a Fire Service note from file at page
381 of a meeting held comprising a member of the Fire
Service, Mr. Bownes, and other Oficers of the City Council,
Mr. "Moor from Environmental Health, and twc gentlemen
from the Building Surveyors Department.
      "Contents of letter dated 18.2.87" - that is page
      374 - "were discussed and agreed that these matters
      be taken up with the Club."    Tnat is the fire
      matters.
      Third paragraph*
                                 •v-

      "Stewarding   and s e c u r i n g   of all gates was d i s c u s s e d
                                          MR.   COLLINS



    and the Fire Service indicated that existing
    arrangements were only acceptable subject to
    exits being stewarded..and unlocked during 100%
    of the time that the^r.o.und was in use for a
    designated p u r p o s e . •""-“Any relaxation of this would
    mean an insistence that panic fastenings only be
    provided."
     Now, it is not made entirely clear there but I think
that that relates to or on-the face of it it relates to
the external gates rather than any of the internal gates
in the terracing.              -
     "Discussion then took place on areas of responsibility
     and ground  inspections.
     On areas of responsibility Bownes did not want to be
     tied down to individual references and even indicated
     that his Department could not act independently but
     must refer all matters to the Council Committee
     responsible for the Act.    Whilst all others present
     would prefer definitive areas of responsibility
     (allowing that there.jnust be some overlap), David
     Bownes preferred to refer back to a future meeting
     following further consideration of the matter.
     On ground inspections, Bownes referred to the recent
     Lords decision t h a t g r o u n d s should be inspected
     annually"
I think that refers probably to an amendment of the Lords
to the 1987 Bill as it then was which became s . 10 (b) <3)
I think.
     "...he anticipated that this would mean a much moxe
     thorough examination than the present system of bi­
     annual inspections, and that this would be backed up
     by inspections during games.
     This was agreed by all present but reservations
     about the suggestion that during game inspections be
     carried out by the whole working party were expressed
     by the Fire Service.   It was agreed however that one
     such 'during game' inspection would be set up and the
     outcome monitored.
    -.It was also pointed out by the Fire Service that
      the new guide now included a section which defines
      in detail, management responsibility.  It is
      recommended by ;the Fire Authority that the Club
      Certificate specifies as a condition of the licence
      that this section be complied with."

And, of course, that would be to remove the greyness of
the division of responsibility or to help to do that and
was, no doubt, a very sensible suggestion.   Sadly it was
not put into effect in time.
                          105



                                              MR.   COLLINS



       "Note: David Bownes is reluctant to produce minutes
       of meetings, therefore to safeguard the Authority
       we must make our own notes on meeting and forward
       letters to confirm arry points as appropriate."
A letter then from the City of Sheffield on 22nd April,
1987:
       "In November, 1986 I asked both the Police and Fire
       Service to comment o n t h e condition of your stadium
       having regard to t h e - provisions of the 1975 Act.
       the Police have indicated that as at 6th January, 1987
       they are quite satisfied with the stadium and have
       indicated that the degree of co-operation which they
       receive is very satisfactory.
       the Fire Service have, however, made a number of
       comments"

and then they are set out, because the letter is enclosed
and again "the gates" is the outside gates, as I have
indicated.   I do not think I need read the rest in detail.
     385, a telephone message from Mr. Mackrell to Mr.
Strange:

       "1. He can't find any amendments to original Safety
       Certificate dated 1979. Do I know if any exist?
       Not that I have seen.   One was to be drawn out after
       meeting about Spion Kop but knowing City of Sheffield
       they have rr± done it.

       2. Would I send two prints of the latest ground lay-out.
       OK.

       3. He would prefer us. to meet Officer Working Party
       to discuss their various comments, rather than write
       letters.

       During yesterday's meeting with Graham he asked if
       we would raise the question of increasing the agreed
       capacity on Spion Kop with Officer Working Party.*'
       LORD JUSTICE T A Y L O R : " - When did Mr. Mackrell come”?
       MR. COLLINS:     I cannot off-hand remember, sir.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         He took over from Mr. Chester,
did he?

       MR. GLASGOW:     November, 1986, I think, sir,         if you
will    let me check it.    I am sorry.

     LORD JUSTICE T A Y L O R : _ Anyway he cottoned on to ttie
fact that nothing had happened to the safety Certificate
if nobody else had.            —
                                          MR.   COLLINS



     MR. COLLINS:   That is right.   then we have a
memorandum from the Building Surveyor to Mr.'Bownes:
     "I note your r e q u e s t 4 o r - a report on the condition
     of the above sta diumT— -You wiil appreciate that
     to carry out a complete survey of all parts of
     this complex is a long and time-consuming j o b . which
     should not be approached in anything other than a thorough
     manner.    I have therefore yet to find available diary
     time, for my Officers -to spend on this site."

That is June, 1987.    In July we have the first draft
Certificate Conditions which are sent to the Fire Officer
or Fire Service.   "A first draft only and in basic form,
(i.e. they have not as yet been tailored to the needs of
individual stadia).    I enclose a first draft of the
interpretation section" and that is at 388 and then the
draft conditions at 389.    1. to appoint a Safety Officer,
3. The maximum number of spectators, schedule blank - there
was not any schedule.    4, 5 and 6 require arrangements
with the Chief Constable for the provision of a sufficient
number of Police Officers, providing for police use control
rooms and saying no spectator shall be admitted unless the
methods of admission and the methods to be used for
segregation have been approved by the Chief Constable.
9. The Holder shall ensure that the Safety Stewards
are fit and capable to carryout their duties, properly
trained and instructed, and so on.

     390. "10. the written instructions given to
     stewards must include the following tasks and duties.
     Stewards m u s t :
     (a) prevent ove rcrowding by ensuring the crowd
     limits in various parts of the ground are complied
     with"

and there is a note to the left, written I think by someone
in the Fire service which is pretty illegibile on my copy
but the effect of it is, "How on earth can they do this.
     LORD JUSTICE tAYLOR:     Can stewards control this - it
seems to say, does it not?

     MR. COLLINS:    Query.    Effectively it is how can
they do this.
     "(c) ensure that gangways and exits are kept cleai."
and then various other details.     Over the page 391:
     "The Holder shall provide such signs or notices
     of such type, size and design as the Council m a y
     from time to time require for reasons of public safety.
     The Holder shall ensure that the signs or otices so
     required are clearly ^Legible so that they can easily
     be read at all times.
                      107



                                           MR.   COLLINS



     "26. Without prejudice to the provision of Section 8      -■*.
     of the Act the Holder shall not cause or permit the stadium
     or any of its installations to be altered (which term
     shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any     ?-
     way affect the safety^o'f the stadium) in any manner
     whatsoever without the. prior written consent of the
     Council.   The Holder shall supply the Council with
     copies of such plans and specifications" etc.
     28. The Holder shall provide and maintain at the
     stadium to the satisfaction of the Council a suitably
     equipped first aid room and shall arrange for
     attendance of such numbers of qualified first aid
     attendants as the Council may require"
and then it goes on to require a doctor.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Just before we go on,leaving
aside the question of the amendment of the Safety Certificate,
26, the Holder did get the-consent of the Council in writing
to the amendment of the radial fences, etc.   What about
the removal of the barrier?
     MR. COLLINS:    There -'does not appear to have been a prior
consent in writing to that as far as I can find in the
documentation.    Certainly there does not appear either to
have been an application for consent so it is not, perhaps,
surprising in those circumstances that there was no written
consent.   And then there are what I think are relatively
standard requirements for testing and so on, testing
records and inspections.




                            /LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I am sorry.
                      108


                                                   MR. COLLINS

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I am sorry. Just to clarify.       i
This is sent by the Council   to the Chief Fire Officer ....

     MR. COLLINS:   Yes.                                         \

     LORD JUSTICE' TAYLOR:  Does it go to - presumably
passes between the club .7.. What I am trying to get
at is what activated this, at any rate, beginning to
revise the safety certificate? Was it to do with ....

     MR. COLLINS:   No, i t was activated, it would
appear, by the memorandum on the takeover by the City
Council in 1986, the memorandum in which you will
recall Mr. Bownes said there were inadequacies in
the existing safety certificate so it takes them
from 1986 until July, 1987, to get round to preparing
the first draft notwithstanding the inadequacies in
the existing certificate and the first .draft is not
sent to the club, it is sent to the, I think ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: '‘313, is not it, if I am
not mistaken?

     MR. COLLINS:   313 i-s the internal report to
Council, that is correct, sir, and the relevant point
is on page 314. The conditions, do however give some
cause for concern as they appear to be inadequate or
inappropriate in some areas.   You will recall, sir,
in the resolution of the Council at page 318 at C,
the .Head of Administration and Legal Department be
requested todraft new safety certificate conditions
in consultation.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR.:    Yes.   This is when we pick
it up again, is it, next?

     MR. COLLINS:   A year later or so we have the
first draft.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR.:    I have got it now.

     MR. COLLINS: • Then 394, there is the response
of the Fire Authority, 7th of July.  It is a slsightly
wider response because the council was also dealing
with a slightly wider matter and if we look at page
399,-sir, we will see the letter referred to of the
14th May, 1987, in the first sentence of 394. This
was'a letter sent by the City to the Chief Officer,
Safety of Sports Grounds Act.

    "Following a meeting on Tuesday, 10th    March
     I have given some further thought to    the above
     subject.^ Many points were raised at    the meeting
     but 'I think"that the general"feeling   was that
     the roles of each Authority involved    in the
                     109


                                                 MR. COLLINS

    system should be defined perhaps along the
    lines adopted by the South Yorkshire.        I
    have no objection in principle to roles
    being defined in this- way but I should
    make it clear t h a t ' i t - is agreed that
    particular Authorities 'adopt particular
    roles then they will''be under a duty to
    consult with other interested parties where
    there is an overlap of interest. As I see
    it the Authority which carries out a
    particular role will ‘have the responsibility
    of advising the Council as Certificating
    Authority on all matters falling within
    that Lead Authority role.        I have drawn up
    a draft Schedule which attempts to define
    Lead Authority roles.        I should point out
    that the draft is intended to be open for
    discussion and I would therefore welcome
    your comments on it. Would you please also
    let me know if there..are any other matters
    which should be included in the Schedule.

    Moving on to the question of inspections,
    this point was also -discussed. My view is
    that the existing system of bi annual
    limited inspections is no longer appropriate;
    I feel that one major inspection per year
    should be carried out oneach stadium which
    should include all the areas and installations
    within the sscope of the legislation. To
    back up this inspection there should be a
    number of 'during performance1 inspections
    by Officers.  I think that there is general
    agreement in relation to 'during performance'
    inspections as they would highlight the
    performance of the safety system at each
    stadium whilst it is in operation."

Then next paragraph, middle paragraph on 2:

    "Moving on to the 'working party' structure I
     think it is clear from the meeting of 10th
     March that some clarification of its status
     is required.  It is reasonably clear from
     the County Council's records that the working
     party as such was actually a decision making
     body presumably acting under delegated powers.
   "’However, the normal City Council practice iss
     that the principal powers remainwith a
     Committee or Sub-Committee (inthis case the
     General Purposes Panel) with routine matters
     being delegated to a Chief Officer (in this
     case myself).  I would therefore propose to
                       110



                                               MR. COLLINS

     ask the Panel to accept the working party as a
     forum for discussion. .

     I take a view that the Lead Authority will be
     able to use the Working -Party,.as a useful forum
     for discussion prior~-to drawing up that Authority's
     formal view to be submitted to the Certificating
     Authority.  I propose that when an Authority feels
     that a meeting would be appropriate contact should
     be made with my Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Bownes,
     who will then make arrangements for the meeting
     to take place. An agenda will be prepared and
     circulated" and so on.                     -

Then in reply to that there is a letter at 394.    First
of all the schedule detailing proposed division felt
it should remain along the lines of the document issued
previously, so the new schedule is 398, new proposals.
Building surveyor should have responsibility of all
matters relating to structure of stadia including
crush barriers, walls, etc.   Fire service, fire
precautions, fire alarms,   means of escape, emergency
lighting, stadium capacity.   Police, stadium policing,
ground security, evtcuati-cn procedures, assess of
emergency vehicles and emergency planning and the
Director of Environmental Health and Consumer Services,
miscellaneous safety hazards such as nosings, trip
hazards, floor surfaces, defective seating, electrical
safety, food safety and hygiene, toilet accommodation,"
etc.  Then we see also- is the old one, sir, which we
looked at at page 27 and 28 in the bundle.   It is the
South Yorkshire one.   There is not actually an enormous
difference really when one analyses it between the two
but the fire response is they would prefer the South
Yorkshire as it has stood the test of time with few
problems.

    "Whatever the outcome," they go on, one area
     where there may be a need for emphasis is a
     reference to the fact that all authorities
     should be more aware of other authorities
     responsibilities and that when considering
     any proposals all aspects of the green
     guide

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Where are you reading now?

    ‘"MR. COLLINS:  I am sorry.  I have gone back to
394, the second paragraph in Ho. 1.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Right.

     MR. COLLINS:     "Whatever the outcome one area
     where there may be a need for emphasis is a
     reference to the fac-t--that all authorities
'   Cv’                                           111



                                                                                 MR. COLLINS

                               should be more aware of other authorities
                               responsibilities and that when considering
                               any proposals all aspects of the green
                               guide should be taken- into account in                          i.
                               order that full consultation .can take place
                               with other interested-authorities," which
                               clearly is a very prdper and sensible
                               approach.
                    B
                              "2. The proposal for one annual inspection
                               by the working group "in conjunction with
                               individual inspections by authorities as
                               and when considered neces-sary is agreed
                               with although it is envisaged that because
                               of manpower resource limitations the degree
                               of central co-ordination referred to may
                               cause problems.

                               The Fire Authority would wish to carry out
                               such inspections subject to the limitations
                               referred to above and under varying conditions
                               at the ground.   Obviously any adverse comments
                               on crowd safety would be forwarded to your
                               department.  As to the annual inspection, a
                    D          good time would be at the end or towards the
                               end of a season in order that any necessary
                               work can be followed up before the commencement
                               of a new season.

                               Whilst the situation regarding the status of the
                               working group is fully appreciated, this
                               authority feels that the recognition of
                               the group as a decision making body by the
                               City Council is imperative if it is to remain
                               effective. As under the County Council
                               however, the terms of reference of the group
                               would be within the conditions of certification
                               laid down by the City Council, anything beyond
                               these terms being referred back via your
                               Department for a Committee decision.

                               The procedure, outlined for calling additional
                               meetings of the working group is agreed with
                               although it is considered essential that full
                               minutes of all meetings are produced and
                               circulated and in particular should make
                               direct reference to outstanding matters from
                             -"previous meetings in order that these are not
                               'lost' in the-minutes. "

                                 MR. GLASGOW:       I am so sorry.        I think there is a
                          little confusion crept in with the speed at which it
                          has been done.       Could I just ask my friend to clarify
                         • -tha-t-he -read -us ■the ■-dr-aft--new ■*cer tif-icafce.

                               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         3 9 ___



    J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                              112



                                                                          MR. COLLINS

                         MR. GLASGOW:   Yes, sir. Then 394 of course is not
                    a reply to that and it is very confusing because this is
                    the one point in the bundle at which the chronological
                    order gets out of place. -394 in fact is a reply to 399.
                    I think very importantly ^ 0 e - has to go on to 409 in #
                    order to get the Fire Service's reply to the certificate
                    point where they deal with’" it seriatim and it is very
                    important in view of what they say about stewaraing.
              B
                         MR. COLLINS:   Mr. Glasgow is absolutely right and
                    I apologise for not making it clear.  It is indeed right
                    the bundle, 394 to 399, should be read together in
                    isolation from the letter, the Fire Service letter or,
                    rather, the letter to the Fire Service, enclosing the
                    certificate at 387, enclosing the draft c e r t i f i c a t e ^
                    387. As a matter of chronology, what has happened is
                    there were two letters of the 7th of July which are
                    relevant.  There is the letter at 387 and there is
                    the letter at 394.  In fact, ideally, the letter at
                    387 should have been placed after pages 394 to 399
                    so that ideally it should run 386, 394 to 399, then
                    back to 387.
                           MR. GLASGOW:   No, no, 399 has got to go before
               D    394.

                           MR. COLLINS:   Yes, I am     including 399 ....

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Then back to 387.

                         MR. COLLINS:      Then back to 387.     I am sorry
                    about that, sir.
               E
                           LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:'     Then 409 follows on.

                         MR. COLLINS: That is     the fire  answer. 409 is
                    the fire answer or, rather,   the fire comments on the
                    draft safetv certificate.   May I go back to 401? You
                    will see, sir, that this refers to the Police r e c e i p t
                    of the City Council letter referring to - and the
                    letter is on 402 - referring to the arrangement of
                    a meeting.   Hope it will produce a consensus view
                    onfuture administrative procedures.     That of course
                    is   the same or are the samematters, I think, that
                    were referred to in the letter of the 14thof May
                    at 399.
                        ""There is a letter from the Chief Constable
                     which is undaded but someone has written at the
                     top 16/17th July.   Says, "Thank you for your letter
                     of the 14th ofiMay.   Overlap of interest, as you
                     rightly point out.    Helpful to have a meeting."
                     Then there is another copy at 404 of the letter of
                     the '14th of May. This is the ''Police 'copy. '407 •is




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                      113



                                              MR. COLLINS

the draft Police response to that, I think.      I do not
think we need go into it.^ 408 is a note of the meeting.
Discussions were divided into four areas.      "Definition
of Rolls"-of the wrong sort - "Inspections, Status of Group,'
Admin Machinery of the Gr^iip... 1. It was agreed that
roles should be broadly d u H n e d and responsibilities taken
on by the appropriate of the three 'lead authorities'
i.e. Police, Fire and Building Surveyors subiect to
agreement where overlap occurs. All contactwith the
ground should be through the licensing authority.
Environmental Health would take a 'general safety role '
and not be a ]lead' authority.      2. The annual inspection
is to be a joint full inspection to be carried out neat
the end of each season. Match inspections to be done on
an individual basis.  3. The meeting was informed that
legally the group is essentially an advisory authority -
only the council can be the ultimate decision making
authority."

     Then we have 409, the Fire Service comments on the
draft certificate and you""will see, sir, Section 10(a)
which is the one relating to the requirements the
stewards should deal with the control of the crowds.

     LORD JUSTICE LTAYLOR:   That follows the marginal
comment we read before.

     MR. COLLINS:   It does indeed. And over the page
on 410 they say two additional items for consideration:

    "(i) That a competent electrician employed or
     retained by the Holder shall be present"during
     a specified activity.

     (ii) The Holder shall provide and maintain
     within the stadium to the satisfaction of the
     Council the access routes for emergency vehicles
     shown on the plans."

And then we have the input, August, 1987, from the
Health and Consumer Services in the Council.  Health
and Safety - General at the bottom.

    "2. The main first aid room requires to be
     supplied with adequa.te first aid equipment
     for the treatment of spectators should they
     become ill or injured.

     3.  In order to ensure that the football club
     fully discharge their duty to supply an
     adequate number of first aiders, I would
     require that a minimum of 12 be employed to
     render first aid to spectators during an
     activity. •If the -club continue -to-use the
     voluntary services of__St. John's, then it
                                          114

                                                                    MR. COLLINS

                        would be necessary to formalise their
                        relationship with them in order to ensure
                        adequate deployment.

                        4. I am to unders tand, .that the club is now
                        prepared to appoint--in writing, a safety
                        officer of adequate status and authority.
                        I would propose that he has the functions
               B        described in the draft safety certificate
                        conditions.

                        During the inspection of the football club's
                        stadium it became obvious_that the stands and
                        associated areas are subject to excellent
                        standards of maintenance and upkeep.  Bearing
                        in mind the size of the premises the above-
                        mentioned points are of only minor significance
                        and I was suitably impressed with the level of
                        ground management being maintained.

                        I would advise that tfe identity and role of
                        the Ground Safety Officer be formalised in
                        accordance with the green guide and without
                        undue delay."
               D
                    Then a note from Mr. Strange of Eastwoods to the
                    City Council, "Further to the recent discussionss
                    with representatives from the Police, Fire Service
                    and Building Surveyors Department .... we have
                    pleasure in enclosing four copies of sketches ...."
                    This is the device for the gates and that is shown
                    at 415 and 416. Then we have the report, September,
                    1987 ___

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not want to take up
                    time. Do we gather from.this as to whether these gates
                    are only intended to be opened from outside or whether
                    they are supposed to be capable of being opened under
                    some pressure?

                          MR. COLLINS:  My understanding is they are designed
                    only to be openable from outside. As you know, sir, there
                     .has been evidence in the Inquiry   of those   who .say that
                    they were opened by pressure from within.      Wewere
                    hoping to be able to carry, out some tests to see
                    whether it was possible to open them by pressure from
                    within.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   And by what pressure.

                         MR. COLLINS: And by what pressure. As far as I
                    am aware either it has not been possible to organise
                    those tests or we have not got the results if they have
                    been organised.


                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                         115


                                                     MR. COLLIHS

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am told Dr. Eastwood has
tested them and they cannot be ....

     MR. COLLINS:      Thanlc you, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:'"^ We shall hear him.

     MR. COLLINS:      I did not know that.

     MR. GLASGOW:     May I just help you on thatbecause
we have asked the   questions as well and we have not had
an answer and when we do we will help you. Possibly
particularly for Professor Maunder's guidance if you
look at the plan on 415 the matter which concerns us
is the dishing area at the bottom of the catch because,
 to be candid, wedo not understand    how that can be
consistent with a   locking from pressure within. It
appears to be designed to slip up under some pressure.
One would ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Clearly we had better have
this looked at when the expert .....

     MR. GLASGOW:      We have asked but we cannot help
further.

     MR. COLLIKS:   I think we are in much the sane
position at the moment.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:^ Yes.   There is then the
report of the Head of Administration.  The Panel will
recall the City Council inherited the role of
certificating authority, etc.  The Current Situation.
I do not think really I need it. It is all history.
Except for the penultimate paragraph.

    "The drafting of new safety certificate conditions
     in consultation with the Council's advisers has
     been progressing steadily and new draft conditions
     are currently under consideration by those advisers.
     It is hoped that the new conditions will be
     submitted to the Panel at its meeting in October
     for final approval."

I suppose that depends on what you mean by steadily.

418. "Future administration of the Council's
certi'ficating function.         Following a thorough review of
the legislation it has become clear that a detailed
administrative system needs to be established in
connection with the Council's certificating function.
Discussions have been underway.          Accepting that the
.Caunc.il as, ,the .c.er.tif ieating authority .:w.i,11 a,ct .on
^   'V
 C '- i                                    116


                                                                    MR. COLLINS

                         the basis of advice from experts (such as the
                         Fire Service) the question arises as to how
                         that advice nay be best formulated.    In the
                         past the County Council organised an Officer
                         Working Party which was apparently used as a
                         forutnfor discussion* Be tween Officers prior to
                         the final formulation"of advice to the Council.

                B        As it is essential that meetings take place
                         due to the potential overlap of requirements in
                         many areas, all the Authorities and Officers have
                         now agreed that it would be appropriate to
                         establish a revised form of the working party
                         to perform a similar function for the City Council.
                         It is recommended that the 'Safety of Sports Grounds
                         Advisory Group1 (which would consist of rep­
                         resentatives from the Police, the Fire Service,
                         the Building Surveyor’s Division and the Department
                         of Health a n d _Consumer Services), would function as
                         a forum for discussion between Officers," and so on.

                    Then at the bottom:

                       "Under the old County Council administrative
                D        structure the different Authorities represented
                         in.their working party had fairly clearly defined
                       . roles within which-to operate. Although it can
                         be seen that there is some merit in this idea the
                         areas of potential overlap of responsibilitv are
                         quite extensive.   However it appears that the
                         various Authorities and Officers wish for some
                         definition or roles and the following have been
                E        agreed." Building Surveyor, structure, etc.
                         Well, they are the obvious ones.    "It is antic­
                         ipated that the Health and Consumer Services
                         Department would have an input on (a) aspects of
                         general safety;   (b) the general safety management;
                         (c) various special items such as first aid
                         requirements.   It will be appreciated that these
                         areas are not exhaustive."      Inspections, large-,
                         scale annually.   "Delegations.   There is also a
                         further question to be dealt with at this stage
                         and that relates to the day to day decision making
                         required for the running of the Certification
                         System" and so on. Recommendations to note,
                         approve and delegate as appropriate.

                    Gate'release device is approved at page 420.   421,
                    Council to Mr. Mackrell.  "I refer to the revised Guide" ■
                    that is the 1986 edition - "which was recently published
                    by H.M. Government following the Popplewell Report." I
                    suppose that again depends on what you mean by recently.
                    "I would like to,draw.your attention to the new Guide
                    and in particular Chapter 2 entitled 'Management
                    Responsibility.' This chapter sets out in detail the
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
          V;
    ■tvb                                          117


I                                                                           HR. COLLIBS

                   A       sort of matters v;hich ground management should be
i                          responsible for and I regard it as essential that
                           the management of designated stadia should be entirely
                           familiar with it and follow its guidance. Would you
                           therefore confirm in writing that you have obtained
                           and intend to retain a copy and that your Company and
                           its Officers are familiar with it. You should also take
l
                           immediate steps to appoint a Safety Officer."
                   B




                   c



                   D




                       E




                       F




                       G


                                                        / 422.   Mr. Mackrell



                   H


    J. L Harpham Ltd
                     118


                                      Mr. COLLINS


At 422 Mr. Mackrell writes back saying that he does have
a copy and has had one for many months and that with
regard to the appointment of safety officer, his duties
encompass those of safety .officer, and he would be
arateful if they could -amend the "records accordingly.

     We then have the Home Office Notes to which I
referred earlier on, to take us through to 4 30.

     Then we come to the 4th December 1987, a letter
from the Council to Mr. Mackrell enclosing comments
made by officers arising from the inspection.  The
last paragraph:

     "The Fire Service has recently reminded me that
     no reply has yet been received to my letter of
     22na April enclosing their letter of 18tn‘February."

Thev are respectively 383 and 374 in the bundle.

     "You will recall that you were asked in that letter
     to comment on the points raised by the Fire
     Service and I would appreciate those comments
     as soon as possible,  I take the view that it is
     appropriate for a Certificate Holder to have the
     opportunity to comment on the views of Officers,
     before final decisions are taken on works that
     are required".

Then the comments occur at 432 and 433.   Page 433,
under "Miscellaneous Points":

     "4.2 The main first aid room requires to be
     supplied with adequate first aid equipment for
     the treatment of spectators should they become
     ill or injured within the sports ground".

I think the other matters are relatively minor or not
relevant for our purposes.  Then there is an interesting
memorandum at page 434, internal to the Citv, dated 2ad
February 1988, from the Building Surveyor.  He says:

      "I am advised by a member of my staff who has
      attended recent games that there has been a lack
      of effective stewarding on the Kop, resulting in
      the crowd occupying the radial gangways as
      additional standing areas throughout the games-

      Although it is appreciated that these games were
      important Cup-Ties and therefore attracted increased
      crowd capacities, stewarding must be of a quality
      and of such numbers as to maintain these ganqways
      'free' from'Congestion''du-ring' perf-orma’
                                                nces .

      It is also understood that the turnstile capacity
      on the Penistone Road frontage was insufficient,
      and that many of the spectators were still entering
      the ground up to 15 minutes after the kick-off.
                                      Mr. COLLINS

     The combination of late arrival and ineffective
     stewarding could lead to dangerous occurrences.

     It is considered that the Club should be made avare
     of these matters and- be required to confirm that
     stewarding will b'e-made available to keep these
     areas clear.

     This is possibly a matter that should be raised
     at the next meeting of the Working Party so that
     police and fire authority comments may also be
     sought."

There are three things arising from that memorandum.
First of all, although it refers to the Kop, it identifie
a problem which, of course, is essentially the problem
which has given rise to this tragedy, although of course
at the other end, the combination of late arrival and
ineffective stewarding,   the combination of late
arrival causing the turnstiles to be unable to cope.
When I say "ineffective stewarding", I must not be taken
tomean that I am saying it is the Club's fault;    all
I am saying is stewarding in the sense of generally
ensuring that spectators go evenly on the terracing,
whoever may have been responsible for it. I am usin<g
the word "stewarding" in that sense, in that context.

     Secondly, it does not appear that the Council took
any action from that, they did not get in touch with
the Club and they did not raise it, or so it would
seem - certainly there is no record of their having
raised it - for police or fire authority comments.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do you mean nothing flowed
from this memorandum?

     Mr. COLLINS:  It would seem that it was put on
file and that is as far as it went.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Bownes is the ...?

     Mr. COLLINS:  Mr. Bownes is the officer of the
Council who is responsible for the implementation of
the certification responsibilities under the 1975 Act.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   So it did not go to the
Working Party?

     Mr. COLLINS:  There is no record in writing that it
did do, although I think it is fair to say that the
City Council in their evidence may say that there was
reference to its contents rather than to it itself, at
the next meeting of the Working Party.  Sadly, we do
not appear to have, and certainly I have not seen in
the documents, a record, of that Working Party.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.
                                             Mr. COLLINS

     Mr.   COLLINS:   M a y b e because no-one took any Minutes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS: On © a g e -435 is a letter from Eastwoods
dealing with their responses to the various matters. Can
I go on to 441?   These'are all the matters set out in
letter, you will recall, sir, most of which I said were
relatively minor.    I simply referred to 441, the last
paragraph, where it said:

     "The Club have expressed to us their increasing
     concern that with the introduction of each new
     member of the Fire Service to the Officer Working
     Party new or different recommendations are put
     forward by that officer, which in some cases openly
     contradict the recommendations offered by his
     predecessors. Whereas we agree that many of the
     observations and recommendations are of a subjective
     nature, the Club cannot be expected to continue
     spending money on matters which are purely a matter
     of personal opinion ..."

and so on. The Fire Authority's response to that is not
inthe bundle.   For the record, it is document 81 in the
Fire Service bundle and the effect of   it is to indicate
th-at those strictures were, in their view, a little
exaggerated, to use their words.

     442 deals with the gate safety device, and so does-
443 - a demonstration to the police.  444 is another
letter, but a round robin, I think --

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am sorry, do we get a
reply to the document at 431, or have we not got there
vet?

     Mr. COLLINS:     Yes, sir, we do, and we have not
got there yet.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      All right.

     Mr. COLLINS:  444 is a round robin letter.  I call
it a round robin letter, but it would appear to be a
common form letter addressed no doubt to a number of
bodies, including Sheffield Wednesday, in April 1988,
and I think I suspect Mr. Kallipetis again in the no
response;  he confirms that. The middle paragraph says:

       "We acknowledge the very valuable contribution
       which the St. John Ambulance and British Red
       Cross make. There are, however, areas where the
       level of care which we can provide, of necessity,
    - exceed .those .whi.ch. .can J3e,,.pro.vid.ed .1by, the
    .. voluntary societies ... Can we be of assistance
       to you?"
                       121


                                       Mr. COLLINS

     Then there is the response of the Fire Service of
the 25th May 1988, the note of matters following
inspection.  I do not think there are any matters that
I need specifically refer to there.

     Then there is a memorandum of the form of inspection
from the Director of Health and Consumer Services, and
again there is nothing there that I need specifically
refer to.    Sir, if you will give me a moment, I said
that there was a response from the Club, and I am sure
there was and I think I..must have gone over it to the
next one.  431, sir, is dated 4th December, 1937, and,
of course, refers back to a reply to the letter cf the
22nd April enclosing the letter of the 18th February.
If one goes to 435, one sees that that is a reply to the
letter of the 22nd April, 1987;   so that is the reply
referred to.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I see.

      Mr. COLLINS:     I am sorry, I should have spotted
that.    I apologise.  Can I now come on back again to
449? That is an internal communication to the Club,
written in the Club, with a copy sent to Inspector
Sewell of the Police. ‘We have seen that. That is the
instruction to the match day staff. You will recall,
sir-, -that it does not on the .face of it have any scope        .
for stewarding in the terraces.

     455 is Sheffield Wednesday's instructions to stewards.
Again there is nothing in that that refers specifically
to any duties in the terraces;  it refers to nothing
specific to the terraces as opposed to the stands. That
again is a document that we have already seen.

     457 is August, 1988 and refers to the testing of
barriers in the third line:

        "The barriers tested were numbers 121 to 124, L2 4A" -

 and that is the barrier that went.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Were do we find these
 labelled?

      Mr. COLLINS:   Sir, there is a plan which should
 be at the front of your --

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes,     I have   got it, thank
 you.
        Mr. COLLINS:     459 and 460 is the      same plan.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.,    I have   got it.

     • Mr. COLLINS:  And 124A can in fact be seen on 459
 at the front of pen 3.
                     122


                                         Mr. COLLINS

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, thank you very much.

     Mr. COLLINS:   In the third paragraph of this letter
he says:

     "In all but one c&se'the barriers tested successfully
     withstood the applied load. A clip over the rail
     of barrier 124 broke before reaching the full test
     load".

A visual inspection revealed some of the ends being
corroded.   And there are the plans, as you have pointed
out.

     There is a copy of the report at page 461 and 4 62,
and on page 466 we have the Certificate relating to
124 and 124A --

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    466?

     Mr. COLLINS:  Page -466, sir. You will see at the
bottom, if you turn it sideways, 124A and the test of
the two spans.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Sir, the method of testing is that
set out in Annex C to the Green Guide. .

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   You will see that there are three
tests there set out on the Certificate which are
required by Annex C. I am reading from paragraph 1
of the Green Guide:

     "The test is to consist of the application of an
     evenly distributed force of either 6.0 KN/metre
     width (400 lbs f/foot width) or 4.3 KN/metre
     width (290 lbs f/foot width) of barrier as mentioned
     in paragraph 13.

     4. The force to be applied for three consecutive
     periods, the full force being maintained for 5
     minutes each period.  The interval between
     applications to be as short as possible, i.e.
     to enable complete unloading and reloading only.
     A record should be kept of any deformation during
     the loading periods, during the periods of
     maintained loading, or during the recovery period.

      5.  If on the removal of the force for the third
      time the recovery of deformation is at least 75%
      the barrier or handrail may be deemed to have
      satisfied the loading requirements.   If this
     .requirement is. not-met but the recovery is more
      than 50%, then the test should be repeated and if
      on retest the recovery is at least 75%, the barrier
                     123

                                      Mr. COLLINS

     nay be deemed to have satisfied the loa-iing
     requirements.  If the recovery is less than
     50% on the first test or less than 75% on the
     retest, the barrier shall be deemed to have
     failed.           .

     6.   If during any"test, even though the barrier
     or handrail satisfies the above loadinq require­
     ment, doubt should arise for any reason (including
     such matters as cracking of the terracing or
     distortion of connections) as to the safety of
     the barrier, or handrail, a detailed investigation
     should be carried out ... and a record should
     be kept."_

 What is required   is that you have three consecutive
 tests and provided it does better than 7 5% on the third,
 then all is well.   If on the third it does 50% to 75
 then you have got to go through the whole thing aqain;
 and if on the retest it performs better than 75% on the
 third, then all is well.   Now, if we look at the actual
 figures of the barrier in question and if we turn back -
 forgive me - to page 45 9 for a ir.oment, you will see
 that it runs from the right-hand side as 1, and the
 left       side is 3, so that it was 1 and 2 that went.
 It was spans 1 and 2 of the barrier which collapsed.
 So we are concerned largely with the upper of the two
:tests recorded on that certificate for 124A, t h a t ■i s ,
 1 to 2. You w i 11 see that the application of the force
 is 6; applied load tonnes 1.44.     I am looking at page
 465, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   "Test 1: Rest 0; load 29; unload
12; 59% recovery." That is on the first o f .the three.
So that barrier moved, under load, a distance of 29
millimetres, as I understand it. When the test ended,
it recovered to 12 millimetres from its original
position, and thus its recovery was only 59%.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   On the second of the three tests,
it moved 19 millimetres;   it recovered to 5, and thus
achieved 74%. On the final one, it moved under load
19 millimetres but recovered to its original resting
position, i.e. 100.   If you flick through the records
on the other barriers, you will find that 29 millimetre
movement under load is high but not the highest of all
the movements - indeed by no means the highest of all
the movements - but it is certainly on the high side.

     Now, there is an apparent ambiguity in the wording
of this' to' a' layman,"±f 'not 'to an 'engineer : The
ambiguity is perhaps the obvious one. You have got
three tests.     If you start the first test and that
(demonstrating) is your zero, as it were, your upright,
                    124

                                        Mr. COLLINS

when you put it under load, it will move, let us say,
that much.  If it recovers 50%, it will recover to
that, which is still, of course, at a slight movement.
Now, if you start your second test with that as your
base-line, then you are.going to get recovery of", say,
75% to that'and not to.thgt . Similarly, if you start
your third test at you-r-second test base-line, then
your recovery to that is going to be 100 per cent but
it is actually going to be from your original base-line
of the first test, a recovery of much less than 100 per
cent.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  The question is whether you
go back to first place each time or --

     Mr. COLLINS:  It is question of whether vou go
back to first place each time.     We would say, as a
matter of common sense, you must. Otherwise, to use
an exaggerated example, you could have a barrier that
went that much on the first test and on the second test
went a little more and on the third test came back to
that, and would still pa'ss the test because on the third
test it came back to th a t ; and that, frankly, would
seem on the face of it to be absurd.     So we would
suggest that any sensible interpretation must mean that
you go back to first base.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Well, if it was not Parliament"'
that drafted the Green Guide, we can now ask the peoole
who drafted it what they meant, can we not?

     Mr. COLLINS:   We can, sir, if we can find out.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   I may say, sir, we are trying.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you.

     Mr. COLLINS:  These certificates, of course, do not
indicate how Dr. Eastwood did it. I do not think we
have had any indication yet from Dr. Eastwood of how
he did it. No dOubt we will find out from Dr. Eastwood
how he did it.

     Sir, those go on, and the calibration follows them,
to 475, which was Dr. Eastwood's certification that the
various structures were in a satisfactory condition.
That is page 475.

     476 is a reply to the letter at 462, which I did
not read in detail but which was effectively Eastwoods
indicating what the damage was and asking did the Club
want the repairs to be done, and the Club said :

     "I am writing to confirm our instructions that
     all work necessary On the crash barriers be
     completed prior to the commencement of the season".
                    125

                                               Mr. COLLINS

     Then we have Inspector Sewell's note on the
emergency evacuation procedure and I have already
read that.    That was in the Police bundle.

     479 are the figures: for the Manchester United
football match> which        we have already seen.

     480 is an extract from the Football Association's
instruction about the "soccer star scheme", which has
been referred to before.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      That    was   what was goingtobe
staged, was it?

     Mr. COLLINS:   That is    what    was   cancelled, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Then 481 is a letter dated 30thMarch
1989 from the City to the Chief Fire Officer:

     "I refer to your letter of 13th August 1987 in
     connection with Safety Certificate Conditions.

     I now enclose for your attention a copy of the final
     revised Safety Certificate Conditions which, as far
     as possible, incorporate the comments made in your
     letter.  You will appreciate that the wording of .. .
     certain of your comments has had to be amended
     slightly but I hope that the objective has none the
     less been achieved.

     There are four points which require some further
     consideration:

     (a) You say in your letter that an age range should
     be specified in connection with stewards.  I think,
     however, that the wording of Condition 11 should be
     satisfactory without stipulating an age range ...

     (b) police knowledge of the whereabouts of a
     doctor - I believe this is adequately covered ir.
     Condition 7;

     (c) identifiability of press T.V. and radio
     personnel - I am not sure of the justification
     for such a Condition and wonder if you have any
     further comments on it;

     (d) the attendance of competent electrician - again
     I wonder what the justification for this would be.

     Would you please let us have your comments in cite
     course."



                            /One does feel bound to point out
                                     MR. COLLINS



      One does feel   bound to point outthat there appear to
have been 18 months   to draft or to act upon the FireService
comments.

      483 is the draft conditions.

      "The Holder shall provide such signs or notices
      of such type, size and design as the Council
      may from time to timerequire for reasons of
      public safety."

12 amends the written instructions of the Stewards.      It says:

      "They must include the following tasks       and
      duties.  Stewards must:

      (a) Under the direction of the Safety Officer or
      the Chief Steward or an Authorised Officer prevent
      overcrowding by ensuring the crowd limits in
      various parts of the ground are complied with."

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  But those didn't in the 1979
certificate send the particulars as to pens.

      MR. COLLINS:    No, they didn't.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  And there was no proposal, at —     -
this time was there in April 1989 that the revised certi­
ficate should either?

/      MR. COLLINS:  That is quite right, sir. If you loo3;
at page 506 you will see the Draft Schedule 3 referring to
Condition 27 and Condition 27 is the one that deals with
capacity.   You will see that it still does not break down
 the West Terrace at all.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, I am probably asking the
obvious, but there is nothing then in this certificate which
takes account at all of the radial fences having been
introduced?

      MR. COLLINS: tfo, and it does not seek in any way
to amend the amounts, the capacities and they don't seen to
have thought, no one seems to have thought to reconsider
the capacities.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   They could not have had any
 impact"on this occasion.

       MR. COLLINS: No, no, of course as far as the capaciti
 are concerned by then they had lost what is now Pen 5.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   The slim bit of Pen 5.
                                                  127

                                                                  MR. COLLINS



                          MR. COLLINS: Going back to 12 I think other than the
                    first one they are much the same as the one we looked at
                    before.

                            Over the page, 485:     .1=

                            "13. Training exercises organised by the Safety
                            Officer relating to the duties of stewards shall
               B            be held at least once every three months. A
                            written record of the exercises shall be kept."

                            .... The other duties detailed in schedule 2
                            shall be carried out by stewards."

                    If we look at page 48S we see what the duties of the           Safety
                    Stewards are:
                            "The number of Safety Stewards on duty at each
                            specified activity shall not be less than 66.

                            The Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out
                            below:-

                            262 for each main exit
               D
                            12    1 per vomitory in the South Stand

                             3    1   "      "          "     "   West Stand

                            18    1   "      "          "     "   North Stand

                             2    Beneath South Stand"

                    Mo duties in relation to Stewards on the terraces, of course.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry to take time, but    ^,
                     the new bit that you referred to which related to overcrowding
                     which is at     484, can we just look     backto thecertificate
                     as before, it was 107 wasn't it onwards.

                             MR. COLLINS:   The existing certificate sir?

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.

                             MR. COLLINS:   Yes, the existing certificate is at 107.

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Where do we find the relevant
                     bit?
                           MR. COLLINS: There is nothing so specific, but insofar
                     as there is it is paragraph 9, page 111, which is much more
                     general.
                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           So this is a total recast really?




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   128

                                                          MR. COLLINS


                          MR. COLLIES:   Oh yes.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: And when you pointed      outthat
                    passage it is not that that   has been inserted, it is a
                    complete recast in which that: now appears?

                          MR. COLLINS: Yes, if   you recall, sir, the   original
                    draft which was commented on by the Fire Service   wasspecific,
                B   that the Stewards should effectively sort out the levelling
                    on the terraces.  I am paraphrasing.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, I thought the Fire Service
                    -queried how on earth they were going to be able to do it?

                          MR. COLLINS: Exactly and then 12(a) is a redraft
                    intended, I imagine, to take account of the Fire Service
                    objection and the redraft says:

                          "Under the direction of the Safety Officer or
                          the Chief Steward or other authorised Officer,
                          prevent overcrowding by ensuring crowd limits
                          in various parts of the ground are complied with."

                    But v/ith respect one would have thought if there was a diffi­
                D   culty in doing it, identified before, that does not cure that
                    difficulty if it is a difficulty.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Again we went rather q u i c k l y over,
                    it was a letter from Eastwoods wasn't it, that was the reply
                    to the Club being invited to comment?   Did the Club comment
                    on the suggestion?

                E          MR. COLLINS: No, the Club weren't asked to comment
                     on the draft Safety Certificate.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Shouldn't they have been?

                           MR. COLLINS: Well I would have thought so and one
                     imagines they will. The intention is that they would have
                     been but I don't think taht stage has yet been reached, as
                     I understand it.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Can you help on that, Mr. Maxwell?

                           MR. MAXWELL:  I seek to assist on another point, sir.
                     Condition 12(a) contains reference to "an authorised Officer"
                     and the definition there includes a Police Constable and
                     therefore the Stewards are to be deployed at the direction
                     of a Police Constable as a possible way of dealing with
                     the terraces.

                           MR. COLLINS: Yes, certainly that is right. An
                     authorised Officer is defined on 482 to include a Policeman,
                    'but so 'far as putti-ng to -the Club is concerned, I ttiink I
                     am right in saying that stage has not yet been reached.
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                   M R . COLLINS



      MR. MAXWELL:   It hasn't.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:. Thank you very much.   That is
what I was seeking. Thank ygu_.

      MR. COLLINS: Sir, I don't think it is necessary to
refer to more of that save to refer you to paragraph 33 at
the end on 487.   It says:

      "The Council may from..time to time issue written
        guidance to holders on safety matters. The
      holder must pay due regard to any such guidance."

The guidance is at page 492, the draft guidance.

      "This note has been prepared by the Sheffield
      City Council in order to inform Certificate
      Holders as to the general background of the
      Safety Certificate Conditions....

      GUIDANCE

      Where advice is given to the holder by any of
      the four Officers mentioned it should be
      acted upon in accordance with the time constraints
      given--in the advice. The holder is reminded . .
      that failure to take steps to ensure the
      reasonable safety of spectators could give rise
      to a prosecution.

       The Chief Constable and his Officers have a
       particularly important role in relation to
       'public order' situations the correct handling
       of which should reduce any risk to spectator
       safety.

       The Chief Constable must therefore be provided
       with appropriate facilities at the stadium
       for control, crowd surveillance, detention
       and administrative purposes.  These facilities
       are essential if public order is to be
       maintained and the risk to spectators minimised.

       The Chief Constable must also be informed at
       the earliest possible moment of the proposed
       date and content of all specified activities
      -so that appropriate planning can take place.

       In addition there must be consultation and
       agreement between the holder and the Chief
       Constable veil in advance of specified
       activities about the proposed methods of
       admission and -the segregation ■of .spectators.
       Consultation must also take place if advance
       information is such that public order difficulties
       may arise. As a result of this consultation
                                    MR. COLLINS



     it is possible that the Chief Constable may require,
     for reasons of preserving public order, that the
     specified activity is "all ticket" or the specified
     activity should not be.played at all at the Stadium
     or the day and the time- of the specified activity
     should be changed.

      The Chief Constable should also be able to use
      whatever means are appropriate to exercise control
      over spectators for reasons of safety ...."

Then there is a Police note 4 93, reaction to that:

      "Enclosed for information is a copy of the
      Certificate issued by the then South Yorkshire
      County C o u n c i l . Also attached is a copy of
      the first Draft prepared by the City Council
      in August 1937.

      Referring to the latter could I draw your
      attention to paragraphs 4, 5 & 6 which have been
      totally deleted from the new draft."

Sir, the original 1987 draft you may recall included - page 3
I think - included specific reference to the holder making
•arrangements with-the.-Chief Constable providinga roou for
Police use and not admitting spectators unless methods have
been approved.   Those have been removed, as is pointed out
in this document.

     "Similarly could I draw your attention to    paragraph LO
      which outlined the duties of-stewards.      To some
      degree the first draft made the stewards    answerable
      to police officers.  In the latest draft    the reference
      to police has been totally removed."

I am not sure that is entirely fair, because as Mr. MaxveLL
pointed out, it is covered by the definition of "authorised
Officer", although of course that is a Police Officer rather
than the Chief Constable, although I suppose the Chief
Constable is a Police -Officer.

       "Generally speaking the new draft certificate,
       apart from matters relating to the police, is
       reasonably consistent with the first draft.
       However you may consider it appropriate at some
       stage to seek the views of Chief Superintendents
       Broomhead and Duckenfield."

 Then theis is a letter from the Chief Constable to the Joint
 Secretariat.   It says:

       «X enclose a copy; of >correspondence.received
       from the Administration and Legal Department
       of Sheffield City Council and relating to the
                           131

                                      MR. COLLINS



     Council's proposed general conditions to attach
     to certificates under the above Act.     I also
     enclose a copy of my immediate reply from which
     you will see that I am _concerned that the
     proposals do not take .'-full account of the
     legislative provisions.regarding the attendance
     of police at sporting events."

That letter is at 495, the Chief Constable says:

      "Meanwhile, I am concerned to note that the
      conditions do not appear to require the attendance
      of police officers at football matches, as
      provided by Section 2 of the Safety of Sports
      Grounds Act 1975 (as amended by Section 21 of the
      Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
      1987) . I am forwarding a copy of your corres­
      pondence to the Police Authority Legal Department
      for advice on the matter and will contact you
      when that advice is available."

496, the response of the City:

      "I refer to your letter ....

      I have carefully considered this matter and
      have come to the conclusion that Conditions
      which purport to delegate the Council's
      functions to outside bodies are unenforceable
      as they are beyond the powers of the Council.
/     Therefore several Conditions which were included
      in the first draft (relating to for example
      discussions between Certificate holders and
      the Police) have been deleted or modified.

      I am, of course, conscious of the very important
      Police role in connection with the safety of
      spectators at sports grounds and I have therefore
      taken two steps to ensure that this role is
      properly recognised in the certification system.
      Firstly the definition of "authorised officers"
      in the Conditions include Police Officers.
      Secondly there is also a new Condition which
      relates to guidance given by the Council on
      safety matters." That is 33.   "A draft of
      the proposed guidance is enclosed with the new
      Conditions and you will see that it refers
      largely to Police/Certificate holder relations.

Then there is a copy of the certificate that we have already
seen that follows.

     ..Sir, ..this .stage ..of the. Inquiry is I think perhaps not
the time or place to go into whether the second paragraph
is right or not.      I don't think it is right speaking for
myself, but as I say this perhaps is not the time or place.
                               132
                                               MR. COLLINS



       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           No.

      MR. COLLINS:   Sir, we then have the Ambulance log
which I don't think we need :to refer to in detail at this
stage. That can be dealt wi fell-when the Ambulance give
their   evidence because it is'-riot realiy material to safety
of the ground because it relates to theevents of the day.
That is at pages 510 to 517.

      May I say I am not seeking to decry its importance
or minimise its importance, it is just that it is more
relevant to the events of the day than to the issues in this
bundle.
       I don't think 518 matters.

      Sir, that is the bundle. I am sorry it has taken
rather longer than I had hoped to go through it but I hope
that it has been valuable and I know that it will mean
that we don't have to go through a lot of evidence of
reference to the history which really is there in the
documents.
       I hope too that I have indicated in the course of
going through it the areas where there might be criticism
of certain of the bodies which are directly concerned and
it is "hot 'ne'cessary for me to spell those- out insofar as^
they are not already covered by standard letters. As I say
I hope they have already been spelt out in the course of
going through, but insofar as they haven't, may I just
indicate in relation to the City Council that it would seen
that the major matters are first of all the inordinate
delay that took place in doing anything about the perceived
inadequate and inappropriate'safety, matters in the Safety
Certificate; that the delay was inordinate I think cannot
be doubted, whether or not .it was excusable will remain
to be seen.
       Secondly, there seems to have been a failure on anyone's
 part, and this may be more in fairness a matter that one
 should take against the Club rather than the City Council,
 failure to consider the effect of the removal of that barrier
 144 on capacity and generally, but certainly so far as the
 Certificating Authority is concerned and I am not at this
 stage limiting it to the City because clearly their
 responsibility is that the City inherit from South Yorkshire
 in these matters, there seems to have been a failure to take
 any steps as the pens were divided and subsequently redivided
 in 1981 and 1985, to take any steps to consider what effect
 that should have on the capacity and to reflect that in the
 Safety Certificate.

         There a p p e a r s to have been little i f a n y c o n s i d e r a t i o n
 - and a g a i n this is a matter which " a f f e c t s the' Club 'as 'w e ll
 as the C e r t i f i c a t i n g Authority - in 1985 or thereafter of
 the n u m ber of t u r n s t i l e s n e e d e d a t the Leppings Lane e n d
                         133
                                    MR. COLLINS



to cope with any reasonable flow that might be expected of
spectators into the ground.

      There are a number of bireaches of the Green Guide both
in respect of the capacity of=the pens, the crush barriers,
the width of the gates, the 'perimeter and the tunnel. Those
are matters which are really are already covered.

      The first aid room situation ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, you put that in criticism
of the City or just the Club?

      MR. COLLINS: Both. The first aid room never seems to
have got its proper equipment and again that is a matter
really for both and I think this is also a matter for both,
no one really seems to have applied their minds properly to
the problems of even distribution and ensuring even distribution
of the fans on the terraces, coupled with and ensuring that
the capacity of the pens were..not exceeded.

      Nov/ in that regard, sir, it is perhaps worthwhile
pointing out that there will be in due course evidence, and
this is a purely factual matter, that as the pens stand it
is a matter of measurement their capacities even at 1,000
and 1,200 are exceeded.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: You mean 1,000 and 1,200 is
more than the Green Guide says it should be?




               /MR. COLLINS:   That is right.
                       134


                                      MR.   COLLINS


     MR. COLLINS:   That is right, yes.    Sir, if one
looks at Paragraph 222 of the Green Guide one sees that
it is there stated that the extreme allowances for packing      „
density are as follows: 54 persons per 10 sq.m. when
the terrace or viewing (inaudible ) is in good condition
and 27 persons/10 sq.m. when it materially deviates from
the recommended guidelines so as to constitute a possible
hazard.   There are then various elaborate --
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: _ It seems rather extraordinary
that you immediately halve the capacity without any kind
of sliding scale but there we are.
     MR. COLLINS:   There is a sliding scale because
223 says that it may be necessary to interpolate between
these figures where conditions fall between the two
extremes.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sorry, I misjudged them.

     MR. COLLINS:   Although it is done in rather general
terms and then there are various elaborate provisions for
working out the capacity at less than maximum where the
crush barriers do not conform in one way or another,
either because they are the wrong strength or because they
are wrongly positioned.

     If one takes 54 as the maximum, which is the maximum
allowable assuming everything is right, and I may say everything
was not right so far as the crush barrier configuration is
concerned but taking it at 54 which is the maximum possible
the area of Pen 3 is 14.35 metres x 13.1 metres and at
Pen 4 it is 14.645 metres. . 14.350 x 13.1 . Pen 4 is 14.645
x 13.1.   The areas are therefore - and I am reliably
informed - respectively 188 sq.m., that is Pen 3, and 191.8
square metres, that is Pen 4.   Assuming, therefore 54/10 sq.m.
the capacity of Pen 3 is 1,015 and the capacity of Pen A would
be 1,036, making a total of 2,051 as against the 2,200
for the two which is in the Safety Certificate and which has
been assumed.
     Those, I emphasise, are the figures assuming the
configur ation of the crush barriers to perform exactly
with the Green Guide.   They do not and therefore those
are in themselves figures which are too high and the
true capacity in accordance with the Green Guide would
be less than those figures.

     Sir, you will recall that somewhere there is a plan
which gives the 1,000 and 1,200 and off-hand I am trying
to remember whether 1,200 is Pen 3 or Pen 4.   The 1,200
is Pen 3, I am obliged.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    it would help me if you reminded
me which document it is we -have it on.

     MR. COLLINS:   I have it in a little aerial sort of
plan of the ground — not aerial, a plan of the ground
                                           135


                                                                 MR.    COLLINS



                 with the figures.       I think it may be that one, sir.

                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Tha is right, it is.

                      MR. COLLINS:       And idd-s Pen 3, is it, sir, which i s --

                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Pen 3 is 1,200, according to this,
                 and Pen 4 is 1,000.
            B
                      MR. COLLINS:   That is right.   Actually Pen 3 is
                 smaller than Pen 4 and it just shows how arbitrary the
                 1,200 and 1,000 were because one must remember that Pen          4
                 has had taken out of it --    No, I am wrong, Pen 5 was
                 taken out of Pen 6 next door.
                      Sir, those are, as we see it, the major matters
                 which we would say should be considered, if there are to
                 be criticisms against the City Council and Club.     There
                 are other matters against each of them but they have had
                 Salmon letters which cover the other matters. So far
                 as the City Council is concerned, I think probably I would
                 substitute what I have stated for matters which are in
                 the Salmon letter and which, as the thing has gone on,
                 as the Inquiry has gone on- perhaps are not of such vital
            D    relevance.    There are breaches of the Green Guide,
                 as I have indicated which are referred to. .
                      I hope that makes it clear enough but if Mr. Maxwell
                 wants it in writing I will, ofcourse, give him it in
                 writing so that he can have a formal Salmon letter but
                 Ihope he has sufficient information to know what the
                 possible areas of criticism are.
             E
                      MR. MAXWELL:   No, sir, I do not require it in
                 writing but I wonder if I could mention a point which
                 may well be a false point which I feel I ought to deal with
                 now so that others do not build upon it and it relates to
                 page 434 of the Inquiry core bundle which is a memorandum
                 sent from the Building Surveyor about the Spion Kop
                 and which it was said --
                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Can we just get it first.

                          MR. MAXWELL;     434, sir, a memorandum relating to
                 the spion Kop concerning a problem which it was said was
                 remarkably similar to the one which concerns this Inquiry
                 and where it was suggested that Mr. Bownes who had received
                 t h i s ‘mem orand um had not taken any'action upon it.   Sir,
                 the position is this, that we did not put into our statement
                 all of the advisory group meeting documents but one such
                 which came into existence on 23rd March three weeks after
                 this m e m orand um and which relates to the Spion Kop --

                        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    23rd April?      I am sorry,
                  February..                 .-
             H            MR. MAXWELL;   Thenotes are of a meeting held on 23rd
                  March

L. Harpham Ltd
                                             MR.   COLLINS




     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     The date on this document
is 2nd F e b r u a r y . •* 1 . .
     MR. MAXWELL:   I am obliged, it is seven weeks or so
after the memorandum on page 434.     There is a discussion
of this memorandum where the Building Surveyor's represent­
ative outlined the mem orand um and the circumstances which
gave rise to it and Superint enden t Stuart for the Police
indicated that the gangway problem had been discussed
with Sheffield Wednesday who were going to take measures
with their stewards in an.attem pt to resolve it.    Sir,
I mention this because action was taken and it is recorded.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well. It may be convenient
if you can give us the document to slot it in at that point.

     MR. COLLINS:   I am grateful to Mr. Maxwell.    As
I hope I made clear, I sai d that we have not seen any
document and I was not aware of any document. Now he has
drawn that to myttention clearly that matter does not
or should not attract the emphasis that perhaps I placed
upon it and I fully recognise that, subject to seeing the
document Mr. Maxwell refers to.
     MR. MAXWELL:     The document is with ---

     MR.   COLLINS:    I am sure it is.
     MR.   MAXWELL; At least with junior   counsel.
     MR.   COLLINS:    I am sure it is. It is no doubt one
of the 2,000 that we have had to go through.     We can be
caught out as well as anyone.
     Sir, that is all I want to say in going through
this history.   I was now proposing to call the representative
of the Fire Service input which is Mr. Seaman, I think.

     MR. HYTNER:    Sir, before that is done, so that we
have a comprehensive view of the 2,000 other documents,
could I just ask Mr'. Collins, at Document 422 there is a
reply to the previous document, 421.    It does not
actually answer the que stion put and what I was wondering
is whether that was followed up and whether there is some
more correspondence or whe ther the City just let it lie.

     'MR. COLLINS:  All I can say is so far as I am aware
there was no follow up --
     MR. HYTNER:   Could I just indicate what I am saying.
Would you please therefore confirm in writing (b) that
your company and its officers are familiar with the Guide
and intend to perform the management duties outlined in
Chapter 2.   There was no answer to that question.

      MR. COLLINS:    I take the point, there was no specific
 answer to it.    I will check to see whether there are
                         137



                                                MR.   COLLINS



any follow-up documents.   I do not believe th± there are
because if there had been they would almost certainly
have been considered to be.-relevant.
     MR. HYTNER:   I am grateful, and the other question
is this, that although we have got a fair idea of what
may be said from Dr. Eas twood 's statement, is there
actually any correspondence or any minute of a Board
Meeting or anything of that sort to indicate when and why
kthe Club did not proceed with the turnstile plans.

     MR. COLLINS:   Beyond the minutes that I have referred
to, no, but I think --   They may exist, other documents;
I am not saying they do not but it would seem fairly clear
from the documentation we have that the reason it was not
proceeded with was expense.
     MR. HYTNER:     We gather that from dr. Eastwood --
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Could I suggest if there are
any further matters of this kind they might perhaps be
discussed --    There may be other people who have got matters
to raise as well.
     MR. COLLINS:    I will endeavour at 5 o'clock to answer
all queries.    -I do not promise I will be able to.  “    '" "
     Sir, as    I say, what I was proposing to do was to
deal with Mr. Seaman.      Now, he has a dauntingly long
statement and bundle but the bulk of his statement is
simply a narrative of the Fire involvement which is shown
in the documentation and therefore it is not going to
be necessary to go through it.        For the purposes of this
part of the Inquiry where there are such statements - and
this applies    to Mr. Seaman;   it will apply to Dr. Eastwood
and it will apply to Mr. Bownes on b ehalf of the City
Council;   it may apply to some extent to Mr. Mackrell
but I do not think perhaps to such an extent - what I
propose to do is to put the statement in as representing
the evidence of that wit ness for the purposes of the
Inquiry, because we. have all had the opportunity of
reading the relevant sta temen ts and then I propose to
ask questions on such parts of the statement as I consider
to be worth asking questions about, if I may put it that
way, (a) to elicit mat ters which are not included in the
general bundle, in so far as relevant and (b) to probe,
if I .think it right, any areas where that witness has
referred to matters in his evidence.
      That, I hope, is a convenient way of dealing with
it.    Cer tainly it will have achieved the object of going
through this rather tedious exercise today of going
through, .this .b.undl,e .if it .ser.v.es .to., sho.r.ten .enormously
the taskof the witnesses who will be called to deal
with the various bundles. ‘Therefore I hope, notwithstanding
the size of this, I can get through Mr. seaman relatively
quickly.     Certainly we can perhaps start him now and
                              138



                                                A. K.    SEAMAN


     certainly if I do not finish him in chief tonight,
     finish him in chief tomorrow and then see how we go
     from there.
                      ALAN KEITH"SEAMAN,"called

                       Examined by MR. COLLINS

Q. You are Alan Keith Seaman, is that right?            A.   That's
   right, sir, yes.
Q. You have read through, no doubt, and been involved in
   the drafting of the statement which is dated 8th June,
   1989 which is at the beginning of the bundle which you
   have in front of you.   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. And do you formally confirm the truth of the contents of
   that statement?   A.   Yes, I do.

          MR. COLLINS:   Sir, may I say, for the purposes of
     the press if there are any listening that that means
     that that statement is the evidence that is before the
     Inquiry.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Quite so, that is being put
     in as the evidence.                       - --        .... .
        MR. COLLINS:   As the evidence of this witness so
   the press are free to report any part of it, if they
 • wish to do so.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:   Mr. Seaman, you are - because,of
     course, some of the public have not read this - you are
     Assistant Chief Fire Officer, is that right?   A. That
     is correct.
Q. And is your major concern that of Fire Prevention and
   Safety including, of course, Safety at Sportsgrounds?
   A.   Yes , s i r .
Q. You have been, I think, a fireman for 23 years, involved
   with Fire safety matters since 1973. A. That is right,

Q. Have you held your present post since early 1987?
   A. Y e s .
Q. And you are a member of the institution of Fire engineers.
   A . Yes, sir.
Q. Now, your involvement - Fire Service involvement - involved
   i T r p u t right from the ‘Outset-, did •i-t-.-not-j of the -passing
   of the Safety at Spo rtsgrounds Act?              A.    Yes.

Q. I do not think it is necessary to take you through the
   historical part of your statement.   May I go on or start
                       139

                                               A.   K.   SEAMAN



at page 10 of that statement.
     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, I .will give you and perhaps I




                                                                        *-V
can do that as I go througfv before I get to 10 because
there are references to extiibits and you would like the
cross-reference.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    To the bundle you have
just been through, yes.
     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, page 1, Exhibit 1 is not copied,
it is simply in the file.   Exhibit 2, page 4.   Exhibit 3, t
the Green Guide, 1976 edition, we do not have copied.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.




                                       /MR. COLLINS:      Exhibit 4, page.
                                     A.K. SEAMAN



Q. Exhibit 4, page 27. On to page 4 of the statement.
   Exhibit 5, page 307. Exhibit 6 is not copied. Can we
   just look at it perhaps, Exhibit 6 in your bundle refers
   to the abolition on reconstruction of Local Government
   and the need to establish'.and' maintain liaison and so
   on. It is a general note requiring the Fire Service to
   have their usual input in advising and liaising with
   the relevant Authorities. - A. Yes.

Q. Exhibit 7 is also not copied and is a letter from the
   City of Sheffield to the Fire Service anticipating the
   transfer of responsibilities under the Local Government
   reorganisation and suggesting a meeting o^-the 13th oi.
   March. We have got the record of that meeting.

            Exhibit 8 is again not copied and is a memoranduu
      from the County from the County Solicitor of South
      Yorkshire to the Chief Fire Officer of the 5th of March 1986
      referring to the arrangments for a meeting and general
      discussion because of the impending changeover.

            Exhibit 9, page 312.  Exhibit 10, page 381.
      Letter of the 14th May 1987, Exhibit 11 is page 399.
      Exhibit 12, 394.
            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I am, just wondering, Mr. CoLlins,
      I am not-being offensive but instead of playing bingo if
      we got a list we could ....
            MR. COLLINS: I can give you a list. I will give
 ■;   you a list which you will have by tomorrow morning.

 Q. May I go to page 10. Mr. Seaman, you refer at    the bottom
    of page 10 to a meeting of the Officer Working   Party on
    the 12th of February to discuss Mr. Eastwood's   report
    and to consider the views which will be put to   the Club.

            Nov/ that meeting or minutes of that meeting,
      Exhibit 17, are referred to at page 57 of our bundle.

            Then over the page you say:

            "With regard to the West Terrace you consider
            due to the lack of depth of the terrace the offer to
            reduce to 7 , 2 0 0 and so on all would be well

      Now you specifically refer to "total movement laterally
      throughout the terrace and the three entrance/exits in
      the terrace being well situated and the West Stand
      providing a minimum of fire risk. You go on:

             "The existing gates in the perimeter fence were
           . .discounted .for means of escape.purposes."
                                   A.K.   SEAMAN


  A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. Was this you at the time, Mr. Seaman, or someone else
   actually at the meeting.  I think it was someone else,
   wasn't it. You weren't there, yourself. But the three
   exits that are referred to* .those presumably are the
   three tunnels, two at the -ends of the Stands and one in
   the middle.  Is that right? - A. That is right sir, yes,
   the three tunnels.

Q. And those,were looked upon, were they, as the natural
   means of escape if there were a fire? - A. Yes.

Q. It being assumed that there was very unlikely to be a
   fire in the Stand itself? - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q. Of course I suppose it was possible that the tunnels
   might be blocked off or one or more of them might be
   blocked off because of fire or possibly a bomb scare or
   something like that? - A. We thought it was very unlikely
   that we would lose one but'anything is possible.

Q. Yes, but doing the best you could you considered, did
   you, that having regard t o the lack of any constraints
   on the terraces themselves, all should be well in the
   sense that it met the reasonable requirements? - A. Yes
   sir.                                      -
Q. Did you know of the width of the perimeter gates? - A.
   I can't say specifically.   I amnot aware that anybody
   took particular regard of the width of the gates at that
   time.
 Q. Was that because it really was not contemplated that the
    perimeter fence would form any sort O j. means o^ egress
    in case of fire? - A. Yes.   We only saw a minor need for
    the use of the gates.

 Q. Only a minor need for the use of the gates? - A. Yes.

 Q. And it was on that basis that you were prepared to approve
    the capacity of 7,200? - A. Yes sir.

 Q. Can I go on please to page 14. You refer there to the
    Safety Certificate and then in the middle you refer in
    1930 to a memorandum from the Council stating:

          "Despite the fact that the Certificate had
          been issued as recent as the 21st of December,
          it was felt that the Sheffield District
          Officer ... to review the situation due
          to the pending F.A. Cup semi-final ....

    Now so these are not in fact or this aspect is not covered
    in our bundle? - A. No.

 Q. I am not sure that it is of vital relevance and I can
                                     A.K.   SEAMAN



lpave it if I may to Mr. Muller to bring out such matters
as he considers relevant.  I would though like to-go
on to 2.7 on page 16 and refer if I may Exhibit 3s.

         There is there a reference to a letter from South
Yorkshire County Council initlining the concern O j. police
n S n c v of locking away supporters inside grounds unv.il home
I n t e r s 1 l ~ r J d th5 area b e c a u s e this obviously
had" a safety implication? - A. Yes sir, it did.

And then there was this:
          "Concern was also expressed at modifications
          being made at Sheffield Wednesday at the
          request of the Police without the knowledge
          of the Officer Working Party".

now that related, I think, one looks at the second page
of the letter, part of Exhibit 35, second paragrapn.

          "Extensions to the barriers at the foot of
          the Koo. Desi g n a t e d ground be added at t u
          request of the Police; the wire nesn at^tne
          top be extended beyond the edge o* tne *rame.
          No record of the Working Party had been
          consulted."
 Fow was that incident in 1930 where there .appears to have
 be^n worked out without proper consultation, so ia* as
 t i l A r e Service is concerned are you aware of any oche.
 incidents ....
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:_ Sorry, it is my fault.          I
 have not connected with this yet.
        MR COLLINS:   It is 35, second page at the end
  of the exhibit, second paragraph or the first rull
  paragraph, and then the third paragraph.

        The point you were making of course was that tnese
      , t         could have safety implications of which
  the Pol ice might no t £ Sully aware'. Is that the point?
    A If I can just make it clear to you. Mr. Vaugnn
  o* the South Yorkshire County Council actually wro.e
  this letter.   It was not the Fire Service, but yes.




                 /Q. I am sorry, your concern ....
                            143


                                                  A. K. SEAMAN


Q.    I am sorry, your concern, the general concern which
      you share, is that if modifications of any sort are
      made, they could have an implication or an effect on
      safety and therefore it-is vital that everybody be
      informed and asked to g i v e •their, opinion? A. Yes, it
      is necessary that everybody knew.

Q.    It would seem that the role of the police, or the
      input of the police, one would expect to be largely
      concerned with crowd safety - crowd management - that
      is to say, public order?   A. Yes, sir.

CT.   And I imagine you would say, would you, that you would
      not necessarily expect the police to be alive to all
      the implications in respect of safety of a particular
      matter that they wanted done?   A. It would depend who
      the policeman was.

Q.    Of course.  A. If the policeman was a policeman that
      was regularly attending .meetings of the Officer
      Working Party,  and, as the Fire Service did, we had
      a headquarters officer that attended meetings in every
      district - Sheffield, Rotherham, Barnsley and Doncaster -
      so that we had an overall view of standardisation,
      then I would have anticipated that that officer would
      be aware of the general .safety implications---

q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Would be aware of...?

Q.         Mr. COLLINS:  Keep your voice up, Mr. Seaman.
      A.  Sorry, sir, of the general safety implications.
      On occasions, sometimes at local level things were
      asked for without the knowledge of the Working Party
      in the early days.   I can remember that that happened
      on a number of occasions and was taken up and dealt
      with.

Q.    But t h i s .improved after that letter, did it? A. Yes.
      I don't think it was ever a serious problem, but
      from time to time things do happen.

Q.    That presumably was the purpose or the main purpose
      of including this part of your statement, was it?
      A. Yes.

Q.     To highlight that?         A. Yes, exactly that.

Q.    Can we go on, please, to page 18? Perhaps Ihad better
      start at the bottom of 17, Exhibit 41, which is our
      page 153. We are here concerning ourselves, as you say,
      with the proposed erection of the radial barriers.   Now,
      I think that the representatives of the Fire Service
      this time were Messrs. Ellis, Horner and Ray, as appears
      from the indication?   A. Yes.

Q.    What position did they hold?   A. Mr. Ellis at that
      time was the Divisional Officer in charge of the
      area of the Hillsborough Ground, in charge of fire
prevention matters. Mr. Horner was one of his
station officers that worked in his section. Mr.
Ray was the Headquarters-based Divisional Officer.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      The Headquarters what?
A. He was the Divisional Officer based at Headquarters.
So he had two representatives from the Division and
one from Headquarters.

Now, you pick up the reference at the bottom of our
page 153,"the first page of the Minutes, to the new
gates at the rear of the terrace being under police
control? A. Yes, sir.

This, of course, was a provision for dividing the
terrace, effectively, into three pens?   A. Yes, sir.

You had approved, as I u n d e r s t a n d it, the original
capacity on the basis that there were three readilv
available exits and there was no barrier to movement
of fans to any one of those three exits?           Is that
correct?  A. Yes, sir. ...

We have now, of course, a barrier being built over the
radial fence?    A. Yes.

With a 1.15 metre gate at the back of each of those -
barriers?   A. Right.

Now,    in your statement,     at the bottom of paae 18, you
 say:

        "It was clearly understood by the representatives
        of the Fire Service that these gates would be
        constantly manned and they would not have approved
        the proposal if the situaiton was to be otherwise.
        At this" time the permimeter fence gates were
        never contemplated for mass evacuation on to the
        pitch."

 Now, you considered, d i d you - obviously you have looked
 at your records - the F i r e Service considered that
 those 1.15 metre gates w o u l d be adequate for evacuation
 should the need arise?          A. Yes, sir.  We considered
 that they were essential to allow movement in that
 direction, should it be necessary,         he felt tna<- ths
 lack of fire risk in t hat stand made it unlikely that
 we w o u l d n ' t have the tunnel escape route, but we needed
 to m a i ntain an ability to go that way if necessary.

 I entirely follow     ---

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: We are having difficulty
 hearing.  I wonder if you could get yourself a little
 closer to the microphone?   Thank you.

      Mr. COLLINS: Mr., Seaman, I entirely follow that in
 your thinking it was singularly improbable that there
 would be any need to effectively block off the tunnels,
                           145

                                            A. K. SEAMAN

      but let us just consider for a moment, if we may, the
      position in the central pen.  In that pen, the only
      obvious means of egress in an emergency is through
      the central tunnel, is it not, when you build those
      radial fences? I appreciate that you have the gaps
      at the back but essentially it is the central tunnel?
      A. Yes.               •-- -

Q.    Now, if for some reason the central tunnel is impassable,
      whether because of a fire in the stand or because of
      something happening behind which means that you cannot
      use it to go out, then .the position is that those in
      that central pen are limited, are they not, to those
      two rather small exits in the back?    A. Yes, sir.

Q.    And if you do not consider that the perimeter fence
      can provide a sensible means of escape, as indeed it
      obviously cannot, because there is only one rather
      small gate - that is right, is it not?   A. Yes, sir.

Q.    - then it would seem to the layman that there was
      certainly a potential da'nger if you only had those
      small gates at the back, particularly as the back mav
      be the difficult place to get to? Do you see what I
      mean? If something is_ wrong in the Wept Stand, then
      you cannot get to the tunnel and it may be that you
      cannot get to those gaps at the back either?     A. If
      I -could explain on that one, we would-feel -that it would
      be better, in that situation, to have the exits at the
      rear because if there is pressure, it's the people at
      the back who are able to move, not the people at the
      front, and so they are able to go and as they flow
      away, that would reduce the pressure, yes. The actual
      terrace itself was regarded as a relatively safe place;
      it's in the open air;   there is no fire risk.   If you
      have to move people, for whatever reason, it is
      difficult to imagine, on a properly packed terrace,
      a problem arising of serious proportions, and therefore
      if for any reason you had have lost the tunnel escape,
      it would have been possible, using the public address
      system and a manned gate (so that where necessary
      action could be taken to open the gate and draw attention
      to the fact that, we wanted people to go through it)
      to evacuate in that way;   and we felt that it would
      have been relatively safe to do that, bearing in mine
      that it was a balanced compromise that was needed on
      the Terrace.

Q      So_far as your role is concerned, do you see your role,
       in regard to provision of suitable egress, to be limited
       to egress caused by fire or similar hazard, such as
       something like a bomb scare, something of Fire Brigade
       concern, and not to extend, for example, to a need
       for egress caused by someone creating trouble on the
       terraces?     A.  I think it has to encompass everything
     ■ that ..might-happen.

Q.     So you,  the Fire Service, are concerned with egress
       generally?   A. Yes.
                                      A. K. SEAMAN


And you say positively in your statement that it was
understood that they would be constantly manned and
that they would not have approved the proposal otherwi
That is not quite so strongly recorded as*that, is it,
in the Minutes?   A. No, I understand it is not, but
the point I would like .-to’.make is that we feel that
it would be absolutely essential to have a crate that
you needed potentially to use for means of escaDe
purposes to be permanently manned.

I entirely follow that, .Mr. Seaman, but what vou are
saying in your statement is that at the time,that was
made crystal clear.  Are you saying that because you
assumed that that wouid have been done or because vou
have been told by whoever was involved that that was
the position?   A.  I have had the ooportunitv of
speaking to the people that attended that meeting and
that is their reflection.




                        /Q.   That is your information.
                                               A.K. SEAMAN


That is your information from them? - A. Yes.
    ,     . _ reference on page 19, and perhaps we ought
jSst toe iook at this to Exhibits 44 and 45 which are not
in the bundle.                            ‘'
      4 4 is a memorandum from the Chief Executive of South
Yorkshire to the Chief Fire Officer which a s k s for commen
iOiKsniie          4-1,a+
                        . ic the Eastwood proposals in

    s S £ rS rS to --r----r= .“~-.
          -The reason it is not in the bundle is it is not


    that is there re^erreo uo-
            May I now go on please to page 23. Again perhaps
    t nnoh1- to put it in context by looking at page 2 .
    p r e f e r s t l a meeting to discuss theproposals for
    segregation at the Leppings Lane end.

            Paae 211 of our bundle is Exhibit 51 and this is
    the p r o p o s a l to c o n s t r u c t the n e w tu r n s t i l e s a. the
    L e o o i n g f L a n e end.   I t h i n k the p r o p o s a l was for t h e 29
    n e t / which   was the. one under discussion.
           You set out what those proposals are in your page 22
    you sav and refer to Exhibit 50 and perhaps we ought to
    loSv It that because it is not again in our ounale, to
    loo,, at t                Officer then attending,
    IS! Grimshaw's notes on the relevant plan. If we can
    look at that.
             NOW the proposed radial barrier from the existing
           •     4. +.1 , 0 n0rth end of the terrace coula be
     5 ar^ n L d \          2?c   What has been referred to in your
       iflement is that the bit where we see towards the
     bottom where.^neutral^area^or^visiting^supporters^^

     t h f S n n e l ? - A. Yes sir, that is the actual annotation
     that Neil G rimshaW made during the meeting.
                                                                           " whi ch
n    and crossing out "the n e w secondary radial fence
Q ' i f reffr^S to on the side there? - A. Yes sir.

0    A n d also dotting in in the middle of the home ^“P p° j terS
     terrace       Mow I presume w h a t appears on your page        ,
     Mr! l e ^ a n , is a? rela t e d to you by Hr. G n m s n a w . Is
      that right? - A. Yes.


0- ~         please? -'l!                                          ~         ^

Q.    f^ ^ ^ ^ /f^ ^ l^ jfS ^ iL tm p IS ed ^ rh S a d q ra ’rters
                                    A.K. SEAMAN



in the Fire Prevention Section and he had the reference
at that time for Safety of Sports Grounds and so he
would attend sports grounds'working party meetings.

Effectively was he your predecessor or not? -• A. No, he
is a colleague.

You record his concerns or his main concerns which he
expressed in the meeting as having been:

      "Whether the external gates and exit routes
      created at the rear of the Stand would be
      adequate for the numbers of spectators in
      each section of the West Stand and terrace."

What was that specifically referring to, as you understood
it? - A. I understood him to mean the numbers of people
that would be in each of the newly created pens. The
external gates were also the fact that the new partitions
and turnstile arrangements- were each going to feed into
different sections of the ground and each of them would
need an exit gate so that they could cater for the number
of people that would require a means of escape and he
needed to check what those widths of gates needed to b e .

I see. So for example if we look at the drawing and can
I draw ..your attention again just by way of example to -
the area described as "Visitors' West Stand" do you see
just to the back of the visiting seating supporters' side
of the West Stand? - A. Yes.

There appears to be a relatively small area therewith a
gate opening for exit purposes into the visiting supporters'
centre terrace exit? - A. Yes sir.

And it is the size, is it, the adequacy of the size of
that area which was concerning Kr. Grimshaw together with
the size of the gates? - A. Yes. He wanted to ensure
that the gates were wide enough to take the flow of people
exiting from the Stand, from that part of the Stand.

Of course there were two gates, one on each side in the
example that I have actually givei you.

Then (b) going back to page 23:

       "Whether the numbers of spectators being allowed
       into each section of the terrace could be
       controlled to prevent overcrowding.11

Now what sort of control, as you understand it, was
Mr. Grimshaw concerned with? - A. He was concerned that
because of the way in which the terrace was proposed to
be .split .-.up., that it would be. necessary to have. ,caref.u3
control over numbers going- into the pens. It needed to
be properly controlled.
                                                        149
\
                                                                  A.K. SEAMAN


                             On the face of it they ought to have been ableto'be
                        Q. controlled by the number of turnstiles and thus the        . ^
                              ability to count in the turnstiles those entering througn
                              them’ - A. I think on the arrangement shown on tnis
                              drawing that would have been- true, .yes, it would have
                              a natural separation.
                              Ouite apart from any rearrangement of t h e turnstiles what
                  B     Q. Mr     Grimshavj was largely concerned with, 1- one correcay
                              interprets (b) was this was it, that when you divided the
                              terrace into the pens you-had to be careful that you got
                              the right c a p a c i t i e s for each pen? - A. Yes, and also that
                              we got the gates in the new fences manned for emergency
                              purposes should they need to evacuate.

                           Did it occur as far as you can tell to Mr. Grimshaw, or
                        Q. indeed to anyone, that the new radial fences might. <-r-eCt-
                           the caoacity of the terraces? - A. If I could say that
                           w f « as capacity was concerned, what the Fire Service
                           dealt with was the aspect of capacity by means Ox escape,
                           that is calculated not necessarily on tne area ox ti.e
                           terrace which will be what the crush barriers in Jie
                            tandina area gave you a figure for, but on tne widtn O a
                           the means of escape and how many people that could carry.
                   D
                         O     So you were concerned with what I think is the standard
                               of eight minutes.  Is that right? - A. Yes. sir.

                         o     And that is I think in the Green Guide, the effect o^.
                               it being you have got to be able to get everyone out
                         '     within light minutes? - A. That is the general guidance
                         '     S v e n in the Guide. It can vary. If there is a « s * ,
                    E          if the Stand had been combustible, we would hav/e reaucea
                               that evacuation time to a much lower figure.

                         o     Now this one in fact on the original was 6.6 minutes, 1
                               think as we have seen, something of that order, and
                               cSi?s4 w             I
                                         have a Stand which you consider to bear a vexy
                               minimal risk of fire? - A. Yes sir.

                          0    So you did not consider it and you d on’t consider it
                               nart of your function to concern yourselves with tne
                               effect on the capacity in relation to the crusn barriers,
                               that is for the other persons concerned with sa^e^y.
                               - A If I could explain. - The original division of
                               responsibilities under the South Yorkshire County Council,
                               the figures were required from all three members o^. the
                               Working Party. The Fire Service worked its figures out
                                b   a on t h e capacity of the exit routes and that would
                                        s   e   d


                                cive a figure. That could be affected by how long an
                                evacuation time we were allowing, it could be eighu
                                ninutes^ it could be two-and-a-half for a combustible
                                Stand or it could be a period in between.
                                          •So f a r as the'capacity of the standing-.capacity
                                    of the ter“ ce is concerned, that was based on the standing



    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                             150
                                                       A.K. SEAMAN


                     area fo*- spectators and the condition of crush barriers.
                     That was not a calculation that the Fire Service carried
                     oSt but that would produce a figure and the figure that
                     SSuid n o r S t l y apply to a particular area of the terrace
                     would be the lower of those -two figures.



                B




                D




                 H                           /Q. Then C


J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                     I
                             151



                                            A.   K.   SEAMAN



Q. Yes, and then (c) - what arrangements could be made to
   ensure that the gates in the radial fences would be readily
   available for use should lateral movement to alternative
   exits become necessary - that is your point about keeping
   them open and manning thefflr is it?   A.   We wanted them
   manning whether they were open or closed.     The intention,
   as we understood it, was to have flexibility of the use
   of that area and there could be home and away supporters
   in adjacent pens.   That might mean that gates were closed
   under normal circumstances.     Whether they were open or
   closed we would have wanted a steward or a Policeman there
   appropriate  to the ne_eds, really I suppose as agreed
   by the Club --

Q. It did not matter who but someone had to man those gates?
   A.  Someone had to be there.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Why would you?     Take this
     match, for example.   There was nobody, either stewards
     or Police on the gates in the radial fences back against
     the stand but the gates were locked open.    A.     Right, sir.
Q. What would it have added to have had them manned?
   A.   Normally speaking, sir, we would wish people to
   evacuate down the tunnel, down the normal route.       If
   we ..needed to get them cM t via the gates-in an emergency..
   situation then we would need to get people to go through
   that gate and that would necessitate a decision to use
   the public address system to direct people to go through
   that gate.     That was part of the emergency evacuation
 • procedure.      In those circumstances, we wanted someone
   on that gate to direct people in the vicinity andmake
   sure that they saw where the gate was.       A Policeman,
   as a member of authority, or a steward that has got an
   identification jacket on, to actually perform     that function
   to assist people through the gate.       That was the idea
   that was embodied.

Q.        HR. COLLINS:    I can understand that you might want
     to have someone to ensure that the gangways, that is the
     access points to the gates were kept free.   Is that a
     consideration?    A.   The access gates      The tsrace itself
     at that point had no gangways.

Q.    I follow that but that in itself would surely render the
     gates less obviously available as a meg-is of egress in case
     of need, would it not?     Normally, if you have got an egress
     point you would expect to have a clearly marked gangway
     showing that it was an egress point, would you not?
     A.    The problem was, sir, that we did not want them to
     go via those gates under normal circumstances.     We wanted
     them to go out via the tunnel in normal circumstances, vhich
     is generally what happened.     So if we had marked that,
     it could have caused confusion.

Q.   The difficulty surely is that unless you have some sort of
     gangway or unless you identify those gates as possible
                           152


                                     A.   K.   SEAMAN



  egress points, people, particularly those further down
  the terrace, may not even know of their existence.
  A.   That is why the public address system was.seen as            'j
  the means of activating tbe gse of those gates, so that
  a message could be given to- the crowd to get them to
  move in that direction.    -The packing on the terraces
  itself with the crush barriers was considered to actually
  control the flow towards the gate at the terrace.     It
  would want to be in a controlled way, not in a rush, and
  that would naturally tend to do it.

Q. It may be suggested, I suppose, that although your requirements
   were, on the face of them, sensible and one can see v/hy you
   wanted them, in fact they would have had no practical
   effect because, as Lord Justice Taylor has pointed out, the
   existence of a man at the gates probably would not have made
   a great deal of difference, assuming you have got no gangway
   and no identification of the gate as a means of egress.
   A.   Well, I do not think I can agree with that.    I think
   I have got to say that the plan has been and still is in
   other grounds that if you have got a gate that is separating
   an area there is a steward there and it is for that purpose.
   If it is considered that that is not an adequate means,
   I don't know, I am not aware actually that it was tried
   on the day.    The gate was open.   I am not aware that the --

Q. You are quite right, it was not used but that was because
   the tunnel was available too, one way, but that was because
   people on the whole did not know that the gates were there
   because they had been pushed forward in the crush on the
   terraces and were not able to see that they existed, you
   see.   A.   Well, I would make the point, sir, that they
   knew that the tunnel was there and they did not use that.
        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Is that a convenient moment?

        MR. COLLINS:   Yes, sir.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can you give me some idea
   how long you think you will be?
        MR. COLLINS:   You can see, sir, we have got quite
   a way through this statement.   I have already indicated
   I am not going to go through the matters that are essentially
   historical.   I do not think I shall be more than at worst
   an hour and probably less.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am not tying anybody.         Is
   there likely to be a great deal of cross-examination?

        MR. HYTNER:    Five minutes from me, sir.

        MR. MULLER:   There may be some things I wish to
   elaborate but not more than quarter of an hour..
        MR. MAXWELL:    Yes, sir, there may be some from me.
        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Does it look as though we
should finish this witness's evidence within the morning*?
     MR. COLLINS:   I would certainly hope so, sir. Well
within the morning, I wou.13 hope, but it is not in my hands.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well.   I just wanted some
idea.    What then I propose to do after that will be to
break off until it has been proposed, I think, Monday
afternoon.

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, that is certainly what we had
been working to and I understand that that is acceptable.
What we would endeavour to do in that case, having
finished Mr. Seaman, would be to call Messrs. Calvert and
Sewell who are the Police Liaison Officers for Monday
afternoon in anticipation that there is no real reason why
they should not be disposed of in the course of the
afternoon because, of course, the planning for the day
in question has been exhaustively • dealt with already
in relation to other officers and we are concerned, and
concerned only at this stage with the Police input
into the history of the matter and the state of the ground.

     MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, the suggestion that the chronology
is acceptable, sir, is not something that can be accepted.
It was contemplated, that there would be s o m e .opportunity
for mature consideration in dealing with documents.       As
we have heard today, even the Inquiry team has not dealt
with 2,000 yet and, sir, it is in relation to that matter
that I rise.   We had expected to have the opportunity of
being able to deal with matters and also to survive the
weekend.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It is hard to deal with both
Brahms and the list at the same time!

     MR. WOODWARD:  It is indeed, sir.   On the question
of the timing it is in relation to the suggestion that
the matter is acceptable, sir, we cannot, I am afraid
accord with that.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    There is no point in wrapping
it up, Mr. Woodward; what are you saying?     What would
you like?   I am prepared,- if you think it is necessary,
to give longer time on Monday.

     ‘MR. WOODWARD:  Would it be possible, sir, to sit on
Tuesday and not on Monday?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I think certain arrangements
have been made for Tuesday, I believe, to enable the
Ambulance Service, is it --- ?

     MR-. COLLINS: Sir, yes, the position is, as you
are aware, that because Professor Maunder is unable to
be here on the Tuesday and on the Wednesday, we have
arranged already that there should be — we will not deal
 «//   :
   k\y,

                                           154




                   with this part of the matter, we will insert the Ambulance
                   Service personnel on the day; we will have evidence from
                   one or two doctors who attended -on the day and who have
                   already said things in pubiic; we .will have evidence
                   from one or two other individuals who add to the story
                   and from the F.A. and that'we would hope to deal with on
                   the Tuesday and the Wednesday. Of course, those are
              B    matters which, although they may have matters relevant,
                   Professor Maunder will not be directly concerned with,
                   or at least not so directly concerned with as, of course,
                   this side    of the Inquiry.   So we could, I suppose, simply
                   defer the    Police evidence which I hope to call on Monday -
                   afternoon if we have to but that is, of course, sir,
                   a matter for you.     What we could not do is to go into
                   Tuesday and I would not be in a position to recall Mr.
                   Seaman if there are any matters to be put to him after
                   Mondayu.ntil Thursday, and then we run into difficulties
                   because I have got to fit Dr. Eastwood in on Thursday,
                   so what I am saying effectively is that if Mr. Woodward
                   is unable or finds matters which he needs to put to Mr.
                   Seaman which he is not able to put tomorrow, then he
                   will either have to have Mr. Seaman back on Monday,
                    some time   or not until Thursday at the earliest.
              D
                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I am sympathetic to the
                   problems w i t h ■this amount of documentation., obviously, but-
                   you appreciate, Mr. Woodward, and I am sure everybody does,
                   that I am not trying to press on with this because I want
                   to do so just, you know, for the sake of it.        It is very
                   important that we should get this Inquiry completed by a
                   certain time and it is a question of how we can best do
               E   that.    I am prepared, if you tell me it is necessary,
                   to say that we will not sit Monday at all but it does
                   mean that things are having to be put out of phase, as
                   Mr. Collins has indicated, and we will get on with --
                   I do not think thatmatters particularly.

                        MR. WOODWARD:    Sir, I rise to endeavour to help
                   because the opportunity to reflect reduces the necessity
                   for the investigation of matters which may be demonstrated
                   to be perhaps easily resolved by looking at other documents,
                   so whilst I am on my feet might I mention Dr. Eastwood.
                   We know that investigations are under way with the Health &
                   Safety Executive and we have been given, as it were, a
                   skeleton whisper in writing of certain indications but,
                   sir, it is not something which one can usefully work to.
                   We would like, if that was at all possible, to enable --
                         MR. COLLINS:    You will get that either this evening
                    or tomorrow morning.    You will get it this .evening.
                         MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, that is a further burden for the
                    weekend to be put into the time and to be able to deal with
                    that, sir, would be a great advantage.
               H         MR. COLLINS:   As I have already indicated, I am not
                    going to call Dr. Eastwood until Thursday so Mr. Woodward

J. L Harpham Ltd
                           155




will have at least some time to ccnsider the evidence in
relation to Dr. Eastwood.             There it is, sir.     May I
perhaps suggest that this is a matter we could perhaps
discuss between o u r s e l v e s .a n d .you need not make a final
decision about Monday intii-tomorrow" morning and it may
depend upon what time we finish tomorrow, perhaps, as to
whether we sit on Monday at all, as to how much is
available on Friday.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: - I do not want to be dogmatic about
itj   if it is actually going to be helpful and we have got
to get the right answer so there is no point in just hastening
along for the sake of it.
     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, I hope I am fully aware of that.
All I am suggesting is that we have heard your willingness
to give all Monday and we all know that you are willing
to give all Monday but perhaps before we make a final
decision on whether we ask you to accept that, we can
discuss among ourselves because I do not know whether
everyone will support Mr. Woodward.   It may be everyone
will and there will be no problem but it may be that
others will not entirely support him.    I just do not
know.
     LORD JUSTICE- I.AYL0R :.     I am content to. cavsijd,er i.t,. -
tomorrow.
                 (The Inquiry was adjourned until
                10.00 a.m. the following morning)
