Our Pef: HPH/JB/S3/2741

16th December 1988




Dear Mr..

In complete contrast to ny last letter to yew please fih<2 enclosed a copy of a
letter I have received f r m a very ’satisfied custcxnerw-' ,

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely.
5"+

c^o lrsr\ 5
Our Ref:   GHW/JB/S3/2672

25th November 1988




Dear Mr.

Further to my letter dated 13th November 1988 I have now had an opportunity to
discuss the incident with members of the St. John Ambulance Brigade.

They have acknowledged that they were late in arriving for the Everton match
and have given me an assurance that this will not occur in the future.

I trust your son has made a speedy recovery.

yours sincerely,




G.H. Mackrell
Secretary
Our Pef: GHM/JB/S3/2600

15th Povenber 1988


Hr. P. Wells,
St. John Ambulance Brigade,
131 Psalter Lane,
Sheffield.
Sll BOX


Dear Peter,

Please find enclosed a copy of a letter X have received frcn a supporter
regarding last Saturday's watch. It obviously raises areas of concern and
should be grateful for your carments before canposing a suitable reply.

Yours sincerely,




G.H. Mackrell
Secretary
Our Ref:   GHK/JB/S3/2599

15th November 1988




Dear Mr.

Thank you for your letter which arrived this morning.

I am obviously rrsost concerned regarding the incidents to which you refer. I
have today written to the St. John Ambulance Brigade,-eneltJsing a copy of your
letter, requesting their observations as soon as possible. Once I have
received a reply I will, of course, be back in touch.

May I wish your son a speedy recovery and as a small token of our appreciation
of your support please accept with my compliments three tickets for this
Sunday's caning mate* with Tottenham Hotspur.

Yours sincerely,




G.H. Mackrell
Secretary
mm
■
■.-•x.'v'mm
Em
mm
                  'Jteour^lr,



              s $ Z l ^ ^ x/tuL      ^
                                     q    cuj U    ^    £    l/edr(\ / j f '&s7rcu4&£           Qjfc > $ £

              ^       rvnustO^-                    / ^/ ^tJO                     7 a j £ Ouvisrjt£           fS

              sdcJihM- /TZsbujy                             ov-r 'tAWUbl flcrlt>£ar7 cm s$UL
              ^cfjO, /72y sCj*t7 d e u y j# /. d /A ^                       20^1- or\      OL <^>cuTl2f

              XJj&Z/i/.       /IM/lfr                           ^        <did!!esrn                    ^ p O .

                          .d&jy      a   a&u/dy/                a.              sdcdjLsy        c m   J ~ OY\

              '^UA                       ',            /Oedutf-                d & L

                  fcc/O M J & O -        C/<2n y                     <f~ ^CGt-izJ. yUb

                  ^ u v d     aud-                                       -^xcA <       &    /   /Vfait-

                  WdirtL -                    ^ c /jL                ^                                Cud

                  '           Xi/SL,                                 /Za~(^~ c r r d y     O^a-ooz/.,

              /10-&7UL y&2su2~                                               ^fty ^ c n \.
                           c m     /                         datlL ^        J%£L /Ch-b&L

*6C/£/\Q?..                       AOO-            *dis7L '                                     Q_

C v C j ^ „o ^ / o m A f         y^/j&sb                             50/0

                                                     ydx/t^'^0         /rum/-

        /   O   /    o     p      e    r    &    £    Jovtc&> ^ c u / o u A J J i ,

 H & . A* crrt/l,                           cJed& ^ adkatL                                 <=f-

            '£*&'    >£nCcnj-n^Qpji                     CpryiSL,            / W 4 d £ ^ /rtg>£

                                           <Ao$y      OJO^liAAinrt j 0 / U jui£>         •f-

                xrt^yOfJ&lS-                                f 7 * 2 * s c d i a j k s r 7 jj)

/r? o £ ^ /KSL. cmA/J&r                              Jjt£       uu&d/i e.cfrnuy
       . a sy ,/r)<n\jL. /Th^& m , cfA jctuM - M & l                                J&tin*j
s£ k     /^jeuion^                 •^ZiAcra Sasrta/ui cm
                    s^>        i‘6 c d & r n , { / & / < & + & ( ■    ojh&    < / cA l

k/uuj- ^                                                      c ^ a s ? ~^bl/?~ d ^ r K Q _

J&&      ^~<ci/£                        ^       sCOgAA^     / t z > C t / j d £

^^uCA^&eJb          OjU vjM M l ,

        culSI-- ^         /tlUQjt' step J$M> A c ^ jt^                            /A
                    swi           C(37U2U0&/~                    ^ Q s U o u t J y /tfda/hlr
err                     OfrrtfL ^     aap srZaxSL /M odc/ob

g ^ rv u a s & £ -^£>     d& U ujnp ^ /a u n J L   C crn/flG A jh   l/& ^ jk & ri,.
            A Voluntary Organisation of the Order of St. John                             Please reply to:
                                                                                          Area H .Q .,____

             St. John Ambulance                                                           131 Psalter Lane,
                                                                                          Sheffield S11 8U X
                                                                                          Tel: (0742) 552177
                                                                                              or
            COUNTY OF SOUTH & WEST YORKSHIRE
            SHEFFIELD AREA
            Commander: C. Neville Packett Esq.,           K.St.J„ J.P.
            Commissioner: Dr. J.R. Shortland, C.St.J., B.Sc.,M.B., Ch.B.,
            Ph.D. M .R.C.P.(Path.)
            County President: Mrs. D. Altman
            Area President: Mr. F. McKenzie S.B.St.J., J.P.
            Deputy Area Commissioner: Miss M. Ward, O.St.J„ S.R.N., S.C.M. H.V.
            Area Secretary: M rA .S . Thackray O .StJ.




             23rd     August      1988




             G.H. M a c k r e l l E s q . ,      F.C.C.A.,
             The Secretary,
             Sheffield Wednesday                 F.C.      PLC.,
             Hillsborough,
             Sheffield S6.1SW

             Dear     M r.   Mackrell,

               T h a n k y o u fo r y o u r l e t t e r of t h e 2 2 n d i n s t . , r e f .
                G H M / J B / S 1 / 2 3 2 6 , t o g e t h e r w i t h c h e q u e ' fcTr £ 3 4 8 . 3 5 ,
                r e p r e s e n t i n g y o u r d o n a t i o n to t h e S h e f f i e l d A r e a in
i f c ^ l B f i r e s p e c t of f i r s t - a i d c o v e r f o r t h e p e r i o d J a n u a r y
                to M a y 1 9 8 8 .

             M a y I e x p r e s s o u r s i n c e r e t h a n k s to             the   members    of      your
             B o ard for t h eir g e n e r o u s d o n a t i o n .

             I duly      note     you      ha v e m a d e a r r a n g e m e n t s for     the     current
             season      with     Mr.      P. W e l l .

             I w o u l d a d d t h a t Mr. P. W e l l s h a s r e c e n t l y r e s i g n e d
             a s Duty O f f i c e r ,    a n d t h e r e f o r e I s h o u l d be    g l a d if y o u
             w o u l d c o n t a c t m e w i t h a n y d u t y m a t t e r s or f i n a n c e , a s
             in p r e v i o u s y e a r s .




             Kind     regards,

             Yours      sincerely,




             Area Secretary,
             S h e f f i e l d Area.
Our Ref:   GHM/JB/S1/2326

22nd August 1988


Mr. A.S. Thackray,_____




Dear Hr. Thackray,

Please fi^.ipn^pedjjpr cheque for £348.35 representing the sum due to the
-Brigade for the' second half of last season.

Arrangements for the current season have already been made with Peter Wells
whom I will, in fact, be seeing tenorrow evening at our Stewards training
meeting.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely,




G.H. Mackrell
Secretary
Cur Ref:    CBM/JB/S1/2219

11th July 1988


fir . P. Vfclls,
f'r. Joht\ Ambulance,
.131 Psalter Lane,
Sheffield 11.


Dear Peter,

FOllowing on fran oar meeting last Tuesday I anv writing to confirm that we
will be pleased to provide a facility for rest and refreshments for your
menbers in the North Stand for the caning season.

In addition we will be happy to supply'all first aid materials necessary for
carrying out your duties at the ground. I should be most grateful if you
could let me have a list of what you require as soon as possible so that T.can
get the matter in hand.

Kind regards.                -~

Yours sincerely,




G.E. Mackrell
Secretary
                         (o C
         THE REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRST AID EQUIPMENT AND FIRST AID ROOMS



                                                       Number of employees
                    Item                        1-5    6-10  11-50 51-100 101-150
    Guidance card                                 1      1      1       1     1
    Individually wrapped sterile adhesive
    dressings                                   10     20      40       40        40
    Sterile eye pads, with attachment            1      2       4        6         8
    Triangular bandages                          1      2       4        6         8
    Safety pins                                  6      6      12       12        12
    Medium-sized sterile unmedicated
    dressings                                    3      6       8        10       12
    Large sterile unmedicated dressings          1      2       4         6       10
    Extra large sterile unmedicated
    dressings                                    1      2       4         6        8
  Where sterile water or sterile normal saline in disposable containers needs to be
kept near the first aid box because tap water is not available, at least the following
quantities should be kept:
                                                           Number of employees   !
                                                       1-10  11-50 51-100 101-150
    Sterile water or saline in disposable containers
    (where tap water is not available)                  1                         6
                                                                3        6               !!
Travelling First Aid Kits
The contents of small travelling first aid kits (for use, in some circumstances, in
establishments where there is dispersed working, or by employees working away
from their employer’s establishment or by self-employed persons) may vary accord­
ing to the circumstances in which they are to be used. However, items included
should always be among those specified above. In general, the following items should
be sufficient:
    a. six individually wrapped sterile adhesive dressings;
    b. one medium-sized sterile unmedicated dressing (approx 10 cm x 8 cm;
       examples of suitable dressings currently available are the Standard Dressings
       No 8 and No 13 BPC);
    c. one triangular bandage (this should, if possible, be sterile; if not, a sterile
       covering appropriate for serious wounds should also be included);
    d. six safety pins.
Supplementary equipment
The approved code states that where first aiders and occupational first aiders are
employed in an establishment the employer should provide appropriate carrying
equipment for them to use. In addition it is recommendea that where such
equipment is provided, blankets should be stored alongside the equipment and in
such a way as to keep them free from dust and dampness.
Protective Clothing and Equipment
Protective clothing and equipment should be provided near the first aid materials
where there is a possibility that the first aider or occupational first aider might need
  rotection to avoid becoming a casualty himself while administering first aid.
P fotective clothing and equipment should always be properly stored and checked
regularly to ensure that it remains in good condition.
   <




        THE REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRST AID EQUIPMENT AND FIRST AID ROOMS




                                                      Number of employees
                   Item                       1-5     6-10  11-50 51-100 101-150
  Guidance card                                 1       1      1       1     1
  Individually wrapped sterile adhesive
  dressings                                    10      20       40       40       40
  Sterile eye pads, with attachment             1       2        4        6        8
  Triangular bandages                           1       2        4        6        8
  Safety pins                                   6       6       12       12       12   I
  Medium-sized sterile unmedicated                                                     i
  dressings                                     3       6        8       10       12   !
  Large sterile unmedicated dressings           1       2        4        6       10   |
  Extra large sterile unmedicated                                                      i
  dressings                                     1       2        4        6        8   :
  Where sterile water or sterile normal saline in disposable containers needs to be
kept near the first aid box because tap water is not available, at least the following
quantities should be kept:                                                           B
                                                          Number of employees
                                                      1-10  11-50 51-100 101-150
  Sterile water or saline in disposable containers
  (where tap water is not available)                   1        3         6        6
Travelling First Aid Kits
The contents of small travelling first aid kits (for use, in some circumstances, in
establishments where there is dispersed working, or by employees working away
from their employer’s establishment or by self-employed persons) may vary accord­
ing to the circumstances in which they are to be used. However, items included
should always be among those specified above. In general, the following items should
besufncient:
   a. six individually wrapped sterile adhesive dressings;
   b. one medium-sized sterile unmedicated dressing (approx 10 cm x 8 cm-
      examples of suitable dressings currently available are the Standard Dressings
      No 8 and No 13 BPC);                                                            B
   c. one triangular bandage (this should, if possible, be sterile; if not, a sterile
   * covering appropriate for serious wounds should also be included);
   d. six safety pins.
Supplementary equipment
The approved code states that where first aiders and occupational first aiders are
employed in an establishment the employer should provide appropriate carrying
equipment for them to use. In addition it is recommended that where sucn
equipment is provided, blankets should be stored alongside the equipment and in
such a way as to keep them free from dust and dampness.
Protective Clothing and Equipment
Protective clothing and equipment should be provided near the first aid materials
where there is a possibility that the first aider or occupational first aider might need
protection to avoid becoming a casualty himself while administering first aid.
Protective clothing and equipment should always be properly stored and checked
regularly to ensure that it remains in good condition.
                                                                                       107
                   A Voluntary Organisation of the Order of St. John                                Please reply to:
                                                                                                    Area H .Q .,___

                   St. John Ambulance                                                               131 Psalter Lane,
                                                                                                    Sheffield S11 8UX
                                                                                                    Tel: (0742) 552177
                                                                                                        or
                   COUNTY OF SOUTH & WEST YORKSHIRE
                   SHEFFIELD AREA
                                                                                           Mr.   A. S. Thackray.
                   Commander: C. Neville Packett Esq., M .B.E., K.St.J., J.P.
                   Commissioner: Dr. J.R. Shortland, C.St.J., B .S c.,M B ., Ch.B.,
                   Ph.D. M.R.C.P.(Path.)
                   County President: Mrs. D. Altman
                   Area President: Mr. F. McKenzie S.B.St.J., J.P.
                   Deputy Area Commissioner: Miss M. Ward, O.St.J., S.R.N., S.C.M . H.V.
                   Area Secretary: M r A.S. Thackray O .StJ.




                                                                                           3 1 s t March 1989.


G. H. M a c k r e l l Esq., F.C.C.A.,
Secretary,
S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y P. C. ELC,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield. S6 1SW.




D e a r Mr. Mackrell,


                Re.F. A. Cu p Semi- Final - S a t u r d a y 15th April                           19Q9.



                Thank you for your let t e r o f the 21st-.instant R e f . G m ^ J B / ^ ^ ^ J n
S
Shhe
   efff
      fiie
         elld
            d A r e a and our Area D u t y O r g a n i s e r                                 b«f P r o v i d e d ^ the
accordingly.                                                                                    has b e e n advised




                                                         Yours sincerely.




                                                         iti-Lca, latiox'e nary.
                                                         S h e f f i e l d Area.
Our Ref: GHM/JB/Sl8/3070

21st March 1989


The Secretary,
St. John Ambulance,
131 Pnalter Lane,
Sheffield 11.


Dear Sir,

Re:   F.A. Cup Semi-Final - Saturday 35th April 1989, Kick-Off 3.P0 p.n.

I write to advise you of the above fixture which will be played between
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, and to request the attendance of your
officers to provide first aid cover on this occasion.

I look forwaro to your reply in due ccursr-.

Yours faithfully,




G.H. Mackrell
Secretary
                               ST. JOHN AMBULANCE
                             A Voluntary Organisation o f the Order o f St. John
                              County of South & West Yorkshire

                                            BARNSLEY AREA


President:                                                               Area Commissioner:

Mrs. L. Fairclough

                                                                                   ?? April 1989

                     Report of events on 13 April 1989 at Hillsborugh
                     Football Ground Sheffield

                 By                (A.S.O.)                                (Div.
                 Officer - Barnsley Division)                                       (Ambulance
                 M e m ber - Stairfoot Division)


     At around 3.15pm on Saturday 15 April, I (P Schofield) was
     at home and switched on the television to watch the foot­
     ball m a t e h : at Hillsborough. It was immediately apparent
     that a large scale disaster had occurred, though little
     hard information was reported. Believing the Bar ns ley Area
     ambulance m ay be able to assist, I travelled to Oakwell
     football ground, knowing that I would be able to muster a
     crew from the members present.

     A r r i v i n g at Oakwell at .pproximately 3.50pm. I     informed the
     Senior Officer Div Supt                       |of the c i r c umstances.
     and she acceeded to my request for                      and
     to a c c omp any me to Sheffield.

     We three then travelled to Cudworth and transferred to the
     A r e a ambulance. Using lights and sirens we made best speed
     to Hills bo rou gh encountering standing traffic at the junction
     of Doe Royd Lane and Halifax Road. Police traffic controllers
     waved us to the "wrong" side of the dual carriageway, thus
     av oiding the traffic and we procceeded to the traffic island
     at the junction of Penistone Road Nth and Leppings Lane. Traffic
     Police there directed us towards the Leppings Lane entrance
     of the football ground, where we joined a queue of wai tin g
     ambulances, the time being approximately 3.55pm. Aft er some
     five minutes, Police instructed ua to go to the other side
     of the ground, where, we were told, the injured had been
     taken.

     W i t h Police motorcycle escort, we drove via Parkside road
     to the east side of the ground where Police directed us to the
     internal access road, leading to an access point between the
     south and west stands. The ambulance was reversed to the access
      ra m p and made ready to receive casualties. The three of us made
      our w a y onto the pitch and although there were numerous people
      obvio usl y suffering from shock and exhaustion, we were informed
      by Police that all casualties had been removed to the Sports
      Hall.


                                               -1-
Re t u r n i n g quickly to the ambulance we drove back to the Penisto:.v
Road       entrance, turning left toward the Sports Hall. There we
joined a n o the r queue of waiting ambulances, and as we stopped
behind us arrived the Barnsley Ditrict M a j o r Incident ambulance.
We gave assistance in carrying their equipment to the Sports Hall
where we were informed that all injured had been di spatched to
hospitals in the area, and that all that was required was a large
qu an tit y of body bags for the numerous bodies laying on the floor
of the hall, these being temporarily covered by an a sso rtment of
plastic bags, coats and jackets.

Not being able to help, we carried the equipment back to the
ambul anc e and we believe the Barnsley SYMAS ambulance then returned
to Barnsley. A senior ambulance officer asked us and sev era l other
am bu lances to make our way to the bus depot on Herries Road South
and stand by there, to await the eventual removal of the bodies.

On arri va l at the bus depot a few minutes later, another ambulance
o fficer asked if we could establish a First Aid Station there,which
we duly did. There were large numbers of fans at the bus depot
await in g transport, some of whom were obviously intoxicated, many
of whom were very subdued by the events, and some distressed and
tearful. Mrs A Brown and Mr G Pratt offered help and sy mp ath y to
those who aproached, whilst I went back to the ground to contact
M r Wells of Sheffield Area. Having reported to Mr Wells and it
being evident no more could be done, I returned to the bus depot.

A t 5.15pm we were directed               back to the Sports Hall entrance where
a senior ambulance officer                said that we could stand down as the
di sp osa l of the dead would             be done by six SYMAS ambulances for
a d m i n a s t r a t i v e reasons. He   thanked us for our help and we then
returned to Barnsley.




   cc
   cc
   cc
   cc




                                          -2-
                                                                P t'b a i J i
                                                                 °u n d h d


                                   T H E FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIM ITE D
  Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 IIG.Telephone 0253 729421.Telex67675. Fax 0253 724786.Secretary R.H.G. Kelly, F.C.I.S.




 2 /5 8 9 8                                                                                                        11th August, 1988.




 Dear Secretary,

                                       LOCAL PLANS/SAFETY CERTIFICATE
                                         REGULATION 90 APPENDIX 'C'

       With reference to the above, in view of the comprehensive plan submitted by
 you last season it will not be necessary for you to submit one for the forthcoming
 season.
       I would ask, however, that you let me have a note of any amendments to that
 plan, i.e. change in admission prices, etc. to ensure our records are up to date.

          We 'pj&yare not in possession of a full copy of your Safety Certificate.

                                                          Yours sincerely,




                                                               secretary




The Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.




                     All correspondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
Cur Pef: GHM/JB/F7/2337

23rd August 1988


The Secretary/
The Foott:al1 I.eague,
Lythan f-t. Annes,
Lana?-.
FY8 1J0


Dear Sir,

Fe:   Local Plans/Safety Certificate

Thank you for your letter dated 18th August 1988, amendments to air local
plans for the coning season are as follows:

1) Hie capacity in the North Stand (ie. members stand) is reduced by 180 to
9,702 places. This is to accomodate a new disabled facility here at the
ground. This in turn makes total capacity of the ground 54,101.

2)    A copy of the admission prices for the current season are enclosed.

3) This year our membership scheme has been altered slightly in that guest
tickets are available for purchase but these must be collected and paid for
prior to the day of the match.

4) The restaurant licence is now in the name of our new Catering Manager,
Mr. Steve Bussell.

I confirm that we are still not in the possession of a full Safety Certificate
from the Local Authority but I understand from them that it is in an advanced
stage of drafting and I will, of course, forward you a copy as soon as it has
been received.

yours faithfully,



G.H. Mackrell
Secretary
                                  Sheffield
                                 Wednesday
                                      Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
                        Telephone: (0742) 343122 Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6.
                              Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145


Our Ref:       GHM/JB/F7/1110

6th May 1987


The Secretary,
The Football League,
Lytham St'. Annes,
Lancs.
FY8 1JG


Dear Sir,

Re:    Membership Scheme/Local Plan

Please find enclosed, as requested, the proposal for a membership scheme here
at Hillsborough.

At present the capacity of the stadium stands at 54,324.                                       This comprises

Kop (Hone Supporters Standing)                                                  21,000
South Stand covered .)       •Home                                                5,567
South Stand uncovered)     Supporters                                             3,310
North Stand            )    Seating                                               9,882
West Stand (Visiting Supporters Seating)                                          4,465
Leppings Lane (Visiting Supporters                                               10,$00
                                                                                 54,324


If we deduct the parts of the ground allocated to visiting supporters then we
are left with 39,724 of capacity; and of this balance some 21,000 is on the
Kop.

I have had meetings with the South Yorkshire Police who have stated
categorically that they do not want the Kop to fall within the scope of a
membership scheme, as it is the only area of standing accommodation for home
supporters and cannot be partitioned.

                                                                                continued . . .
                    Chairman: H. E. McGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A. Manager. H. Wilkinson
 Directors: M. Sheppard, J.P., F.C.A. (Vice-Chairman), S. L. Speight, O.B.E., C. Woodward, K. T. Addy, E. Barron, G. K. Huiley.
                                               Registered in England No. 62478
In light of this advice we were left with the natural choice to designate the
next biggest area, the North Stand, as our membership area. Its capacity of
9,882 would mean that 24.87% of the available capacity would be within a
membership scheme.

Whilst we fully acknowledge and accept the target of 50% grounds such as
Hillsborough, with large capacities, present special difficulties, and taking
in account the advice of the local police I trust that you will find the
scheme as proposed acceptable.                                  ....

A copy of my local plan is attached to this letter.

Yours faithfully,




G.H. Mackrell
Secretary
                       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. LOCAL PLAN                     I




Cround Plan

i)     Attached is a drawing Reg 8945/1 shoving current ground layout as
       requested.

ii)    Enclosed is a nap which clearly shows the location of the ground in
       relation to the surrounding area.

iii)   Since responsibility for licencing under the items of the Safety of
       Sports Grounds Act noved to the City of Sheffield, we are still awaitinn
       a revised Safety Certificate. A copy will be forwarded in due course.

Stadium Operation

i)     Close consultation takes place with the Police regarding'forthcoming
        matches. The level of manning however remains the perogative of South
        Yorkshire Police,

ii)    There are 88 turnstiles at Hillsborough all of which are computer linker’
       to VDO's in the Control Boon and the Secretary's office. In addition
       television cameras monitor each bank of turnstiles and record onto
       recorders in order to analyse possible problems and delays at points of
       entry.

Policing'

i)     South Yorkshire Police are very experienced and very thorough in their
        policing of football matches. As an example enclosed are copies of
        their Operation Orders for the recent F.A. Cup Semi-Final held here at
        Hillsborough and in contrast the fixture with O.P.P-. staged on 2nd Hay
        1987.

Stewarding

i)      Sheffield Wednesday employ a retired police Superintendent Mr. D. Lock
        as their Safety and Security Consultant.

ii)    The ground is sub-divided into its component stands and terraces and a
        steward is appointed to be in charge of each area.

 iii) Communication between staff on matchdays is by using two-way radios.
       The Police are able to link into this system.

 Segregation

 i)     Strict segregation is enforced. The VTest Stand, holding 4,465, and the
        Leppings Lane terraces, holding 10,100, are the areas designated for
        visiting supporters.

 Membership/Family Areas

 i)     Our family area is contained within the South Stand uncovered.     It has a
        maximum capacity of 3,310.


                                                    continued ..
                                      -   2   -




Intelligence Gathering

i)     This is dealt with by close liaison with the Police and the visiting
        club.

Security of Players and Match Officials

i)     Both match officials and players park within a secure and stewarded car
        park.

ii)    There is always a Police presence by the players tunnel when the teams
        and match officials enter and leave the pitch.

Ground Regulations

i)     The standard Ground Regulations as provided by the Football League are
       displayed.

Alcohol

i)     There is no alcohol on general sale within the ground.

ii)    A Restaurant Licence in the name of catering Manager, Mr. PeterRayner,
        is‘held in repsect of the Riverside and Tavern Restaurants.

iii) A Licence in the pane of Secretary, Mr. Graham Mackrell, is held    in
      respect of the Directors Guest Lounge.

Admission Prices

i)     A copy of admission prices for season 1987/88 is enclosed.

ii)    There is no policy of charging visiting supporters a higher price than
        home supporters.

Fixtures

i)     Sheffield Wednesday pair with Sheffield United at the request of the
        South Yorkshire Police.-

Cup Matches/All Ticket Matches

i)     Close, consultation with the Police always takes place prior to
        determining arrangements for high profile matches.

Sale of Tickets

i)     Tickets may be purchased by personal application, post or by telephone
        via credit cards.

•ii)    Normally tickets will go on sale 14 days prior to the date of the match.

iii)    Visiting supporters are encouraged to buy their tickets frctn their own
        club.

                                                      continued . . .
Transport Arrangements

i)     Supporters arriving by car, park in side streets or on the nearby
       industrial estate.

ii)    Supporters arriving by train using Wadsley Bridge station are escorted
        by the Police the half mile to the ground.

iii) Visiting supporters travelling by coach are dropped off in leppings
      Lane. Ihe coaches are then parked in Berries Road South.

Public Relations and Camnunications

i)     Sheffield Wednesday has a very active Young Owls and Travel' Club,.

ii)    At every natch local schools, parties etc. are entertained by the club.

iii)   Sheffield Wednesday have joined the Football and Ccmunity Programs.
                                                                                               R E G . NO. S O (± l3
    TELEPHONE;
ST. ANNES 7 2 9 4 2 1     THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED                                              ENGLAND
    (STD   0253)

                                             R E G IS T E R E O   O FFICE


                                        L Y T H A M ST. A N N E S
      ST7 6 7 5                                    LANCS.                                     R .H .G . KELLY. F.C.l.S.

                                                  FY8 1JG.


 1/27                                                                       5th March, 1987



 TO ALL CLUBS



  Dear Secretary,

                                       Anti-Hooliganism Measures

      Further to the Divisional Meetings on 29th January, 1987, and a further
  meeting with the Government officials on Monday, 23rd February, I can now
  inform you that the Government Ministers, Mr Richard Tracey and the Hon.
  Douglas Hogg have endorsed the proposals embodied in the League's comprehensive
  Report of November 1986 - save that they required specific action to be taken
  by the Clubs on the subject of Membership Schemes.

      This action is along the lines detailed to Clubs at the meetings on 29th
  January, and is as follows

           1)           All Clubs are asked to develop and introduce membership schemes
                         for specific designated areas of their grounds by the beginning
                         of the 1987/88 season.  These areas should be reserved for
                         members only.  Non-members would not be admitted. The schemes
                         should cover at least 50% of each ground's capacity as determined
                         by the conditions of the ground's safety certificate.  Clubs which
                         cannot attain 50% should identify the percentage they can meet.
                         Advice may be obtained from Andy Williamson re points of detail.

           2)           Clubs who feel that they are unable to meet the requirements for
                         50% Membership Schemes will be able to make representations to
                         a Special Committee consisting of representatives from the League,
                         The Football Trust and independent advisors.  If, after discussion,
                         it is agreed by the Special Committee, the club and the local
                         Police that they are unable to meet the 50% requirement, then the
                         Club will be expected to show that they are taking adequate
                         alternative measures.  Should this be the case, their position will
                         be accepted by the Government.  If the Club is not able to convince
                         the Committee, they may become liable to a charge under F.A.
                         procedures for failing to implement the recommendations on
                         Me mbership.

                                                                                        /Contd.2
                                     -   2   -




    Whilst appreciating that the principle of membership schemes is a complex
matter, there is a requirement for all Clubs to respond quickly so that
designated areas are identified in time for sale of season tickets, etc., for
next season.

    In addition to the above, the following points were also agreed between
the League and the Government

    a)     All Clubs are required to submit detailed local plans for dealing
           with the management and control of home and away supporters as per
           the attached document. These plans must be produced as soon as
           possible and they must be drawn up in consultation with the local
           police, local British Transport Police, the      local authority and
           other relevant organisations such as local coach operators and
           recognised supporters c l u b s . These plans will be available to the
           F.A. in the event of a disciplinary commission.

    b)     The League, the Football Association and the clubs, with advice
           from the local Police, will consider the need for all ticket
           arrangements at particular matches.

    c)     The League will commission a study by independent consultants to
           report on the scope, costs and benefits/disadvantages of a
           reciprocal membership scheme embracing all 92 League C l u b s . The
           Association of Chief Police Officers have agreed to assist with the
            advice on this study.

    d)     Football Trust grants will be made available to Division Three and
            Four Clubs for the installation of closed circuit television
            depending on the particular needs of individual c l u b s . Clubs who
            have not yet applied should review their requirements.

    e)     The League and the Football Association will support and promote the
            development of family enclosures and other initiatives designed to
            establish closer links between clubs and their communities.




    The Management Committee need your urgent co-operation in order to be able
to report back to the Government at the earliest opportunity.

                                Yours sincerely.
                                  LOCAL PLANS




Each club is required to submit details    of its own plan for dealing with

crowd control before, during and after matches.     This should be determined

after due consultation with the police and local authority, and take

account of the following points


1.    Ground Plan

      Submit architect's plan(s) of stadium,    indicating seats,   terraces,

      entrances/exits, turnstiles, service areas and amenities, segregation

      measures, membership/family areas, perimeter fencing, C.C.T.V.,

      police control, etc.

      Submit map indicating location of ground in relation to surrounding

      areas, and showing car and coach parking facilities (home and away),

      railway stations, etc.

      Submit copy of Safety Certificate issued by local authority, and

      provide details of any revised requirements.




2.    Stadium operation

      Determine policy for policing and stewarding,    including match

      categorisation, and provide appropriate details.

      Provide details of turnstile operation in relation to ground capacity,

       including counting system.

       Determine policy regarding exclusion- and/or banning orders, and provide

       appropriate details.


 3.    Policing

       Determine policy for    communicating with police pre-match, match-day

       and post-match, and provide appropriate details.
Consider capabilities of any C.C.T.V.   and provide appropriate details.

Determine general policy for retention of visiting supporters and

provide appropriate details.

Consider arrangements for reciprocal policing.




Stewarding

Determine instructions for stewards and how these are given, and

provide apapropriate details.

Give details of stewards'   training.

Determine policy for communicating with stewards on match-day and

provide appropriate details.

Consider arrangements for reciprocal stewarding.




Segregation

Determine arrangements for segregation of home/away fans and provide

appropriate details for both inside and outside ground.




Membership/family areas

Determine arrangements for any membership of family areas and provide

appropriate details.




Intelligence gathering

Determine procedure for estimating number of travelling fans and

their mode of transport, e.g.,    liaison with opponents, police and

British Rail Transport Police, and provide appropriate details     (also

any contingency arrangement).

Consider previous experience with specific opponents.
Security of players and match officials

Determine policy for the security of players and match officials and

provide appropriate details for:-

           a)    entering and leaving the ground

           b)    entering and leaving the field

           c)    car and coach parking




Ground regulations

Consider whether any additional ground regulations are required to

standard list and provide appropriate details.




Alcohol

Submit details of licensing arrangements and outlets.




Admission prices

Determine scale of admission charges your club intends to operate and

provide details including prices for seats,       terraces, season tickets,

juveniles/O.A.P.s, family areas, visitors' areas, etc.?

Note:      Any   club who levies higher rates onvisitors could      face

charges being brought by the F.A. if this policy resulted      in

segregation procedures being undermined.




Fixtures

When submitting fixture questionnaire,     consider preferred pairings,

any special requests, choice of midweek days, etc., in relation to

crowd control.
After receiving notification of your fixture schedule, consider what

factors might lead to a change of dates, either at the beginning of

the season or during the season, and provide appropriate details.

Consider any departure from normal kick-off times and provide

appropriate details.




Cup matches

Consider what factors determine date and kick-off time, and provide

appropriate details, e.g., competition rules, neighbouring matches,

police availability, etc.

Consider admission prices and provide appropriate details.

Bearing in mind the competition rules, determine visitors'   allocation

of tickets and provide appropriate details.




All-ticket matches

Consider whether any match should be made all-ticket and provide

appropriate details, i.e., potential sell-out or security reasons.




Sale of tickets

In -the interests of segregation, determine policy for selling tickets

and provide appropriate details of:-

         a)    how you deal with block bookings   (personal callers and

               postal applications)

         b)    in normal circumstances, how far in advance are tickets

               made available and are bookings taken
                                         - 5 -



                   c)   what policy is    employed to identify applicants,   e.g.,

                        home fan, away   fan, ticket tout.

                   d)   what policy is    employed for selling tickets on match

                        day

                   e)   what policy is employed when'you are the away club and

                        are any restrictions imposed, e.g., Through travel club

                        only.

                   f)   any variation    in general policy for high risk games




    16.   Transport arrangements

          Provide details of local public transport and street car parking

          availability, and whether this varies according to kick-off time.




    17.   Public relations and communications

          Consider use of tannoy and     programme

          Consider relationship with media (local and national),       schools, youth

          organisations, chamber of trade,       licensed victuallers association,

          traffic commissioners, etc.

          Consider opportunities provided by any community initiatives, e.g.,

          Football and the Community Programme.



\
