 ,£3-0. .                                             • ‘     s
                                                                                                                                                    NEW S                                                                                                                              M ARCH 1 1998




          IN BRIEF
         Road rutted by tanks
                                                 R E L A T IV E S o f t h e 96
                                                 people killed in the Hillsbor­
                                                                                             by TIM REID
                                                                                          and JAMES HARPY
                                                                                                                           Anyone convicted under the
                                                                                                                           Act faces up to two years
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      believed that Lord Justice
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Stuart-Sm ith, who sc ru ti­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        club
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ev id en ce that m ight have
                                                 ough disaster are planning a                                                                                                                                                                                          changed the verdict.
         fixed after 50 years                                                                                              imprisonment and a fine.                                                                                   nised the alleged new evi­          Lord Justice StUart-Smith,
                                                 private criminal prosecution      since the decision by Jack                 The families, infuriated by                                                                             dence, had done a thorough       an Appeal Court judge, was
    ; A VILLAGE in East                          against Sheffield Wednesday       Straw, the Home' Secretary,             what they see; as a denial of                                                                              and comprehensive job;
                                                 football club in the latest                                                                                                                                                                                           asked to examine the case
      Yorkshire will finally                                                       to block moves for a new                justice, are also planning an                                                                                The families are also to       for a further-inquiry after a
      have a road damaged by                     round of their nine-year fight    public inquiry.                         advertising campaign as they                                                                               proceed with private prose­
                                                 for justice.                                                                                                                                                                                                          video emerged of a vital sec­
      the Allied tanks in the                                                          A crim in al p ro se cu tio n       continue their fight for a                                                                                 cutions against senior offi­     tion of the ground taken by a
      wake of the Second                            Alun Jones, QC, the emi­       against Sheffield Wednesday             fresh public inquiry into the                                                                              cers in charge of policing the
                                                 nent barrister, has 'advised                                                                                                                                                                                          c lo s e d - c ir c u it t e l e v i s i o n
      World War repaired.                                                          would also name the club                disaster,                                                                                                  ground. The earlier Taylor
                                                 that they have strong grounds                                                                                                                                                                                         cam era w hich p olice had
      After 50 years, East                                                         directors at the time of the              The nationwide campaign                                                                                  report, which recommended        claimed was faulty. At the
      Riding council has found                   to launch an unprecedented        tragedy in 1989 as d efen ­             w ould be sim ila r to that                                                                                all-seater stadiums, pinned
                                                 action against the club for                                                                                                                                                                                           sam e tim e, a doctor who
OJ    the £30,000 needed to                                                        dants, claim ing that they              mounted by relatives of the          ‘Betrayal’: Mr Hicks, and his daughters, Vicki, left, and Sarah       the blame on a “failure of       treated the injured came for­
      smooth out tracks left in                  breach of safety rules govern­    were in breach of their obli­           Children killed in the Dun­                                                                                police control” but attempts
                                                 ing sports grounds.                                                                                                                                                                                                   ward with evidence that at.
i/.' Rolston Road, Hornsea.                                                        gations under the Safety of             blane massacre, in their suc­ disaster, accused the Home add to the findings of the                        tq bring disciplinary action     least one victim was still
iv                                                 The action, expected to be      Sports Ground Act.                      cessful battle to ban the pri­ S e c r e t a r y of a “ c y n ic a l original inquiry.                     against two senior officers      alive at 3.40pm. Stefan Pop­
yJi      Soldier stabbed                         confirmed at a meeting today          “ The aim of the action             vate ownership of handguns. b e t r a y a l ”        a f te r    h is      In his C om m ons s t a t e ­   were dropped. The inquest        per, the coroner, ruled ou-
         A GERMAIN civilian was                  of the relatives of the Liver­    would be to get criminal con­             Trevor Hicks, chairman of announcement 10 days ago ment, Mr Straw expressed                              later returned a verdict of
                                                 pool fans who 4ied, will be                                                                                                                                                                                           tany evid en ce relating to
         arrested after Lance                                                      victions,” said Ann Adling-             th e H illsb orou gh support that a study of alleged new his “most profound sympa:                         accidental death.                events after 3.15pm.
1o.      Corporal Malcolm Keats,                 financed from ^‘fighting fund     t o n , t h e f a in ily su p p o r t   group-' w h o s e d a u g h te r s ■ev id en ce had d isc o v e r e d *•'thy” for the dismay felt            But relatives believfe that              jimmy McGovern
         27, of Templecombe,                     which has topped £500,000         group’s solicitor, last night.          Vicki and Sarah died in the nothing of significance to th e fa m ilies, but said he                        the inquest jury was denied                letter — Page 32
         Somerset, serving in
-7t      Monchengladbach, was
;3li     stabbed to death in a row                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TOM STOCKILL
-hi      over a taxi. His father,
21       also Malcolm, an ex-
J®       Army major, described
*9'      the act as “senseless,
-G.1     malicious and
         unnecessary” .

-k Prisoner hanged
ex* AN investigation was
    under way last night after
- i 'l
-b' a remand prisoner,
*£i Steven Wilkinson, 32,
$tl was found hanged at
tnH Leeds Prison.
                                                      over
1c       War game scare
ts. TRAWLERMEN were
         alarmed when the,
.or] .periscope of a Ger                    in
         .o il K n u o .M «<>...» »>Ki 1*           T om                          t o a .fr»rra<ar l a h o i lf
 M ARCH 1 1998



                                                                                                                                                                                                                AP/SPORTSPHOTO/WESSEX




                                                                                                              m »?as

                                                                                                              m m
                                                                                                              S',1 r*.



                                                                                                  *" ^         «' a>v


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sm §



                                                                       Coral reefs should be ‘off-limits to dive tourists’; visitors cannot wander around Stonehenge; and motorists are discouraged a t Prior Park, Bath




 THE Queen has been pre­                by TIM REID and
                                                                           Tourist hordes face no-go zones
 v en ted by John P re sco tt          JONATHAN PETRE               NO-GO zones for tourists are being                                      by GREG NEALE               eould inhibit the freedom to travel                 have been damaged by hum&n
 from sending a m essage of                                         drawn up by leading members of                                   Fnuimnmeritr™m=fimrioht          ^ and even harm Some environments                     activity, including tourism as well
 goodwill on the abolition of Her Majesty to send a m es­           the travel industry. The m ove                                                                      by starving them of income.                         as shipping and destructive fishipg
  England's only Royal county sage to be re a d ... . on 31st       com es amid concern that tourism                          a director of the Thomson travel             The Call for no-go areas was                     te c h n o lo g ie s/’ he said. “ I’d be
 in a , move condem ned as March. :                                 — now the w'orld’s biggest industry                       group , said: "Of cou rse th ere debated last week at the Royal                               quite happy to see many of theijrn
 “politically spiteful”. : - ”    “ I know this n ew s will         — is damaging many environments                           should be limits. Because some Geographical Society in-London.                                placed off-limits for dive tourism,
: Buckingham Palace had . come as a great disappoint­               and social cultures.                                      tourist attractions are getting full        Last year the mayor of Venice                     and visitors travel over them in
 indicated that the Queen ment. N onetheless, may I                    Some: e n v i r o n m e n t a l i s t s —              up at times during peak tourist sea- called for limits on the uuinbers                        glass-bottomed boats instead.” }
 would mark the dissolution wish you every success in               backed bv travel company execu-                           sons — for example, the Parthe- allowed into the city to celebrate                               Dr Bellamy said walkers shoujd
 next m onth of the Royal ; marking the end of this era             tives — believe that tourists should                      non. Notre Dame or St Paul’s — the Millennium. About 10 million                               accept restrictions at certain times
 County of Berkshire, whose for local government in Berk­           be banned from some wildlife sites                        there are consequences. Damage is holidaymakers visjt Venice anhu^                            of year. “There are parts of the
 links with the British monar­ shire with the dignified and         to prevent their degradation, and                         being done to these sites.                ally, and some experts say that the                 Cairngorms where ptarmigan neSt,
 chy date back a thousand rnemorable o ccasion s you                from remote areas where indige-                              “ New' technology is being intro- 2000 celebrations could draw an                          or other sites where particularly
 years. .But the deputy Prime have arranged.”                       nous trib es could be a ffe cted                          duced in some museums, forewarn- extra 15 million.                                            rare plants are found.” he saijd.
 Minister vetoed the plan.        Ann Risman. chairman of           a d v e r s e ly by e x p o s u r e to                    pie, which allows for time-con- ' In Britain, visitors can no longer                          “ Most people accept that these
   County leaders, who were the Royal County of Berk­               foreigners.                               j               tro lled tic k e t in g . P eo p le w ill wander among the ruins of Stone-                    places need protection."              i
 hoping the message from the shire County Council and in               Other, partial bans could b e                          accept this , . . Yes, there should be henge. but are confined to a perim-                       The National Trust refused Jto
 Queen would be . the high charge of the valedictory ser­           introduced to curb the impact of                          no-go areas. But they should be eter walkway because of fears that                            p r o v id e a car park w h e n ;it
 point of- a service at West- . vice at the Abbey, said: "I         traffic on historic towns and cities                      determined by those who know the pressure of sigh tseers was                                  reopened Prior Park, an 18th ceji-
 minster Abbey marking the* didn’t want a political m es­           or to protect wildlife during nest-                       about biodiversity — the scientific damaging the site.                                        tury garden near Bath, relyipg
 end of the county's adminis- sage, for goodness sake —             mg seasons. ,                                             e x p e r ts — not by th e tou rist          David Bellamy, the environmen-                   instead on public transport. Aijid
 trative status, are furious at jUst a simple thank you m es­          Martin Brackeriburyv president                         industry.”                                tal campaigner, believes that some                  the Italian pity of Bologna has
 what they see as an act of sage to all th e voluntary              of the Inte:rnationaI Federation of                          But other tourist industry lead- wildlife sites should be placed off-                      closed rriuc’ if its centre to private
   11-rhtirltcbrit'Cv          w n k p rs.        w o r k e d :in   T i u r O n f’r n t o r ' ;   ch a 'V m n n o f P a n -   „erx, a n d   som r* c o n s e r v a t i o n ' s * '   lim its- t n t n u m t t    ill ilio   f i r s in   ■   ^npfpsfion a n d n n ttn -
second public inquiry, criminal action or disciplinary proceedings against
poI ice off iters.
It will jrfo</js on video footage of the incident that relatives of the victims
say hasjhox been available to previous inquiries. Its existence was unknown
until it turned up in a television archive earlier this year.
The judge will also consider medical evidence suggesting that some of the 96
fans killed died later than 3 . 15pm on the day of the Ffl Cup semi-final
between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. The inquest jury was only allowed
to consider evidence before this time.
Mr Straw said wider issues of footbaI I safety and crowd control were
considered by the original inquiry chaired by the late Lord Taylor, former
Lord Chief Justice, and would not be re-opened.
But he acknowledged that the bereaved fami I ies felt there were sti I I some
matters left unresolved and it was 'in the public interest ' to see if new
evidence existed.
In a statement to MPs. Mr Straw said-. 'I am determined to go as far as I can
to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and that we do not
reach a final conclusion without a fuI I and independent examination.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, who is expected to begin his work in September
and report before the end of the year, will advise Mr Straw whether a
further public inquiry is required. He will also advise the Crown
Prosecution Service, the Attorney General and the South Yorkshire police
whether any action should be taken in the public interest.
Richard Wells, chief constable of South Yorkshire, we Icorned the review but
sa id noth ing new had come to Ii g h t .

The Daily Telegraph
Copyright (C) Telegraph Group Ltd,     1987-1997



   4**01   JuI 97 Hillsborough   relatives win fresh   inquiry:   The Independent
                  ( QI :58 )

    By KflTHY MARKS
It took the screening of a television programme, and a change of government,
but yesterday relatives of football fans who died at Hillsborough finally
secured a review of how the disaster was handled.
The Home Secretary, Jack Straw, told the House of Commons that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith, a senior Court of Appeal judge, would scrutinise new video and
medical evidence relating to the deaths of 96 fans at Sheffield Wednesday's
Hillsborough stadium in April 1989.
Mr Straw said that the judge would advise him whether the evidence, which is
be I ieved to chaI lenge the poI ice version of events at the stadium, was
significant enough for a fuI I public inquiry to be held.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would also examine any other material submitted by
interested parties, he said, and would identify any relevant evidence for
the Attorney General, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire police.
Mr Straw's statement followed a long campaign for a fresh investigation by
families of the victims, who were invited to London to be briefed by him on
details of the review.
The supporters were crushed to death after police decided to open gates to
let people into the Leppings Lane terrace at the FA Cup semi-final match
between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
Mr Straw said:     I hope that this examination will enable us to establish
conclusively whether or not material evidence . . . has been overlooked. We
owe it to everyone touched by the tragedy, but above all to the fami I ies of
those who died, to get to the bottom of this matter once and for all.
Despite earlier inquiries, he said, 'concerns have remained about whether
the fuI I facts have yet emerged'. The suffering of relatives had been
 'exacerbated by their belief that there are unresolved issues which should
be investigated further '.
The video evidence consists of a tape taken from a surveillance camera
trained on the Leppings Lane stand, which shows events between noon and
5.22pm and is believed to be clear enough to identify faces of individual
fans. Police told the inquest in 1990 and an inquiry by the late Lord Taylor
   1**02 JuI   97 N e w s : U K : Minister orders fresh probe   into soccer stadium
        ^ •       deaths: Financial Times (QI :60 )

    By LIRM HRLLIGRN, Political staff
R fresh investigation into the Hillsborough disaster has been ordered by Mr
Jack Straw, home secretary, after a long campaign by families of those who
died in the 1989 soccer stadium traqedy in the northern EnqI and city of
Sheffield.
In the disaster, 96 Liverpool fans died from injuries suffered in the crush
as supporters poured into the Sheffield ground for their team's FR Cup
semi-final tie with Nottingham Forest.
The affair was later investigated by Lord Taylor, who concluded that a
failure of police control was the main cause. He made 43 interim
recommendations and a further 76 final recommendations, which transformed
the presentation of soccer and introduced all-seater grounds.
Mr Straw announced that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. a senior judge, would
scrutinise new evidence on the tragedy to      investigate whether a further
public inquiry was needed.
 'I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively
whether or not material evidence about the causes of the Hillsborough
disaster has been overlooked. ' he said. He added that there had been a
 'profound improvement' in the behaviour of fans at football grounds.
The decision to hold a further inquiry was we Icorned as 'a spoonful of
justice' by a group of bereaved relatives who had been invited to London by
Mr Straw.
Mr Trevor Hicks, chairman of the Hillsborough Families Support Group, said-.
 'This isn't a quest for vengeance. It isn't a witch hunt. We feel we got
what we came for.
Victims' families - who dispute the original inquiry's finding of accidental
death - have been demanding an investigation into fresh video and medical
evidence which has emerged relating to the hand I ing of events by South
Yor ksh ire poI ic e .
The Crown Prosecution Service had previously decided there was insufficient
evidence to prosecute any of the police involved but last March announced
that it was reviewing the case in the light of new evidence. This review is
sti I I going o n . Mr Straw told the House of Commons that he had asked the
judge to estabI ish whether there was enough new evidence to justify a fuI I
public inquiry or criminal prosecutions. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith could
also recommend disciplinary action against individual officers from South
Yorkshire police - although as the senior officers concerned have retired on
medical grounds, it is thought unlikely.
Mr Richard Wells, South Yorkshire's chief constable, welcomed the review but
stressed it was still the force's belief that 'nothing new has come to
light' since Lord Justice Taylor's original inquiry. 'We fully co-operated
with the earlier judicial investigations and we have nothing to fear from
this new investigation, ” he said.
Mr We I Is insisted there was no new video evidence. But the fami I ies be I ieve
a videotape taken from a closed circuit television camera trained on the
Leppings Lane end of Sheffield's stadium, where the disaster took place,
casts doubt on the poI ice version of events.

The Financial Times
Page 9
International Edition I
Copyright (C) Financial Times Ltd,      1982-1997


   2**01   Ju I 97 Hi I Isborough tape to be   investigated.-   The Dai ly Telegraph
                   ( Q I.
                        -37 )

   By PHILIP JOHNSTON, Home Rffairs Editor
LORD Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior RppeaI Court judge, is to chair an
investigation into the Hillsborough disaster, eight years after it happened.
Jack Straw, the Home Secretary, said yesterday that the limited
investigation would aim to establish whether new evidence would justify a
that they were unaware of the build-up of fans in the pens because the
camera was not working.
Calls for a fresh investigation gained momentum after the broadcasting last
December of a documentary drama by Jimmy McGovern, which suggested that
officers must have known that the terraces were severely overcrowded.
The medical evidence suggests that more could have been done to save lives.
Dr Ed Walker, who treated injured fans, says that one teenager was still
alive 25 minutes after the coroner decided that the victims must have been
dead. The families believe the new evidence calls into question the inquest
verdicts of accidental death. Lord Taylor laid most of the blame at the door
of the poI ice.
Since the tape came to light in March, the Crown Prosecution Service has
been reviewing the case to establish whether there is sufficient evidence to
bring charges against any police officers.
News 5

The Independent
Copyright (C) Newspaper Publishing Pic,    1988-1997


   5**01   Ju I 97 Hillsborough quest for truth.. Judge to take new   look at crush
                   that killed 96 fans. The Guardian (Q I ,93 )

     By MARTIN WAINWRIGHT AND NICK VARLEY
A FINAL effort to find the cause of the Hi IIsborough disaster will be Ied by
the judge in charge of the independent monitoring of MI5 and the other
security services.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been charged to scrutinise allegedly new
evidence about the crush at the 1989 FA Cup semi-final which killed 96
Liverpool fans. Home Secretary Jack Straw told the Commons yesterday.
The fresh inquiry was designed to 'get to the bottom of this matter once and
for all,' said Mr Straw.
The judge's conclusions will form the basis for a fuller, public inquiry if
he finds that the inquest and Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry were not given
the fuI I p ic t u r e .
He may also recommend further action to the Attorney General and Crown
Prosecution Service. The initial proceedings will not be in pub I ic and will
concentrate on two files of evidence produced by victims' relatives, who
have argued for eight years that the truth has been obscured.
Lord Justice Stewart-Smith, who became the first secret services
commissioner eight years ago, will study a closed circuit police video of
scenes on the Leppings Lane terraces at the Sheffield Wednesday ground
during the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
He will also examine suggestions by a doctor that victims were alive after
the 3.15pm limit on evidence imposed by the Sheffield inquest coroner,
Stefan Popper, which relatives believe stifled important questions.
The video, from a police monitor described as not working properly at
previous investigations, was brought to national attention by a TV drama
documentary by the Liverpool writer Jimmy McGovern. The same film, screened
 last December, then prompted Dewsbury hospital doctor Ed Walker to question
why his evidence of victims surviving after 3.15pm had been ascribed to 'an
unidentified doctor ' and had not been analysed at the Taylor inquiry or the
in q u e s t .
Mr Straw told the Commons: 'I hope that this examination will enable us to
establish conclusively whether or not material evidence about the causes of
the Hi IIsborough disaster has been overlooked. If it has, I can assure the
House that I wi I I take whatever action is needed. We owe it to everyone
touched by this tragedy, but above all to the fami I ies of those who died, to
get to the bottom of this matter for once and a l l . Trevor Hicks, of the
victims' families support group, welcomed Mr Straw's announcement as the
  best we are going to get. We think it's been a good day.
Mr Hicks, who lost his two daughters in the disaster, said:    We believe
there was some skullduggery in the way the evidence was gathered and
presented. It may border on criminal activity.
But the Attorney General s office and Crown Prosecution Service are known to
be sceptical after an initial look at the new evidence. South Yorkshire
police, who welcomed the inquiry and whose senior personnel have almost all
changed since the disaster, also repeated doubts that a different picture
would emerge. The force took the brunt of the blame for the tragedy in Lord
Justice Taylor's report, but disciplinary measures were not taken against
senior officers involved because of retirement on medical grounds. This and
the award of over pounds 1,000,000 stress compensation to some officers -
publicly regretted by South Yorkshire's chief constable Richard Wells - has
 increased the sense of grievance among relatives.
Phi I Scraton, head of the Hi I Isborough Project at Edgehi II col lege, near
Liverpool, which has conducted the most intensive independent investigation
 into the affair to date, said that the review would be inadequate if it
focused too narrowly on the new evidence. 'It is important to examine other
matters, such as the lack of cross-examination of evidence at the inquest,
the change of police commander at Hillsborough before the semi-final and the
possible suppression of evidence to the Taylor inquiry and the inquest, ' he
sa id .
The inquiry was welcomed by the shadow home secretary, Brian Mawhinney, who
said:    We owe it to the families and friends of those who died, to members
of the poI ice force and the other emergency services and to a I I those who
be I ieve in justice. ' Liverpool MPs were also del ighted.
ChronoIogy
April 1989: 96 people died at Sheffield Wednesday's Hillsborough ground at
FA Cup sem i-f inaI .
May-June I989; Lord Justice Taylor 's publ ic inquiry.
January 1990: Final Taylor Report made 76 recommendations on top of 43 in
interim report. He concluded: 'The main reason for the disaster was failure
of poI ice controI '.
March 19 9 1 ; Jury at mass inquest returned  accidental death' verdict.
January 1992: Disciplinary charges against police officers on duty at the
ground dropped. Officer in charge earlier retired on medical grounds.
November 1993, Application by victims' families for judicial review of
inquest proceedings dismissed by Divisional Court.
December 1996, ITV screened dramatisation of alleged new evidence.
June 1997: Home Secretary Jack Straw announced new scrutiny of evidence to
Lord Taylor, the coroner and legal authorities.

The Guardian
PAGE 006
Copyright (C) Guardian Newspapers Ltd,        1984-1997


   6**01   JuI 97 Shorts: Straw announces Hillsborough    inquiry:   Financial   Times
                  ( Q I : 14)

Home secretary Jack Straw, left, has ordered a fresh investigation into the
Hi IIsborough disaster after a long campaign by fami I ies of the 96 people who
died. They dispute the original inquiry's verdict of accidental death. Mr
Straw told the Commons that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would scrutinise new
evidence on the 1989 Sheffield soccer stadium tragedy to investigate whether
a further publ ic inquiry was needed. Page I I

The Financial Times
Page I
London Ed it ion I
Copyright (C) Financial   Times Ltd,      1982-1997



   8**01   JuI 97 Politics: Straw orders new look at evidence on Hillsborough:
                  Fami I ies of those who died in footbaI I ground crush welcome
                  announcement: The Scotsman ( QI ;84)

   By JOHN PENMAN,   Political   Editor

THE fami I ies of those killed in the Hi IIsborough disaster last night
welcomed a move by the Home Secretary, Jack Straw, to re-examine the
evidence to see if a further public inquiry is necessary.
The announcement was described by Trevor Hicks, whose two daughters died in
the tragedy, as a move in the     right d i r e c t i o n ’.
Mr Straw told the Commons the Government owed it to everyone 'touched by the
tragedy, but above a I I the fami I ies of the 96 people who died, to get to the
bottom of this matter once and for all'.
He announced a senior Appeal Court judge. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, would
scrutinise new evidence on the 1989 tragedy at Sheffield Wednesday's ground

  I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively
whether or not material evidence about the causes of the Hi IIsborough
disaster has been overlooked, ' he said.
Families of the victims have lobbied for a fresh inquiry on the basis of new
video and medical evidence challenging the police version of events. The
Liverpool fans died from injuries suffered in the crush as they poured into
ground for their team's FA Cup semi-final tie with Nottingham Forest.
The Crown Prosecution Service had previously decided there was insufficient
evidence to prosecute any of the police involved, but last March announced
 it was reviewing the case in the light of new evidence. This is said to
 include a videotape taken from a camera trained on the Leppings Lane end
stand where the disaster took place.
Mr Straw said that, despite earlier inquiries, he was determined to go as
far as he could in ensuring no matter of significance was overlooked.
The original public inquiry, by the late Lord Justice Taylor, came up with a
number of recommendations, many of which led to significant changes in
football grounds nationwide.
But the families were unhappy when an inquest recorded verdicts of
accidental death and no action was taken against two poI icemen who were
recommended for disciplinary action .
The efforts of campaigners were boosted in December when Granada TV
broadcast a dramatisation of the tragedy.
Mr Hicks, the chai rman of the Hi I Isborough Fami I ies Support Group, hai led
yesterday's move as an important mi lestone in their quest for a 'spoonful of
just ice'.
He added: 'This isn't a quest for vengeance. It isn't a witch-hunt. We
basically feel that we got what we came for and it was a worthwhi le trip. We
are slightly cautious, but we greet today with a great deal of
satisfaction.
Mr Hicks said he hoped that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's review would at
least lead to a review of the inquest verdict.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, whose findings will be published, could also
advise that the attorney general seeks a High Court review of the inquest.
In a brief statement last night. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said he would not
be holding the inquiry in public. He would consider written representations
before deciding whether oral hearings were necessary.
South Yorkshire's Chief Constable, Richard Wells, welcomed the review, but
stressed it was still the force's belief that nothing new had come to light
since Lord Justice Taylor's original inquiry and the inquests.
 'We fully co-operated with the earlier judicial investigations and we will
want to fully co-operate with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's review of what may
or may not turn out to be new evidence,     he said.
 'South Yorkshire Police a have nothing to fear from this new judicial
investigation and the material that is going to be put before Lord Justice
Stuart-Sm it h .
Mr We I Is insisted there was no new video evidence. The question of whether
officers lied about what happened on the day was a matter for judicial
exam inat io n .
However, families believe a video tape taken from the camera trained on the
Leppings Lane end casts doubt on the police version of events.
Police in the control room told the original public inquiry that they were
unaware of the bui ld-up of fans because the camera was not working.
The families also believe the evidence calls into question the inquest
verdict. The coroner refused to take evidence from after 3 : 15pm on the day,
rul ing that a I I the fans who died at the ground were dead by then.
But the families believe that the video evidence supports their contention
that some fans were alive for up to 40 minutes after the cut-off time.
The Scotsman
Page 6
Copyright (C) Scotsman Publications Ltd,   1991-1997



  10**30 Jun 97 Commons; Lord Justice Stuart-Smith Will Scrutinise New Evidence
                On The 1989 Hillsborough Disaster In Which 96 People Died, Home
                Secretary Jack Straw Told The Commons In A Statement: Press
                Assoc iat ion (QI ;42 )

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will scrutinise new evidence on the 1989
Hillsborough disaster in which 96 people died. Home Secretary Jack Straw
told the Commons in a statement.
Mr Straw said the judge would advise him whether new video and medical
evidence was of such significance as to justify a fuI I public inquiry.
The advice would be made avai IabIe to the House and the publ ic, Mr Straw
sa id .
The judge would identify for the Attorney General, the Director of Public
Prosecutions and the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police any evidence
that might be relevant to their decisions which had not been considered
prev io u s I y .
Mr Straw, 'We owe it to everyone touched by the tragedy, but above all to
the fami I ies of those who died, to get to the bottom of this matter once and
for all.
Mr Straw said that the judge hoped to do some work on the case before the
end of July, to start proceedings in September. Mr Straw hoped the report
could be produced by the end of the year, but only the judge could assess
this in the light of representations.
Shadow Home Secretary Dr Brian Mawhinney welcomed the new inquiry: 'We owe
it to the fami I ies and friends of those who died, the members of the poI ice
force and other emergency services and to all who believe in justice to
ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and that we don't reach
a final conclusion without a fuII and independent examination of the
evidence.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said in a press statement later that his inquiry
would not be taking place in public.
The judge said he would have regard to representations which had already
been made and which were made to him in writing: 'I shall then consider
whether it is necessary to hear oral representations.
He added: 'In due course I wi II let those who are involved know where to
send their written representations and such arrangements, if any, as wi I I be
made for oral representations.

Press Association
T ime I5:59
Copyright (C) Press Association   1997



  11**30 Jun 97 Commons: Straw Announces New Hillsborough Probe:   Press
                Assoc iat ion (QI :24 I )

    By TREVOR MASON, Parliamentary Chief Reporter
A fresh investigation into the Hillsborough disaster was ordered today by
Home Secretary Jack Straw after a long campaign by fami I ies of the 96 people
who d ie d .
He announced in the Commons that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would scrutinise
new evidence on the 1989 soccer stadium tragedy to see if a further public
inquiry was needed.
 'I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively
whether or not material evidence about the causes of the Hi IIsborough
disaster has been overlooked, ' Mr Straw said in a statement.
Families of the victims have lobbied for a fresh inquiry on the basis of new
video and medical evidence challenging the police version of events.
In the disaster, 96 Liverpool fans died from injuries suffered in the crush
as supporters poured into the Sheffield Wednesday ground for their team's FA
Cup semi-final tie with Nottingham Forest.
The new evidence is said to include a videotape taken from a closed circuit
 television camera trained on the Leppings Lane end stand where the disaster
 took place.
Mr Straw said that, despite earlier inquiries, he was determined to go as
 far as he could in ensuring no matter of significance was overlooked.
  'We owe it to everyone touched by the tragedy, but above all to the fami I ies
of those who died, to get to the bottom of this matter once and for all.'
Mr Straw said no one who witnessed the terrible events on April 15 1989
could have forgotten them.
fl number of inquiries and investigations had taken place including that by
the late Lord Taylor, who attributed the main reason for the disaster on a
fai lure of poI ice control .
He made 43 interim recommendations and a further 76 final recommendations,
which had transformed football in this country with all-seater stadia.
Despite this and other investigations 'concerns have remained about whether
the fuI I facts have yet emerged'.
The suffering of the victims relatives had been 'exacerbated by their belief
that there are unresolved issues which should be investigated further '.
fl Granada television programme on the disaster in December had also raised
 issues which the programme-makers believed represented new evidence.
Since then further representations by the Hi IIsborough Fami ly Support Group,
centring on new video and medical evidence, had been made.
Mr Straw said the Attorney General and the Crown Prosecution Service had
 looked at the new evidence put forward.
The Director of Public Prosecutions, Dame Barbara Mills, had taken the view
that the material so far presented would not justify a fresh criminal
 invest igat io n .
  'Nonetheless, I am acutely conscious that the fami I ies of those who died at
Hillsborough and many others, including Members of this House, are very
concerned that unresolved issues remain, ' the Home Secretary declared.
 'I am determined to go as far as I can to ensure that no matter of
significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a final conclusion
without a fuI I and independent examination of the evidence.
Mr Straw said he had agreed with the DPP 'that there should be an
 independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any new evidence
relating to the disaster which was not previously available.
 'We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the
Court of Appeal, for that purpose.
The judge would look to see if any evidence was now avai IabIe that was not
available to earlier inquiries and investigations.
He would advise whether any evidence was 'of such significance as to justify
   .. a further public inquiry'.
Mr Straw said Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would examine all the evidence put
forward, together with any further material which interested parties wished
to submit.
His advice to the Home Secretary on the possible need for a new inquiry
would be made public at the conclusion of his investigations.
 'He will identify for the Attorney General and the DPP and the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire Police any evidence which might be relevant to
their decisions which has not previously been considered.
Mr Straw stressed: 'I hope that this examination will enable us to establish
conclusively whether or not material evidence about the causes of the
Hillsborough disaster has been overlooked.
 'If it has, I can assure the House that I wi II take whatever action is
needed.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said in a press statement later.. 'I have very
little to add to the statement this afternoon by the Home Secretary in the
House of C o m m o n s .
 'My enquiry will not take place in public. I shall be examining the evidence
which it is said was not previously available at Lord Taylor's enquiry or to
the prosecuting or disciplinary authorities.
 'I shaI I have regard to representations which have already been made and
which are made to me in writing.
 'I shall then consider whether it is necessary to hear oral representations.
 'In due course I wi I I let those who are involved know where to send their
written representations and such arrangements, if any, as will be made for
oral representations.
The judge, 69, was appointed a Lord Justice of Appeal in 1988, a High Court
judge in 1981 and a recorder in 1972.
Sir Murray Stuart-Smith was called to the Bar in 1952 and appointed a QC in
 1970. He is married with three sons and three daughters.
In Commons exchanges following Mr Straw's statement. Shadow Home Secretary
Dr Brian Mawhinney welcomed the announcement of the new investigation.
 'What happened at Hi IIsborough was a tragedy of almost unimaginable
proportions, ' he said.
 'Thousands of people went to a footbaI I game - young and old a I ike: 96
didn't return, others were injured.
 'Those real ities have bl ighted forever the I ives of thousands of people.
 'There remains hurt and loss from which, in varying degrees, they may never
re c o v e r .
Dr Mawhinney said:     We owe it to the families and friends of those who died,
the members of the police force and other emergency services and to a I I who
be I ieve in justice, to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked
and that we do     not reach a final conclusion without a fuI I and independent
examination of the evidence.
He pressed Mr Straw on the timetable of the inquiry and asked if the process
was to start immediately.
The Home Secretary replied the judge hoped to do some work on the case
before the end of July but would be starting the examination in fuI I in
Septembe r .
He said hoped the report could be produced by the end of the year, but added
that only the judge would be able to predict when the proceedings could be
concluded, in the I ight of the representations made to him.
Dr Mawhinney pressed the Home Secretary on whether he would publ ish all the
evidence considered by the judge on which the advice would be based.
He asked whether those affected by the new evidence       would be given the
opportunity to     respond to it before any conclusions were made.
Mr Straw rep I ied he would do his best to make sure the evidence was
published, as long as there was no conflict with possible criminal or
disciplinary proceedings.
He said fami I ies and other affected groups would be able to make
representations during the proceedings, but the exact running of the new
examination would be left up to the judge.
He confirmed there would be a further opportunity for MPs to debate the
matter once the new investigations had been completed.
Maria Eagle, Labour MP for Liverpool Garston, congratulated Granada
television for bringing the issue back onto the agenda with the screening of
Jimmy McGovern's documentary on the subject last December.
She asked whether families participating in the renewed examination would
receive any legal representation or financial assistance.
Mr Straw said he believed they already had legal representation but that
some travel costs would be paid by his department.
Alan Beith, for the Liberal Democrats, said his party welcomed the 'focused
re-examination of the evidence, including recently-found evidence, into
these terrible events'.
He asked Mr Straw to confirm it was 'very unlikely and perhaps impossible
that there could be any reopening of police discipline procedures as a
result of what might be found in the inquiry',
Mr Straw told Mr Beith that to speculate on the I ikeI ihood of further poI ice
disciplinary proceedings would be to anticipate the conclusion of the
report.
Labour 's Helen Jackson, MP for Sheffield Hi IIsborough, said: 'The most
tragic trauma of this event I ies with the fami I ies of the Liverpool fans who
attended the match.
She added: 'For the people of the Hi IIsborough area of Sheffield, it was one
of the most traumatic events in their history and the         I inks that they made
and with fami I ies in Liverpool bears witness to that.
Mr Straw replied:    'We should not forget that there w e r e on that day many
individual acts of very great courage by people from South Yorkshire, in the
police service, in the fire service and the ambulance service, and many
other ordinary citizens.
Labour's Louise EI Iman (Liverpool Riverside) joined other Merseyside MPs in
expressing her sympathy for the fami I ies of those who died at Hi IIsborough.
She urged the Home Secretary to give an assurance to the House that whi Ie
the inevitable legal considerations take place, you will keep in your mind
the prime consideration of the feelings of the families concerned and their
deep feelings that they have been denied j u s t i c e 1.
Mr Straw gave that assurance, s a y i n g : 'Of course I made this decision to ask
the Lord Justice to hold this further scrutiny because I felt there was
fresh evidence. In coming to the decision, I took into account the feelings
of profound distress and grief which was felt by those who lost the I ives of
the ir fam i I ie s .
Mr Straw rejected a call by Tory Damian Green (Ashford) for the inquiry to
 look into the general issue of crowd control at football matches.
The Home Secretary said there had been a 'profound improvement in the
behaviour of fans at football grounds' following the implementation of Lord
Taylor 's recommendations in the wake of the Hi IIsborough disaster.
Eddie O'Hara (Lab Knows ley S) told MPs-. 'Those of us from Merseyside know
that to this day when Hi I Isborough is mentioned, the nerves are sti I I
fraught and the pain is sti I I tangible.
He pressed the Home Secretary to afford the relatives of those who died
strong government support during the inquiry and asked whether it would look
 into 'some of the disgraceful accusation made about those fans who were
being killed' by some newspapers at the time.
Mr Straw reiterated Lord Taylor's dismissal of those allegations in his
initial r ep o r t .
Liberal Democrat Ronnie Fearn (Southport) pressed Mr Straw to encourage
people to come forward with new evidence.
 'From what I remember, many of those who spoke to me at the time say they
had recollections of what happened but they never ever came forward because
they were terrified to give evidence at the time, ' he said.
He continued: 'For the ordinary people who are still there, could we make an
appeal to actually go to the ordinary people and ask them to stretch their
memories once more and give this evidence.
 'That's the crucial part of the evidence procedure.
Mr Straw replied: 'If there are any individuals who have material evidence
which was not brought forward to the previous inquiries        .. then I very much
hope and appeal to them to come forward.
Joe Ashton (Lab Basset Iaw), an eye-witness to the Hi I Isborough tragedy,
asked for the evidence to the inquiry to be sworn on oath and for the costs
of expenses for those giving evidence to be paid.
Mr Straw said evidence would not be given on oath unless the Lord Justice
asked for such a step to be taken and confirmed that expenses would be paid.
But he rejected Mr Ashton s caI Is, repeated by Labour s Dennis Skinner
(Bolsover) to reopen the issue of compensation for the families of victims.
Mr Skinner said: 'A short time before the last general election, traumatised
policemen were awarded substantial sums of money because they had witnessed
these horrific events whilst it is well-known that the families of the
victims concerned have not received anything.
He asked the Home Secretary to look into this.
But Mr Straw told him this was 'not an issue in this scrutiny'.
He added:     I understand very strongly the concern that has been expressed on
all sides of the House about payment of this compensation to police officers
and its unavai labi I ity to others who were there.
Labour's Mike Hall (Weaver Vale) added his voice to those calling for events
after 3 . 15pm on the day of the tragedy to be looked at by the inquiry.
Mr Straw told h i m ; 'One of the major issues raised is the issue of the time
of death, whether it was 3. 15pm in respect of a I I those who died or later in
terms of some of those who died and that is a crucial issue.

Press Association
T ime 16:13
Copyright (C) Press Association   1997


  12**30 Jun 97 Commons: Liverpool FC Welcomes Hillsborough Move-. Press
                Association (QI :43 )
Liverpool Football Club today we Icorned Home Secretary Jack S t r a w ’s
announcement of new independent scrutiny of evidence relating to the
Hi IIsborough disaster.
Following Mr S t r a w ’s Commons statement on the appointment of Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith to carry out the investigation, the club said in a statement:
 ’Although the tragedy occurred eight years ago, the human suffering of the
fami I ies involved is sti I I as real today.
 'Many questions remain unanswered regarding the events of that April
afternoon, with new evidence suggesting strongly that the full picture is
yet to emerge.
 'Our passionate hope is that the new enquiry wi I I determine the true facts
surrounding the tragedy and enable the fami I ies to be I ieve that the cause of
justice has been properly championed for those loved ones who never returned
home from Sheffield.
South Yorkshire's chief constable Richard Wells said he welcomed the review
of the evidence but stressed it was still the force's belief that nothing
new had come to light since Lord Justice Taylor's original inquiry and the
in q u e s t s .
He s a i d : I fuI Iy accept the Home S e c r e t a r y ’s wish to open up the process of
reviewing recent claims about the existence of new evidence about the awful
events of Apri I 1989.
 'We fully cooperated with the earlier judicial investigations and we will
want to fully cooperate with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's review of what may
or may not turn out to be new evidence.
He declared: 'South Yorkshire police are the only organisation involved in
the complex causes of this disaster to stand up publicly to accept their
share of the responsibi I ity and to make a publ ic apology - and we have
nothing to fear from this new judicial investigation and the material that
is going to be put before Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
Mr We I Is insisted there was no new video evidence and added the question of
whether officers lied about what happened on the day was a matter for
judicial examination.
He said.- 'inevitably this will open up emotional wounds that have perhaps
just started to h e a l .
 ’But the families have not had the opportunity to heal emotionally either
and we have got to stand shoulder to shoulder with them in recognising
whether there is any new evidence or not.

Press Association
Time 17:25
Copyright (C) Press Association        1997


  14**30 Jun 97 Politics.- Families Welcome New Hillsborough Inquiry:              Press
                Assoc iat ion (Q I :87 )

     By GAVIN           CORDON, Home Affairs Editor
The families of the Hillsborough disaster                 victims tonight    welcomed the
G o v e r n m e n t ’s decision to hold a new inquiry into the tragedy which left 96
footbaI I fans d e a d .
Home Secretary Jack Straw said in a Commons statement that he had appointed
a senior Appeal Court judge, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, to examine fresh
evidence accumulated by the fami I ies.
The chairman of the Hillsborough Familes Support Group Trevor Hicks hailed
the move as an important mi Iestone in their quest for a 'spoonful of
just ice".
 'This isn't            a quest for vengeance. It isn't a witch-hunt, ' he said after he
other group             members had sat in the public     gallery to hear    Mr Straw make his
announcement.
 'We basical ly feel that we got what we came for and it was a we I I worthwhi le
trip.
 'We are slightly cautious but we greet today with a great deal of
satisfaction. We feel we are moving in the right direction.
Mr Hicks said he hoped that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's review would at
least lead to a review of the inquest verdict - which that families have
long disputed - of accidental death.
Mr Straw told MPs that he had asked the judge to estabI ish whether there was
any new evidence relating to the 1989 disaster at the Sheffield Wednesday to
justify a new full-blown public inquiry or criminal prosecutions.
The Crown Prosecution Service had previously decided there was insufficient
evidence to prosecute any of the police involved but last March announced it
was reviewing the case in the light of new evidence.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith - whose findings will be publ ished - could also
advise that the Attorney General John Morris seeks a High Court review of
the inquest.
It is also possible that he could recommend disciplinary action against
individual officers from South Yorkshire Police - although as the senior
officers concerned have retired on medical grounds it is thought unlikely.
 "I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively
whether or not material evidence about the causes of the Hi IIsborough
disaster has been overlooked, ' Mr Straw told MPs.
 "if it has I can assure the House that I wi I I take whatever action is
needed. We owe it to everyone touched by the tragedy, but above all to the
fami I ies of those who died, to get to the bottom of this matter once and for
a II,
In a brief statement tonight Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said he would not be
holding the inquiry in public. He would decide, after considering written
representations, whether oral hearings were necessary.
South Yorkshire's Chief Constable Richard Wells said he welcomed the review
but stressed it was sti I I the force's be I ief that nothing new had come to
 light since Lord Justice Taylor's original inquiry and the inquests.
 'We fully cooperated with the earlier judicial investigations and we will
want to ful ly cooperate with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's review of what may
or may not turn out to be new evidence, ' he said.
 'South Yorkshire Police are the only organisation involved in the complex
causes of this disaster to stand up publicly to accept their share of the
responsibi I ity and to make a publ ic apology - and we have nothing to fear
from this new judicial investigation and the material that is going to be
put before Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
Mr We I Is insisted there was no new video evidence. The question of whether
officers I ied about what happened on the day was a matter for judicial
exam inat io n .
However families believe a video tape taken from a closed circuit television
camera trained on the Leppings Lane end stand where the disaster took place
casts doubt on the police version of events.
Police in the control room told the original public inquiry that they were
unaware of the bui ld-up of fans because the camera was not working.
But the tape, which came to light earlier this year, is said to show events
on the day between noon and 5.22pm, and is reported to be sufficiently clear
for the faces of individual fans to be identified.
Pol ice had previously told the inquest into the disaster that they only had
a tape of events after 3.02pm and that the qua I ity was too poor for it to be
shown.
The fami I ies also be I ieve the evidence caI Is into question the inquest
verdict. Coroner Stefan Popper refused to take evidence from after 3.15pm on
the day, rul ing that a I I the fans who died at the ground were dead by then.
But the fami I ies be I ieve the video evidence supports their contention that
some fans remained alive for up to 40 minutes after Dr Popper 's cut-off
t im e .

Press Association
T ime I8 .
         • I5
Copyright (C) Press Association   1997


  18**30 Jun 97 LORD CHANCELLOR'S DEPARTMENT / HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                STATEMENT BY S TU AR T- SMI TH ; Hermes (QI :24 )

(Issued through the Lord Chancel lor 's Department Press Office)
I35/97                                                30 June I997

STATEMENT BY THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH ON BEING APPOINTED
TO EXAMINE EVIDENCE WITH REGARD TO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

I have very little to add to the statement made this afternoon by the
Home Secretary in the House of Commons.

My enquiry uuill not take place   in public.

I shaI I be examining the evidence which it  is said was not previously
available at Lord Taylor's enquiry, or to the Prosecuting or
Disciplinary Authorities. I shall have regard to representations
which have already been made and which are made to me in writing.

I shaI I then consider whether    it is necessary to hear oral
representat io n s .

In due course I wi I I let those who are involved know where to send
their written representations and such arrangements, if any, as will
be made for oral representations.

Note for Editors

The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith (69) was appointed a
Lord Justice of Appeal in 1988, a High Court judge   in 1981, and a
recorder in 1972. Sir Murray was called to   the Bar (Gray's Inn) in
1952 and appointed QC in 1970. He is married with three sons and
three daughters.

ENDS

For further information Please contact The LCD Press Office on
0171-210-85 I2-3

He rmes
Copyright (C) Crown Copyright,    1989-1997


  25**28 Jun 97 Letter-. Taking the blame for Hi I Isborough:    The Independent
                ( Q I : 15)

     By MICHAEL ROBERTS
S i r ; If there is to be a fresh inquiry into the tragedy at Hillsborough
(report, 27 June), would it be too much to ask that representation is taken
from some of those who actually tried to cram themselves into the already
overcrowded terraces, thereby generating the deadly crush?
No matter how many other factors were involved in the disaster, the fact
remains that it was the awful dynamics of a moving crowd that caused so many
deaths. This would be a prime opportunity for those people to accept that
they played a massive role in what happened on that awful day, instead of
trying to place responsibility solely at the feet of others.
MICHAEL ROBERTS
Bromborough, Merseyside
Letters 19

The Independent
Copyright (C) Newspaper Publishing Pic,       1988-1997


  39**27 Jun 97 Straw sets up review of football tragedy: New inquiry for
                Hi I Isborough fami I ies: The Independent (Ql ;67 )

   By PATRICIA WYNN DRVIES, Legal Affairs Editor
An examination of new evidence from the 1989 Hillsborough football stadium
disaster will be set in train on Monday by Jack Straw, the Home Secretary.
The review, to be announced by Mr Straw in a Commons statement, isexpected
to be headed by a judge or QC who will study previously unseen video film
footage and medical evidence which the families of those who died have
submitted to the Home Office.
Members of the Hi I Isborough Fami ly Support Group uui I I meet Mr Straw
beforehand to discuss the development. The treasurer of the group, Joan
Traynor, whose sons Christopher, 26, and Kevin, 16, lost their lives in the
tragedy, said:flI I we want is the truth, It has never come out official ly,
We just want to know why our chi Idren died.
Phi I Hammond, the group s secretary, whose son Phi I I ipdied, said: 'We know
they can't run the whole inquiry again but we would like them to look at the
main points we have raised and whether we are right or wrong. Obviously we
th ink we are r ig h t .
The fatal crush that led to the deaths of 96 fans came after police decided
to relieve crowd pressure at the FA Cup semi- final match between Liverpool
and Nottingham Forrest in April 1989 by opening gates at the Sheffield
Wednesday ground. Relatives who were at the match or watching television at
home looked on in horror as the tragedy unfolded,
A 1990 inquest recorded verdicts of accidental death, but the late Lord
Taylor of Gosforth's inquiry placed most of the blame with South Yorkshire
police, Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield, the senior operational
officer was suspended and then retired on the grounds of ill-health. The
force has since been found negligent in a series of legal actions brought by
victims' families and rank and file officers traumatised by the tragedy.
CaI Is for a new examination of the events were heightened with the screening
of last December 's docu-drama by the fi lm-maker Jimmy McGovern, prompting
fresh claims by victims' families of a cover-up.
The Crown Prosecution Service has studied video footage discovered in the
archives of Yorkshire Television which South Yorkshire police previously
said was of too poor quality to be made available to the Taylor inquiry or
the inquest.
The fami I ies also be I ieve that more could have been done to save the I ives
of those injured in the crush. A doctor who helped treat more than a dozen
of the injured says that one teenager was sti I I a I ive 25 minutes after the
coroner decided that the victims must have been dead, Dr Stefan Popper, the
Sheffield coroner, declined to hear evidence of what happened after 3.15pm
on the d a y .
Anne Will iams. the mother of one teenage victim, has gathered evidence that
he was alive 45 minutes after the inquest claimed he was dead. She is
preparing an appeal to John Morris, the Attorney-General, for a new inquest
on her son.
 'Kevin did not die from traumatic asphyxia at 3.15 as claimed by the
coroner, ' she said. 'He died because of a neck injury. He needed a
tracheotomy below the obstruction but the swelling of the bones closed his
airway. That would have taken half to three-quarters of an hour to happen,
It is not possible to say at this stage where the review of evidence could
eventually lead. But there are hopes that the original inquest verdict could
be overturned and some families have suggested bringing private prosecutions
of poI ice off ic e r s .
News 7

The Independent
Copyright (C) Newspaper Publishing Pic,   1988-1997


  45**27 Jun 97 Straw to reopen Hillsborough inquiry because of new police
                video evidence.- Britain: The Irish Times (QI-. 50)

   By RACHEL BORRILL
   LONDON
THE BRITISH Home Secretary, Mr Jack Straw, is to reopen the inquiry into the
Hillsborough disaster, in which 96 Liverpool football fans died, following
the discovery by the victims' families of new police video footage of the
tragedy.
It is expected Mr Straw will outline his proposals for a new inquiry to the
House of Commons on Monday after meeting members of the Hi IIsborough Fami ly
Support Group.
The footbaI I fans died from injuries suffered due to overcrowding on the
terraces at Sheffield Wednesday's ground during the 1989 FA Cup semi-final.
Their families have always claimed the tragedy was caused by police
 incompetence, and the Crown Prosecution Service is currently considering
whether any officer can be charged.
Mr Trevor Hicks, whose teenage daughters, Victoria and Sarah, died in the
crush, said the families hoped the new inquiry would examine all the fresh
evidence that has recently come to light, including medical evidence which
proved some of the victims died later than was originally claimed and police
video footage of the terraces which contradicts officers' claims that the
camera was not working.
fl South Yorkshire police spokesman said the force, which was in charge of
poI icing the footbaI I ground on the day, would co-operate with any
 investigation. 'If there is going to be a fresh inquiry we wi I I do
everything we can to assist the inquiry, ' he said.
The original government inquiry into the tragedy, led by Lord Justice
Taylor, concluded that South Yorkshire police were principally at fault
because officers decided to relieve the crowd pressure outside the ground by
opening the gates, Those fans already on the terraces were crushed against
the wire fencing. However, the inquest into the tragedy contradicted his
report, recording verdicts of accidental death for all the victims.
Ms Maria Eagle, the MP for Liverpool Garston, said the new inquiry should be
headed by an independent person who has not been involved in any of the
previous investigations,
Meanwhile, in the British political debate on devolution, the Conservative
party leader, Mr William Hague, attempted to pressurise the Prime Minister,
Mr Blair,    to refer claims that a Labour MP had been threatened with
expulsion    if he campaigned against the government's policy to an independent
 inqu ir y .
In a letter Mr Hague pointed out that the account by the Labour backbencher,
Mr LIew Smith, of his treatment contradicted the Prime Minister 's insistence
that there had been no threats and suggested that 'someone must have I ied to
you '.
However, Mr Blair replied that he had investigated the allegations and now
considered the matter to be closed,

Ir ish T imes
Page I0
Copyright (C) The Irish Times,   1993-1997


  54**27 Jun   97 No More Cover-up, The P l e d g e ; Straw To Get Fit Truth Of
                 Hi IIsbro: Inquiry Into Hi IIsborough Disaster To Be Re- opened:
                 Daily Mirror ( Q l :56)

    By KEVIN MAGUIRE and BRIAN READE
The inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster is to be re-opened by the
Government - with a promise of no more cover-ups.
Home Secretary Jack Straw will pledge in the Commons on Monday to get to the
truth behind Britain's worst sporting tragedy, in which 96 Liverpool
footbaI I fans died.
An inquest in 1991 returned a verdict of accidental death, which is bitterly
disputed by families of the bereaved. They blame police incompetence at the
Sheffield stadium and accuse the force of failing to come clean about their
bIunders.
Now Mr Straw will 'look again' at original inquiries and findings.
And experts will assess crucial new video evidence, unearthed by The Mirror
in Apr i I .
Mr Straw wi I I meet survivors and relatives of victims on Monday, then make a
statement to MPs at 3,30pm.
Last night Merseyside MPs demanded no more fudging - and Hi IIsborough
fami I ies told of thei r renewed hope that the fuI I facts will at last be told
about the Cup semi-final horror on April 15, 1989.
Liverpool Garston MP Maria Eagle said relatives wanted 'justice'.
She caI led for a new inquiry to be headed by a judge not involved in past
invest igat io n s .
Liverpool Walton MP Peter Ki IfoyIe said: 'I have great confidence in Jack
Straw.
 'I am hopeful that what he does announce will meet natural justice.
Hillsborough families' spokesman Trevor Hicks, who will be among those
meeting Mr Straw, said: 'We have got a certain amount of guarded optimism.
Cathy Ellis, 47, whose 67-year-old father was the oldest victim, said:
 'Under the Tories we went through he I I and seemed to be getting nowhere.
 'In just eight weeks of a Labour government, we are now hopeful of getting
justice at last.
Praising The Mirror's efforts, she said at home in Carlisle: 'You have done
a wonderful job.
flnne Will iams, who lost her son Kevin, 15, said: 'We have a Iot of people
behind us now, but what we really need is to get the inquest verdict
changed.
Professor John flshton, head of public health in the north west, helped to
treat the injured as they were pul led from the over-crowded pens on
Hillsborough's Leppings Lane terraces.
He said a new investigation was 'really important' for the sake of the
bereaved fami I i es .
Mr flshton added: 'Only when they have got peace of mind will they be able to
get on with their lives.
Professor Phi I Scraton, who led the Hi IIsborough research project, spoke of
the 'amazing contradiction' behind relatives' a n g e r :
That 96 people died 'accidentally' according to the inquest verdict ..while
an inquiry headed by Lord Justice Taylor said the main reason for the deaths
was 'lack of police management of the crowd'.
South Yorkshire police said that all it knew was that an announcement would
be made on M o n d a y .
Voice of The Mirror - Page 6

The Mi r ror
Page 4,5
Copyright (C) Mirror Group   1994-1997


  55**27 Jun 97 My Philip Just Went To See fl Football Match: Victim's M u m ;
                Dolores Steele, Whose son Philip, 15, died going to see his
                beloved Liverpool play, Comments On Reopening Of Hi IIsborough
                Inquiry, Daily Mirror ( Q l ;30)

    By DOLORES STEELE
Dear Home Secretary,
Thank you for your announcement about the possibility of a new inquiry into
the Hillsborough disaster.
I am the mother of 15-year-old Philip Steele, fl bright, loving son, who
brought the sunshine into our home. He went to see his beloved Liverpool
play on a beautiful, sunny spring day with his parents and two brothers.
But Phi I ip's I ife was taken away by the incompetence of South Yorkshire
Police and the other authorities involved that day.
If you decide to hold an inquiry I would ask for a senior judge to chair it.
Fit the inquest the police were allowed to select the evidence they wanted
the jury to hear.
We have evidence that several police officers committed perjury during the
Taylor Inquiry and the inquest. In any new inquiry all police evidence
should be given under oath.
The major injustice at the inquest was the imposition of a 3 . 15pm cut- off
time which denied us permission to ask any questions about events which took
place after that.
Some families have had reports from witnesses that their children were alive
after that time.
They have a right to know what happened to them.
This is not about compensation. We are battling for justice.
No amount of money could compensate me for the loss of Philip's laughter,
his loving companionship and his lovely, lovely smile.
Dolores Steele

The Mi r ror
Page 5
Copyright (C) Mirror Group   1994-1997



  59**27 Jun 97 The dangers of always blaming the police, fls the Home Secretary
                looks set to order a new Hi I Isborough inqui r y : Dai ly Mai I
                ( Q I I23 )

    By SIMON HEFFER
THE word is that the Home Secretary is considering ordering a new inquiry
 into the 1989 Hillsborough disaster. Not surprisingly, this has been seized
on with hope by the fami I ies of the 96 victims whose I ives have been
blighted by this terrible tragedy.
That said, the question must be asked, just what will be achieved by yet
another inquiry? find, more pertinently, will it damage still further the
already low morale of Britain's police force?
There is no doubt - and this must be stressed - that the poI ice did not
handle the events at that tragic Ffl cup semi-final eight years ago in a
manner always commensurate with their professional training.
There is equally no doubt that I ies concerning the existence of video
footage of one part of the disaster were told to the original inquiry,
chaired by the former Lord Chief Justice, Lord Taylor of Gosforth.
find the police have paid a price. The careers of some senior policemen
involved on that day have been prematurely terminated or impaired.
The emotional suffering of the police, who were scarcely detached observers
of the tragedy, may not rival that of the bereaved fami I ies, but it has been
far from inconsequential.
What has not been dwelt upon, however, is that drunken footbaI I fans
fighting their way into the ground in an uncontrolled - indeed
uncontrol Iable - way were the root cause of the tragedy.
It was in this potentially explosive situation that the inadequacies of the
poI ice were exposed. That is not to excuse or absolve the poI ice, it is just
to say that this was not a tragedy solely of their making - something the
Taylor inquiry seemed not to take on board.
The grief of the families of the victims is entirely understandable.
Their lost chi Idren, fathers, brothers and sisters were innocent, they had
not been causing trouble before the match nor had they the responsibi I ity
for ensuring that order was maintained at the Sheffield ground.
However, no further inquiry can bring back the dead. No further inquiry is
needed to learn the lessons of eight years ago.- they are already,
manifestly, learned.
Such an inquiry can only be punitive, almost vindictive. It arouses the
suspicion that those calling for it are driven by a desire to punish the
poI ice.
The problem is that if we keep setting officers up as scapegoats when no
other culprit for a crime or a disaster can be found, then we are onthe way
to ensuring that we have no proper police force at all.
The public has become more demanding in recent years about what it expects
from the police, and rightly so. But if the police are not treated as
fallible human beings like the rest of us, it will hardly help recruit the
sort of high-calibre people the force needs.
The Hillsborough case is but one example. There is also growing opinion on
the Stephen Lawrence affair - the murder by five racist thugs, named by the
Dai ly Mai I, of a black youth in South London - that as the people concerned
cannot be brought to justice, the police should be persecuted instead.
It may be - though one does not want to pre-judge this aspect of the case -
that the poI ice did not in the immediate aftermath of this ki I I ing pursue
those responsible for Stephen's murder in the rigidly forensic way that they
shouId.
However, if the end result is that the only people to be punished for
Stephen's murder are the police, it will be a grotesque comment on justice
in Br ita in t o d a y .
The problems in the grim South London suburbs where Stephen was slain show
the dangers of expecting too much of our police. One senior Metropolitan
Police officer told me not long ago that serious injury, necessitating sick
 leave, is virtually routine at some time in the working year for those
serving at Brixton.
So worried has the Commissioner, Sir Paul Condon, been about morale in those
areas that he has taken to visiting them regularly for breakfasts with his
off ice r s .
Although he has not been completely successful, he has also bent over
backwards io eliminate racist behaviour from his force and to attract and
rec ru it ■«^f icers from the ethnic minorities.
He has managed to take his force with him on this and other reforms, but any
move to hold his officers in some way accountable for the wrongdoing of
serious criminals could provoke a morale crisis leading to a serious
deterioration in the quality of the policing of London's front line,
Britain's police are not perfect. Every barrel has its rotten apples. But
they are infinitely more dedicated, less corrupt and more honest than their
peers in almost any other force in the world -    as those who travel abroad
with any regularity will have noticed.
Over the past 30 years in this country, it is the politicians, not the
poI ice, who have created a society where ultimate responsibi I ity is seen to
rest with the state and not with the individual, with the result that people
are conditioned to look for scapegoats for their personal failings,
fls a society, we have to start to accept that some terrible   things occur
because of the wickedness and stupidity of our    feI low citizens. We have to
recognise the injustice and danger of making the police, instead, the
whipping boy for these shortcomings.
If, as many seem to hope, the outcome of a new Hi IIsborough inquiry is to be
even more unpleasant about the police than Taylor was, many in the force
will start to wonder what on earth is the point of doing society's dirty
work for it.
They wi I I ask, quite rightly, what possible training could have prepared
them to cope with the shocking situation with which they were confronted
that Saturday afternoon in Sheffield and why Jack Straw, as Home Secretary,
is not standing up for them for a change.
Should good officers leave the force, it cannot be taken for granted that
they will be replaced by high-quality recruits. If the police force is given
the reputation of being society's fall guy, high-calibre people will look
for a career elsewhere.
If that is the situation Mr Straw wishes to create, he should proceed with
this new inquiry. But he should not do so without pausing to consider who
will protect him and his feI Iow citizens when good poI icemen and women
decide they can take no more.


Da i Iy Ma i I
Page 8
Copyright (C) Associated Newspapers L t d , I9 9 3 - I997



* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Download Summary,                                 17 item(s ) downloaded                                                12,06:30 02 JuI                 97



Source(s)                                     UKNEWS
Date range                                    Last month
Search ;                                      HILLSBOROUGH
Search retrieved                    136       item(s )
******************************************************************************


Download complete:                    Turn data capture off and press RETURN
House o f Commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 7)          http://www.parliament.the-stationery-off...0630/debtext/70630-07.htm#70630-07 headO



         Montserrat receives more aid per head o f population than any country in the world?

         The House would like to know, if not today perhaps in tomorrow's debate, how much money are Her
         Majesty's Government are prepared to earmark to ensure that Montserrat is viable in future.

         Mr. Foulkes: I will certainly try to ensure that the hon. Gentleman's final question is answered in
         tomorrow's debate—if not in the introductory speech, then in the reply for which I am directly
         responsible.

         It is not right to compare dependent territories with other countries. We have a special responsibility
         for dependent territories as long as they remain in that role, which is why I said that we accept, jointly
         with the elected Government o f Montserrat, our responsibility to the people o f Montserrat; and that
         continues.

         No doubt if the hon. Gentleman catches Madam Speaker's eye, he will have the opportunity tomorrow
         to extend his contribution and tell us what the previous Government did. I do not believe, however,
         that he will be able to say that they acted with the sense o f urgency that has been shown in the past
         eight weeks.

         Mr. Andrew Miller (Ellesmere Port and Neston): My hon. Friend will be aware that, last year, I
         saw the devastation in Montserrat from a Lynx helicopter flying from the back o f HMS Argyll, the
         West Indies guard ship on station at the time. In view o f the risk to Lynx helicopters because o f the
         nature o f the dust from the volcanic explosion, is my hon. Friend satisfied that, in the event o f there
         having to be a major evacuation, there is sufficient seaborne support to bring that about?

         Mr. Foulkes: Yes. As well as providing the ferry service, which started yesterday, we have had
         discussions with the Governments o f the other islands in the area, and we are satisfied that there is
         sufficient seaborne capacity to carry out an evacuation. I can say, however, that we are currently
         reviewing the evacuation procedures—the second issue o f which was produced earlier this year—in the
         light o f recent happenings, to ascertain whether any updating and improvement are necessaiy.

                                                           Hillsborough Disaster
         3.47 pm

         The Secretary o f State for the Home Department (Mr. Jack Straw): With permission, Madam
         Speaker, I should like to make a statement about the Hillsborough stadium disaster.

         Ninety-six people lost their lives as a result o f the Hillsborough disaster, which happened on 15 April
          1989. That was more than eight years ago, but no one who saw the news reports on that dreadful
         Saturday will have forgotten those terrible events. For those who lost loved members o f their family,
         the pain is ever present. Following Hillsborough, Members o f the House were united in their
         determination to do all in their power to prevent anything like that ever happening again.

         After the Hillsborough disaster, a number o f inquiries and investigations took place. The most
         thorough and wide ranging o f those was the public inquiry led by the late Lord Taylor. The terms o f
         reference o f that inquiiy encompassed not only inquiring into the disaster, but making
         recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events.

         Lord Taylor's inquiry took oral evidence from more than 170 witnesses at public hearings during May
         and June 1989 and considered many hours o f video evidence from different sources. In his interim
         report in August 1989, Lord Taylor found that the disaster had a number o f causes. He did not
         attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear that, in his



2 of 5                                                                                                                            07/03/97 10:53:54
   t-
House o f Commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 7)           http://www.parliament.the-stationery-off...0630/debtext/70630-07.htm#70630-07_head0



         view,


                  "The main reason for the disaster was the failure o f police control".

         Lord Taylor made 43 recommendations in his interim report. His final report in January 1990 made a
         further 76 recommendations. The developments that have taken place since then in safety at football
         grounds and in the policing o f football matches have been based largely on those recommendations.
         Football in this country has been transformed since the Taylor report. To a large extent, that is due to
         Lord Taylor's wide-ranging and soundly based conclusions.

         The deaths that occurred on 15 April 1989 were also the subject o f inquests conducted by the coroner
         o f the western district o f South Yorkshire. After examining the evidence, the jury at the coroner's
         inquest found in March 1991 that the cause o f death o f those who died at Hillsborough was accidental
         death. A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised by the Police
         Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for criminal proceedings and to
         consider whether any police officer should be subject to disciplinary proceedings.

         That investigation involved the taking o f more than 5,000 statements and the scrutiny o f all the
         material that had been examined previously by the Taylor inquiry. After that investigation, the
         evidence was sent to the Director o f Public Prosecutions, who concluded that no person should be
         subject to criminal proceedings.

          The Police Complaints Authority decided that the chief superintendent and the superintendent in
          charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect o f duty. In the event, the chief
          superintendent retired due to ill health in advance o f a ruling by a disciplinary tribunal.

          Column 25

         Under police discipline rules, a disciplinary hearing cannot proceed when a police officer retires before
         the hearing takes place. The Police Complaints Authority decided later that disciplinary proceedings
         against the superintendent should be withdrawn because the retirement o f the chief superintendent
         meant that what, in effect, was a joint allegation o f neglect o f duty could not be heard fairly in the
         absence o f the more senior officer.

         Hon. Members will be familiar with the unhappiness o f the families o f those who died regarding the
         outcome o f the inquest. They later applied for judicial review o f the coroner's proceedings. In
         November 1993, the divisional court ruled that none o f the matters raised in the judicial review
         proceedings justified intervention by that court in the verdict o f the inquest jury. The events
         surrounding the disaster have, therefore, been subject to investigation on several occasions. However,
         concerns have remained about whether the full facts have yet emerged. I have met relatives o f the
         Hillsborough victims whose suffering is exacerbated by their belief that there are unresolved issues
         that should be investigated further.

          Representations were made to my predecessor and have been made to me, to the Attorney-General
          and to the Director o f Public Prosecutions. A Granada television programme in December last year
          dramatised the disaster and raised a number o f issues that, in the view o f the programme makers,
          represented new evidence. The programme prompted an Adjournment debate on 17 December 1996,
          which was led by my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Walton (Mr. Kilfoyle), and to which my
          predecessor, the right hon. and learned Member for Folkestone and Hythe (Mr. Howard), replied. I
          know how seriously my predecessor viewed the matter.

          Since that programme, further material has been submitted on behalf o f the Hillsborough families
          support group. Those representations have related in particular to video evidence o f the disaster and


3 of 5                                                                                                                               07/03/97 10:53:54
 House o f Commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 7)          http://www.parliament.the-stationery-off...0630/debtext/70630-07.htm#70630-07 headO



          to medical evidence about the time o f death o f the victims. My Department, the office o f the
          Attorney-General and the Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully all the evidence
          that has been put forward in recent months. The Director o f Public Prosecutions has taken the view
          that the material so far presented to her would not justify fresh criminal proceedings. The former
          Attorney-General, the right hon. and learned Member for North-East Bedfordshire (Sir N. Lyell), also
          took the view-again, on the basis o f the material presented to him -that any application to the High
          Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect o f succeeding.

          None the less, I am acutely conscious that the families o f those who died at Hillsborough and many
          others, including hon Members, are very concerned that unresolved issues remain. I am determined to
          go as far as I can to ensure that no matter o f significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a
          final conclusion without a full and independent examination o f the evidence.

          The Attorney-General, the Director o f Public Prosecutions and I have, therefore, agreed that it is in
          the public interest to establish an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any new
          evidence relating to the disaster which was not previously available.

          Column 26

          We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice o f the Court o f Appeal, for that
          purpose. His full terms o f reference are as follows:


                  "To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989
                  which was not available:



                  (a) To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or



                  (b) To the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the purpose o f discharging their respective
                  statutory responsibilities; or



                  (c) To the Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police in relation to police disciplinary matters;



                  And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of such significance as to justify
                  establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home Department of a farther Public Inquiry; and in relation to
                  (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
                  their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
                  interest."

          I shall place a copy o f those terms o f reference in the Library.

         We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other evidence that has been
         submitted. He will also consider any further material that interested parties wish to submit to him. He
         will have two tasks. The first is to advise me whether any evidence not previously available is o f such
         significance to justify a further full public inquiry. His advice to me will be made available to the
         House, and will be made public. Secondly, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will identify for the Attorney-
         General, the DPP and the chief constable o f South Yorkshire police any evidence that might be
         relevant to their decisions that has not previously been considered.

         I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively whether material evidence about
         the causes o f the Hillsborough disaster has been overlooked. I assure the House that, if it has, I will
         take whatever action is needed. We owe it to everyone who has been touched by the tragedy, but,


4 of 5                                                                                                                              07/03/97 10:53:55
House o f Commons Hansard Debates for 30 Jun 1997 (pt 7)   http://www.parliament.the-stationery-ofr...0630/debtext/70630-07.htm#70630-07_head0



          above all, to the families o f those who died to get to the bottom o f the matter once and for all.



          Next Section                                       Index                                                 Home Page




                                                                                                                              07/03/97 10:53:55
 5 of 5
