                               S E C T I O N   9




d u d le y \
moves stationery la st J K w

CODE 60
                       THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED                                           ■“.-.tr'*
 (S T O 0 2 9 3 )


                                          R E G I STEER CO O F F I C E

                                    LYTHAM ST. A N N E S                                        seCReTA(,r:
   67675                                         LA.NCS.                                   R.H .G . KELLY. F.C.l.S.

                                                FY8 1JG.


1/27                                                                     5th March, 1987


TO ALL CLUBS


Dear Secretary,

                                    Anti-Hooliganism Measures

    Further to the Divisional Meetings on 29th January, 1987. and a further
meeting with the Government officials on Monday, 23rd February, I can now
inform you that the Government Ministers, Mr Richard Tracey and the Hon.
Douglas Hogg have endorsed the proposals embodied in the League's comprehensive
Report of November 1986 - save that they required specific action to be taken
by the Clubs on the subject of Membership Schemes.

    This action is along the lines detailed to Clubs at the meetings on 29th
January, and is as follows:-

         1)         All Clubs are asked to develop and introduce membership schemes
                     for specific designated areas of their grounds by the beginning
                     of the 1987/88 season. These areas should be reserved for
                     members only. Non-members would not be admitted. The schemes
                     should cover at least 50% of each ground's capacity as determined
                     by the conditions of the ground’s safety certificate.  Clubs which
                     cannot attain 50% should identify the percentage they can meet.
                     Advice may be obtained from Andy Williamson re points of detail.

         2)         Clubs who feel that they are unable to meet the requirements for
                     50% Membership Schemes will be able to make representations to
                     a Special Committee consisting of representatives from the League,
                     The Football Trust and independent advisors.   If, after discussion,
                     it is agreed by the Special Committee, the club and the local
                     Police that they are unable to meet the 50 % requirement, then the
                     Club will be expected to show that they are taking adequate
                     alternative measures. Should this be the case, their position will
                     be accepted by the Government.  If the Club is not able to convince
                     the Committee, they may become liable to a charge under F.A.
                     procedures for failing to implement the recommendations on
                     Membership.

                                                                                    /Contd.2
    Whilst appreciating that the principle of membership schemes is a complex
matter, there is a requirement for all Clubs to respond quickly so that
designated areas are identified in time for sale of season tickets, etc., for
next season.

    In addition to the above, the following points were also agreed between
the League and the Government:-

    a)     All Clubs are required to submit detailed local plans for dealing
           with the management and control of home and away supporters as per
           the attached document. These plans must be produced as soon as
           possible and they must be drawn up in consultation with the local
           police, local British Transport Police, the local authority and
           other relevant organisations such as local coach operators and
           recognised supporters clubs. These plans will be available to the
           F.A. in the event of a disciplinary commission.

    b)    The   League, the Football Association and the clubs, with advice
           from the local Police, will consider the need for all ticket
           arrangements at particular matches.

    c)    TheLeague will commission a study by independent consultants to
           r.eport on the scope, costs and benefits/disadvantages of a
           reciprocal membership scheme embracing all 92 League Clubs.  The
           Association of Chief Police Officers have agreed to assist with the
           advice on this study.

    d)    Football Trust grants will be made available to Division Three and
           Four Clubs for the installation of closed circuit television
           depending on the particular needs of individual clubs.  Clubs who
           have not yet applied should review their requirements.

    e)    The   League and the Football Association will support and promote the
           development of family enclosures and other initiatives designed to
           establish closer links between clubs and their communities.




    The Management Committee need your urgent co-operation in order to be able
to report back to the Government at the earliest opportunity.




                                              V
                                                             I
                                  LOCAL PLANS




Each club is required to submit details    of its own plan for dealing with

crowd control before, during and after matches.    This should be determined

after due consultation with the police and local authority, and take

account of the following points:-


1.   Ground Plan

     Submit architect's plan(s) of stadium, indicating seats, terraces,

     entrances/exits, turnstiles, service areas and amenities, segregation

     measures, membership/family areas, perimeter fencing, C.C.T.V.,

     police control, etc.

     Submit map indicating location of ground in relation to surrounding

     areas, and showing car and coach parking facilities (home and away),

     railway stations, etc.

     Submit copy of Safety Certificate issued by local authority, and

     provide details of any revised requirements.




2.   Stadium operation

     Determine policy for policing and stewarding, including match

     categorisation, and provide appropriate details.

     Provide details of turnstile operation in relation to ground capacity,

     including counting system.

     Determine policy regarding exclusion- and/or banning orders, and provide
     appropriate details.


3.   Policing

     Determine policy for     communicating with police pre-match, match-day

     and post-match, and provide appropriate details.
Consider capabilities of any C.C.T.V. and provide appropriate details.

Determine general policy for retention of visiting supporters and

provide appropriate details.

Consider arrangements for reciprocal policing.




Stewarding

Determine instructions for stewards and how these are given, and

provide apapropriate details.

Give details of stewards'   training.

Determine policy for communicating with stewards on match-day and

provide appropriate details.

Consider arrangements for reciprocal stewarding.




Segregation

Determine arrangements for segregation of home/away fans and provide

appropriate details for both inside and outside ground.




Membership/family areas

Determine arrangements for any membership of family areas and provide

appropriate details.




Intelligence gathering

Determine procedure for estimating number of travelling fans and

their mode of transport, e.g., liaison with opponents, police and

British Rail Transport Police, and provide appropriate details (also

any contingency arrangement).

Consider previous experience with specific opponents.
Security of players and match officials

Determine policy for the security of players and match officials and

provide appropriate details for:-

           a)   entering and leaving the ground

           b)   entering and leaving the field

           c)    car and coach parking




Ground regulations

Consider whether any additional ground regulations are required to

standard list and provide appropriate details.




Alcohol

Submit details of licensing arrangements and outlets.




Admission prices

Determine scale of admission charges your club intends to operate and

provide details including prices for seats, terraces, season tickets,

juveniles/O.A.P.s, family areas, visitors' areas, etc.?

Note:     Any   club who levies higher rates on visitors could    face

charges being brought by the F.A. if this policy resulted    in

segregation procedures being undermined.




Fixtures

When submitting fixture questionnaire, consider preferred pairings,

any special requests, choice of midweek days, etc., in relation to

crowd control.     »
After receiving notification of your fixture schedule, consider what

factors might lead to a change of dates, either at the beginning of

the season or during the season, and provide appropriate details.

Consider any departure from normal kick-off times and provide

appropriate details.




C u p matches

Consider what factors determine date and kick-off time, and provide

appropriate details, e.g., competition rules, neighbouring matches,

police a v ai l a b i l i t y , e t c .

Consider admission prices and provide appropriate details.

Bearing in mind the competition rules, determine visitors'        allocation

of tickets and provide appropriate details.




All-ticket matches

Consider whether any match should be made all-ticket and provide

appropriate details, i.e., potential sell-out or security reasons.




Sale of tickets

I n ‘the interests of segregation, determine policy for selling tickets

and provide appropriate details of:-

              a)      how you deal with block bookings (personal callers and

                      postal applications)

              b)      in normal circumstances, how far in advance are tickets

                      made available and are bookings taken
        c)    what policy is    employed to identify applicants, e.g.,

              home fan, away   fan, ticket tout.

        d)    what policy is    employed for selling tickets on match

              day

         e)   what policy is employed when'you are the away club and

              are any restrictions imposed, e.g., Through travel club

              only.

         f)   any   variation in general policy for high risk games




Transport arrangements

Provide details of local public transport and street car parking

availability, and whether this varies according to kick-off time.




Public relations and communications

Consider use of tannoy and     programme

Consider relationship with media (local and national), schools, youth

organisations, chamber of trade, licensed victuallers association,

traffic commissioners, etc.

Consider opportunities provided by any community initiatives, e.g.,

Football and the Community Programme.
                                  Sheffield™
                                 Wednesday
                              ^=FootbQ ll .Club p lc = ^
                                      Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
                        Telephone: (0742) 343122 Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6.
                              Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145


Our Ref:       GHM/JB/F7/1110

6th May 1987


The Secretary,
The Football League,
Lytham St’. Annes,
Lancs.
FY8 1JG


Dear Sir,

Re:    Membership Scheme/Local Plan

Please find enclosed, as requested, the proposal for a membership scheme here
at Hillsborough.

At present the capacity of the stadium stands at 54,324.                                       This comprises:-

Kop (Hone Supporters Standing)                                                   21,000
South Stand covered .)       ■ Hone                                               5,567
South Stand uncovered)     Supporters                                             3,310
North Stand            )     Seating                                              9,882
West Stand (Visiting Supporters Seating)                                          4,465
Leppings Lane (Visiting Supporters Seefeiag)                                     10,$00
                                                                                 54,324


If we deduct the parts of the ground allocated to visiting supporters then we
are left with 39,724 of capacity; and of this balance some 21,000 is on the
Kop.

I have had meetings with the South Yorkshire Police who have stated
categorically that they do not want the Kop to fall within the scope of a
membership scheme, as it is the only area of standing accommodation for hone
supporters and cannot be partitioned.

                                                                               continued . . .
                   Chairman: H. E. McGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A. Manager: H. Wilkinson
 Directors: M. Sheppard, J.P., F.C.A. (Vice-Chairman), S. L. Speight, O.B.E., C. Woodward, K. T. Addy, E. Barron, G. K. Hulley.
                                               Registered in England No. 62478
In light of this advice we were left with the natural choice to designate the
next biggest area, the North Stand, as our membership area. Its capacity of
9,882 would mean that 24.87% of the available capacity would be within a
membership scheme.

Whilst we fully acknowledge and accept the target of 50% grounds such as
Hillsborough, with large capacities, present special difficulties, and taking
in account the advice of the local police I trust that you will find the
scheme as proposed acceptable.

A copy of my local plan is attached to this letter.

Yours faithfully,




G.H. Mackrell
Secretary
                    .   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. LOCAL PLAN


Ground Plan

i)     Attached is a drawing Reg 8945/1 shoving current ground layout as
       requested.

ii)    Enclosed is a nap which clearly shews the location of the ground in
       relation to the surrounding area,

iii)   Since responsibility for licencing under the items of the Safety of
       Sports Grounds Act noved to the City of Sheffield, ve are still awaiting
       a revised Safety Certificate. A copy will be forwarded in due course.

Stadium Operation

i)     Close consultation takes place with the Police regarding'forthcoming
       natches, The level of manning however remains the perogative of South
       Yorkshire Police,

ii)    There are BB turnstiles at Hillsborough all of which are computer linked
       to vru's in the Control Boon and the Secretary's office. In addition
       television car^ras monitor each hank of turnstiles and record onto
       recorders in order to analyse possible problems and delays at points of
       entry.

Policing-

i)     South Yorkshire Police are very experienced and very thorough in their
        policing of football natches. As an example enclosed are copies of
        their Operation Orders for the recent F,A. Cup Semi-Final held here at
        Killsborouah and in contrast the fixture with O.P.R. staged on 2nd Hay
        1987.

Stewarding

i)     Sheffield Wednesday employ a retired Police Superintendent Mr. D. Lock
        as their Safety and Security Consultant.

ii)    The ground is sub-divided into its component stands and terraces and   a
        steward is appointed to be in charge of each area.

iii) Ccrtnunication between staff on r.atchdays is by using two-way radios.
       The Police are able to link into this system.

Segregation

i)     Strict segregation is enforced. The West Stand, holding 4,465, and the
        Leppinas f^ne terraces, holding 10,100, are the areas designated for
        visiting supporters,

Membership/Family Areas .

 i)    Our family area is contained within the South Stand uncovered.   It has a
        naxinum capacity of 3,310.


                                                    continued ...
Intelligence Gathering

i)     This is dealt with by close liaison with the Police and the visiting
       club.

Security of Players and Hatch Officials

i)     Both match officials and players park within a secure and stewarded car
       park.

ii)    There is always a Police presence by the players tunnel when the teams
       and match officials enter and leave the pitch.

Ground Regulations

i)     The standard Ground Regulations as provided by the Footballleague are
        displayed.

Alcohol

i)     There is no alcohol on general sale within the ground.

ii)    A Restaurant Licence in the name of Catering Manager, Hr. |
        is held in repsect of the Riverside and Tavern Restaurants.

iii) A Licence in the pane of Secretary, Mr.     Grahar. Hackrell, is held in
      respect of the Directors Guest Lounge.

Admission Prices

i)     A copy of admission prices for season 1987/88 is enclosed.

ii)    There is no policy of charging visiting   supporters a higher price than
        hone supporters.

Fixtures

i)     Sheffield Wednesday pair with Sheffield United at the request of the
        South Yorkshire Police.-

Cup Matches/All Ticket Matches

i)     Close consultation with the Police always takes place prior to
        determining arrangements for high profile matches.

Sale of Tickets

i)     Tickets may be purchased by personal application, post or by telephone
        via credit cards.

-ii)   Normally tickets will go on sale 14 days prior to the date of the natch.

iii) Visiting supporters are encouraged to buy their tickets frcn their own
      club.

                                                       continued . . .
    Transport Arrangements

    i)     Supporters arriving by car, park in side streets or on the nearby
           industrial estate.

    ii)    Supporters arriving by train using V7adsley Bridge station are escorted
            by the Police the half mile to the ground.

    iii) Visiting supporters travelling by coach are dropped off in Leppings
          Lane. The coaches are then parked in Herries Road South.

    Public Relations and Ccnnunications

    i)     Sheffield Wednesday has a very active Young Owls and Travel' Club.

    ii)    At every natch local schools, parties etc. are entertained by the club.

    iii)   Sheffield Wednesday have joined the Football and Cc mu nit y Programme.




t
                                                                                        la
                                                                                        1=3
                                                                                        o


                                                                      °(^nded    ^

                                        THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIM ITED
      Lytham S t Annes. Lancashire, FY8 I |G. Telephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786. Secretary R.H.G. Kelly. F.C.I.S.




     2/5898                                                                                                             11th August, 1988.




     Dear Secretary,

                                            LO CA L P L A N S / S A F E T Y CERTIFICATE
                                               R E G U L A T I O N 90 A P P E N D I X 'C'

           With reference to the above, in view of the comprehensive plan submitted by
     you last season it will not be necessary for you to submit one for the forthcoming
     season.

           I would ask, however, that you let m e have a note of any amendments to that
     plan, i.e. change in admission prices, etc. to ensure our records are up to date.

            W e ^fe7are not in possession of a full copy of your Safety Certificate.

                                                              Yours sincerely,




t


    The Secretary,
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd,




                         All correspondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
Our Ref:     GHM/JB/F7/2337

23rd August 1988


The Secretary,
The Footlju.ll J.e-ague,
Lvthan Ft. Ajmer,
Lancs.
FY8 1JC


Dear .Sir,

Re;    Local Plans/Safety Certificate

Thank you for your letter dated 10th August 1°88, amendments to air local
plans for the coning season are as follows:

1) Hie capacity in the North Stand (ie. members stand) is reduced by 180 to
9,702 places. This is to accommodate a new disabled facility here at the
ground. 'This in turn makes total-capacity of the ground 54,101.

2)    A copy of the admission prices for the current season are enclosed.

3) This year our membership scheme has been altered slightly in that cuest
tickets are available for purchase but these must be collected and paid for
prior to the day of the match.

4) The restaurant licence is now in the name of our new Catering Manager,
Mr. Steve Russell.

I confirm that we are still not in the possession of a full Safety Certificate
fran the Local Authority but I understand fran them that it is in an advanced
stage of drafting and I will, of course, forward you a copy as soon as it has
been received.

Yours faithfully,



G.H. Mackrell
Secretary
