S E C T I O N   4
Our Ref:   CHK/JB/S1/2219

11th July 1988


Mr. P. Vfclls,
St. John Ambulance,
131 Psalter Lane,
Sheffield 11.


Dear Peter#

Following on from our meeting last Tuesday I sr. writing to confirm that we
will be pleased to provide a facility for rest and refreshments for your
members in the North Stand for the coning season.

In addition we will lie happy to supply all first aid materials necessary for
carrying out your duties at the ground. T should be most grateful if you
could let ne have a list of what you require as soon as possible so that I.can
get the natter in hand.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely,




G.K. flackrell
Secretary
Cur Ref:   QiK/JB/Sl/2219

11th July 1988


Mr. P. Wells,
St. John Ambulance,
131 Psalter Lane,
fl'.effield 11.


Dear Peter,

Following on frcsn our meeting last Tuesday I an writing to confirm that we
will be pleased to provide a facility for rest and refreshments for your
members in the North Stand for the coning season.

In addition v g will be happy to rurpiy *1.1 first aid materials necessary for
carrying out your duties at the ground. I should be most grateful if you
could let me have a list of what you require as soon as possible sc that I .can
get the matter in hand.

Kind regards.

yours sincerely,




G.H. Mackrell
Secretary
       THE REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRST AID EQUIPMENT AND FIRST AID ROOMS
                                                                                   •\t>3 ■



                                   -                   N um ber of employees
                   Item                        1-5     6-10    11-50 51-100 101-150
  Guidance card                                  1       1        1       1     1
  Individually wrapped sterile adhesive
  dressings                                     10      20      40       40          40
  Sterile eye pads, with attachment              1       2       4        6           8
  Triangular bandages                            1       2       4        6           8
  Safety pins                                    6       6      12       12          12
  Medium-sized sterile unmedicated
  dressings                                      3       6       8        10         12
  Large sterile unmedicated dressings            1       2       4         6         10
  Extra large sterile unmedicated
  dressings                                      1       2       4         6           8

  Where sterile water or sterile normal saline in disposable containers needs to be
kept near the first aid box because tap w ater is not available, a t least the following
quantities should be kept:                              __________________ _______
                                                           N um ber of employees      j
                                                       1-10    11-50 51-100    101-150
    Sterile water or saline in disposable containers
; ' (where tap water is not available)                   1       3         6           6

T ravelling F irst Aid K its
The contents of small travelling first aid kits (for use, in some circumstances, in
establishm ents where there is dispersed working, or by employees working away
from their employer’s establishm ent or by self-employed persons) may vary accord­
ing to the circumstances in which they are to be used. However, item s included
should always be among those specified above. In general, the following item s should
be sufficient:
    a. six individually wrapped sterile adhesive dressings;
  ■ b. one medium-sized sterile unmedicated dressing (approx 10 cm x 8 cm;
       examples of suitable dressings currently available are the Standard Dressings
       No 8 and No 13 BPC);                      _
    c. one triangular bandage (this should, if possible, be sterile; if not, a sterile
        covering appropriate for serious wounds snould also be included);
    d. six safety pins.
S u pp lem en tary equipm ent
The approved code states th at where first aiders and occupational first aiders are
employed in an establishment the employer should provide appropriate, carrying
equipment for them to use. In addition it is recommended th a t where such
equipment is provided, blankets should be stored alongside the equipment and in
such a way as to keep them free from dust and dampness.
P ro tectiv e C lothing a n d E q u ip m en t                                .■ '      ■.
Protective clothing and equipment should be provided near the first aid m aterials
where there is a possibility th at the first aider or occupational first aider m ight new!
 protection to avoid becoming a casualty him self while adm inistering first aid-
 Protective clothing and equipment should always be properly stored and checked
 regularly to ensure th at it remains in good condition.                    / /     /1
                                       .   .                               HoC j l b         107
                                                                               *
                              ST. JOHN AMBULANCE
                             A Voluntary Organisation o f the Order o f St. John
                              County of South & West Yorkshire

                                            BARNSLEY AREA


                                                                                     Area Commissioner:
President:

Mrs. L. Fairclough

                                                                                   22 April 1989

                     Report of events on 15 April 1989 at H illsborugh
                     Football Ground Sheffield

                 B y _______________________ ___                           (Div. Nursing
                 Officer - Barnsley D i v i s i o n )                        ""i(Ambulance
                 M e m b e r - Stairfoot Division)


     At around 3.15pm on Saturday 15 April, I (                   was
     at home and switched on the television to watch the loot-
     bal l ma'tch at Hillsborough. It was immediately apparent
     that a large scale disaster had occurred, though little
     hard information was reported. Believing the B a rn s l e y Area
     ambulance m a y be able to assist, I travelled to Oakwell
     football ground, knowing that I would be able to muster a
     crew f r o m the members present.

     A r r i v i n g at Oakwell at  pproximately 5.50pm, I    informed the
     Senior Officer D i v Supt                     3f the c i r c u m s t a n c e s .
     and she acceeded to my request for                    and
     to ac c o m p a n y me to Sheffield.

     We three then travelled to Cudworth and transferred to the
     A r e a ambulance. Using lights and sirens we made best speed
     to H i l l s b o r o u g h encountering standing traffic at the junction
     of Doe R oy d Lane and Halifax Road. Police traffic controllers
     waved us to the ?,wrong*' side of the dual carriageway, thus
     a vo i d i n g the traffic and we procceeded to the traffic island
     at the junction of Penistone Road Nth and Leppings Lane. Traffic
     Police there directed us towards the Leppings Lane entrance
     of the football ground, where we joined a queue of w aiting
     ambulances, the time being approximately 3.55pm. A f t e r some
     five minutes, Police instructed us to go to the other side
     of the ground, where, we were told, the injured had been
     taken.

     W i t h Police motorcycle escort, we drove v i a Parkside road
     to the east side of the ground where Police directed us to the
     internal access road, leading to an access point between the
     south and west stands. The ambulance was reversed to the access
      r amp and made ready to receive casualties. The three of us made
      our w a y onto the pitch and although there were numerous people
      o bvi o us l y suffering from shock and exhaustion, we were informed
      by Poli c e that all casualties had been removed to the Sports
      Hall.


                                               -   1-
R e t u r n i n g quickly to the ambulance we drove back to the Penisto:.-
Road        entrance, turning left toward the Sports Hall. There we
joined a n o t h e r queue of waiting ambulances, and as we stopped
be hind us arrived the Barnsley Ditrict M a j o r Incident ambulance.
W e gave assistance in carrying their equipment to the Sports Hall
where we were informed that all injured had been dispatched to
hosp i t al s in the area, and that all that was required was a large
q u a n t i t y of body bags for the numerous bodies laying on the floor
of the hall, these being temporarily covered by an assortment of
plastic bags, coats and jackets.

N o t being able to help, we carried the equipment back to the
am b u l a n c e and we believe the Barnsley SYMAS ambul ance then returned
to Barns ley. A senior ambulance officer asked us and several other
a m b u l a n c e s to make our way to the bus depot on Herries fioad South
and stand by there, to await the eventual removal of the bodies.

On a r r i v a l at the bug depot a few minutes later, another ambulance
officer asked if we could establish a First Aid Station there,which
we dul y did. There were large numbers of fans at the bus depot
a w a i t i n g transport, some of whom were obviously intoxicated, many
of who m were very subdued by the events, and some distressed and
tearful. Mrs A Brown and Mr C Pratt offered help and sympathy to
those who aproached, whilst I went back to the ground to contact
M r Wells of Sheffield Area. Having reported to Mr Wells and it
being evident no more could be done, I returned to the bus depot.

A t 5.15pm we were directed     back to the Sports Hall entrance where
a senior a mbulance officer     said that we could stand down as the
disposal of the dead would      be done by six SYMAS ambulances for
adminastrative' reasons. He     thanked us for our help and we then
returned to B a r n s ! e v _




  cc
  cc
  cc
  cc
P . N . G e rrard           J. B. G ordon             J. D . L ass                                                                             M . O . F. Hill           K. G ain es             C. M . A llinson
A. D . P arsons
G. J. B. H u tc h in g s
G. F. G rim es
                            M. P. L. W right
                            W. 1. R. W ard
                            P. G. H orrocks
                                                      W. F. R ich ard s x , , y
                                                      A. D . Lickorish (vj j \ \
                                                      P - 1 . W am o ck
                                                                                     os niMVELL                                                C. L. Pike
                                                                                                                                              J. G. T ro tter
                                                                                                                                              C. V. S. M a n d u ca
                                                                                                                                                                         D. A. H a rp e r
                                                                                                                                                                         D. A . H arris
                                                                                                                                                                         D . C . Kelly
                                                                                                                                                                                                 A. M . D im sd a le Gill
                                                                                                                                                                                                 P. J. F isher
                                                                                                                                                                                                 M . G allim ore
VV. G. W atkins
C. Taylor
M. P. A rseott
                            K. A. Stracn an
                            A. D. W alker
                            T. A. R. C u rra n ; '
                                                      L. A- Belton
                                                     .0, K D o d so n
                                                        k.    lin e r s o n
                                                                                 —         HITE                                               G. B. B. Y eow art
                                                                                                                                               R. J. K idby
                                                                                                                                              D. Sim ler
                                                                                                                                                                         A. G. M urray-Jones
                                                                                                                                                                        J. S. Rigler
                                                                                                                                                                        M. A. S tanger
                                                                                                                                                                                                 F. P. A. G iacon
                                                                                                                                                                                                 M . S. G olding
                                                                                                                                                                                                 D . A. L atham
A. Pugh*Thom as
D. F. G ray
H. N . H e n s h a w
                            J .R .H . Kitchingj
                            D. C . M ace
                            S. G. Riley
                                                     M. B. H u tc h in g s
                                                             UtRplouglP
                                                     A . !. L utley
                                                                                      DURRANT                                                 A. S. G o rd o n
                                                                                                                                              N . D . C am pbell
                                                                                                                                              J. C o o p e r
                                                                                                                                                                        E. C. J. W ells
                                                                                                                                                                        R. T. W h ite h o u se
                                                                                                                                                                        H . J. H . P earso n
                                                                                                                                                                                                 R. H . R. M cK ean
                                                                                                                                                                                                 D . J. M oss
                                                                                                                                                                                                 H . Row e
I. J. T. S te p h en s      N. J. Fagan              1. D . S m ith                  21 Holbom Viaduct, London EC1A 2DY                       S. M . P. M acD onagh     Q . D . R. A rch er
G. K. T oland               R. J. A nderso n         A. P. F. W illiam son                                                                    N. R. M acfarlane         S. L B u m s
K. N. H . G ould            P. G. H. C ollins        A. W. Foyle
                                                                                            Telephone: (01)236 0066                           G. J .M c Q u a te r      P. A. O ld m an
M . B. M aunseli            C. 1. M ajor             A. G am ble                                   Dx Box: 57                                 R. H . N in eh am         G. A. P ro u d le r
P. R. P h illipps           D B. D. M oody           N . S. F. G len n ie                                                                     A. J. A. P en so n        M . P. Robson
M . D. S h a n k lan d      C. P. R entoul           D . M acfarlane
                                                                                              Telex: 887122 LWD G                             J. E. P h e a san t       R. A. Sh ean
                                                                                                                                              P. P. S h e rrin g to n
C. J. H a n so n            D. Sparks                S. W. Polito                       Fax: (01) 248 4212 / (01) 236 3602                    J. R. S m vth
                                                                                                                                                                        R. J. L. Stones
                                                                                                                                                                        G. W atson
T F. M. O lsen              C. H- D aw es            M. J, S ey m o u r                                                                                                                          C o n s u lta n ts
D. S. B aker                D . F arringto n         M. F. S tan co m b e             Telecom Gold: Mailbox 83: LWD 001                       D. A. Cox                 J. T, Young              D, W; S h e n to n
       W hite               R, H , P. Sleigh         N . P, From e                                                                            A, C. R. D avis           L M, A in sw o rth       C. H , D. Sm ith
                                                                                       Wang T/C: (01) 236 7088 (2400bps)


Our reference                     L2/LMD/MPLW                                                                                     You, reference                     117//743968/S W



                                                                                                                                      22nd May 1989


   Messrs Davies Arnold Cooper
   12 Bridewell Place
   London EC4V 6AD                                                                                                                   BY FACSIMILE & POST


   Dear Sirs

  Hillsborough Inquiry

  We refer to your letter of 16th May 1989 and to our subsequent
  telephone conversation on 18th May 1989.

  We now have our c l i e n t s ’ instructions on the matters raised in your
  letter.  The information in this letter is given to you on the
  understanding that you have no intention of approaching any of the
  St John Ambulance personnel and should you ever wish to do so you
  will give us prior notice.

   1.                St John Ambulance Personnel

                           The personnel on duty at Hillsborough on 15th April 1989 are
                           listed on the attached schedule.  This list has been compiled
                           from various sources and may require revision.

  2.                 "Duties"

  2.1                St John Ambulance Brigade provide first-aid cover at
                      Hillsborough.  A plaster on a cut is the normal sort of
                      treatment given.

  2.2                When an "incident" occurs, such as an individual sustaining a
                      suspected fracture (usually from falling down the terraces),
                      the individual is taken in the St John Ambulance Brigade
                      ambulance to hospital for X-ray.  We understand that the
                      ambulance made some five of six trips to the hospital last
                      season during 21 matches.




                 73 Cheapside,                            535 M adison Avenue,              Avenue Louise, 489 Boite 24,   l lt h Floor, West Tow er, Bond Centre,               Also at Beijing,
               London EC2V6ER                              New York, NY 10022                      1050 Brussels                   Queensw ay, Hong Kong                  The People's Republic of China.
                TeJ: (01) 2360066                           Tel: (212)758 3773                   Tel: (02) 647 0660                      Tel: (5) 810 4770              The firm is regulated in the conduct
              Telex: 919014 LWDG                          Telex: 424576 LWD NY               Telex: 23646 LWDBXLB                  Telex: 85288 HKLWDHX                    of its investm ent business by
                                    -   2   -

                          Davies Arnold Cooper

3. ’   Equipment at Ground

3.1    We understand that the equipment in the first-aid room at the
       ground c o mprised:-

              2 trolley stretchers
              4 wire mesh stretchers
              1 box of first-aid equipment      (see 3.2 below)

3.2    In our conversation on 18th May 1989 you mentioned that at the
       beginning of this season the club had sought St John Ambulance
       Bridgade's advice on first-aid equipment.     We understand the
       position to be as follows.  For about three years the Brigade
       had been requesting Mr Graham Mackrell, the Club Secretary, to
       install a standard first-aid box in the stadium's first-aid
       room.  The cost of such a box is of the order of £25.    Last
       year Mr Mackrell provided one (it is the box referred to in
       paragraph 3.1 above) and stated that the Club would pay for
       top-up supplies (bandages, plasters e t c ) .

4.     St John Ambulance Equipment

4.1    St John Ambulance brought the following equipment to the
        ground on 15th April 1989:-

              2 fully equipped ambulances each c o n t a i ni ng :-

                      2 trolley stretchers
                      1 oxygen cylinder - F type
                      1 suction unit (to remove vomit)
                      1 scoop stretcher (spinal injury)
                      1 carrying chair
                      supply of general equipment, dressings etc.

4.2    Each of the members carried their own first-aid satchel
        containing dressings etc.

5.     Relationship between Club and St John Ambulance Brigade

5.1    There is no contractual relationship.   Services are provided
        by the Brigade, and by its members, on a voluntary basis.

5.2    No fee or charges are paid by the Club.   However, some three
       years ago in a pre-season discussion the Brigade pointed out
        to the Club the fact that they were incurring expenses in
       bringing their ambulance to the stadium and in using their
       equipment.   The Club asked what these expenses amounted to and
        the Brigade estimated £35 per match.  The Club then commenced
        to make an annual donation to the Brigade of the order of
       £600, which works out at about £35 per match.

5.3    We understand that this season each St John Ambulance Brigade
       member has been offered by the Club one meat pie free each
       match.

If you require any further    information please let us know.

Yours faithfully
                                                                  49311

Personnel present at H i l l s bo ro u gh :-

Peter Wells                         Divisional Superintendent,
                                    Woodseats
                                    N/M
                                    A/M
                                    Div Supt.
                                    N/M
                                    A/M
                                    N/M
Tr t hn T n w l p r                 Div. Supt
                                    Div. Supt
                                    Div. Supt
                                    N/M
                                    Div. Supt
                                    A/M
                                    N/M
                                    N/M
                                    N/M
                                    A/M*
                                    N/M*
                                    D i v . Supt
                                    N/M
                                    N/M
                                    A/M
                                    A/M
                                    ?
                                    A/M
                                    A/M
                                    N/M
                                    A/M*



C a d e t s :-




A/M Ambulance member                N/M Nursing member



* Responded to call


                                               22.05.89
                                               Lovell White Durrant
                                               L2/LMD/MPLW
        THE REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRST AID EQUIPMENT AND FIRST AID ROOMS



                                                       Num ber of employees
                   Item                        1-5     6-10   11-50 51-100 101-150
  Guidance card                                 1        1       1       1     1
  Individually wrapped sterile adhesive
  dressings                                    10       20        40       40       40
  Sterile eye pads, with attachm ent            1        2         4        6         8
  Triangular bandages                           1        2         4        6         8
  Safety pins                                   6        6        12       12        12
  Medium-sized sterile unmedicated
  dressings                                     3        6         8       10        12
  Large sterile unmedicated dressings           1        2         4        6        10
  Extra large sterile unmedicated
  dressings                                     1        2         4        6         8
  Where sterile w ater or sterile normal saline in disposable containers needs to be
kept near the first aid box because tap water is not available, a t least the following
quantities should be kept:
                                                           Num ber of employees   j
                                                       1-10   11-50 51-100 101-150
   Sterile water or saline in disposable containers
   (where tap water is not available)                    1        3         6        6

T rav ellin g F irs t Aid K its
The contents of small travelling first aid kits (for use, in some circumstances, in
establishm ents where there is dispersed working, or by employees working away
from their employer’s establishm ent or by self-employed persons) may vary accord­
ing to the circumstances in which they are to be used. However, items included
should always be among those specified above. In general, the following item s should
be sufficient:
   a. six individually wrapped sterile adhesive dressings;
   b. one medium-sized sterile unmedicated dressing (approx 10 cm X 8 cm;
         examples of suitable dressings currently available are the Standard Dressings
         No 8 and No 13 BPC);
   c. one triangular bandage (this should, if possible, be sterile; if not, a sterile
         covering appropriate for serious wounds should also be included);
   d. six safety pins.
S u p p lem en tary eq uipm en t
The approved code states th a t where first aiders and occupational first aiders are
employed in an establishm ent the employer should provide appropriate carrying
equipm ent for them to use. In addition it is recommended th a t where such
equipm ent is provided, blankets should be stored alongside the equipm ent and in
such a way as to keep them free from dust and dampness.
P ro tectiv e C lothing an d E q uip m en t
Protective clothing and equipment should be provided near the first aid m aterials
where there is a possibility th a t the first aider or occupational first aider m ight need
protection to avoid becoming a casualty him self while adm inistering first aid.
Protective clothing and equipment should always be properly stored and checked
regularly to ensure th at it remains in good condition.
         THE REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRST AID EQUIPMENT AND FIRST AID ROOMS



                                                      Num ber of employees
                    Item                      1-5     6-10   11-50 51-100 101-150
    Guidance card                               1       1       1       1    1
    Individually wrapped sterile adhesive
    dressings                                 10       20       40       40        40
    Sterile eye pads, with attachm ent         1        2        4         6        8
    Triangular bandages                        1        2        4         6        8
    Safety pins                                6        6       12        12       12
    Medium-sized sterile unmedicated
    dressings                                  3        6        8        10       12
    Large sterile unmedicated dressings        1        2        4         6       10
    Extra large sterile unmedicated
    dressings                                   1       2        4         6        8   i
  Where sterile water or sterile normal saline in disposable containers needs to be
kept near the first aid box because tap w ater is not available, a t least the following
quantities should be kept:

i                                                         Num ber of employees
                                                      1-10   11-50 51-100 101-150
; Sterile water or saline in disposable containers
; (where tap water is not available)                    1        3        6        6        ;
T ravelling F irst Aid Kits
The contents of small travelling first aid kits (for use, in some circumstances, in
establishm ents where there is dispersed working, or by employees working away
from their employer’s establishm ent or by self-employed persons) may vary accord­
ing to the circumstances in which they are to be used. However, items included
should always be among those specified above. In general, the following items should
be sufficient:
    a. six individually wrapped sterile adhesive dressings;
    b. one medium-sized sterile unmedicated dressing (approx 10 cm X 8 cm;
         examples of suitable dressings currently available are the Standard Dressings
         No 8 and No 13 BPC);
    c. one triangular bandage (this should, if possible, be sterile; if not, a sterile
         covering appropriate for serious wounds should also be included);
    d. six safety pins.
S u p p lem en tary eq u ip m en t
The approved code states th a t where first aiders and occupational first aiders are
employed in an establishm ent the employer should provide appropriate carrying
equipment for them to use. In addition it is recommended th at where such
equipment is provided, blankets should be stored alongside the equipment and in
such a way as to keep them free from dust and dampness.
P ro tectiv e C lothing an d E q u ip m en t
Protective clothing and equipment should be provided near the first aid m aterials
where there is a possibility th at the first aider or occupational first aider might need
  rotection to avoid becoming a casualty him self while adm inistering first aid.
P 'rotective clothing and equipment should always be properly stored and checked
regularly to ensure th at it remains in good condition.
