        IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                     1989 C NO. 5925
        QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

                                               Royal Courts of Justice,

                                               Tuesday 6th March 1990.
    B
                                       Before:

                                  MR. JUSTICE STEYN


                                    JOAN CHAPMAN
                          (Widow and Administratrix of the
(   c                Estate of Raymond Thomas Chapman deceased)
                                                                  Plaintiff

                                         and

             (1)    THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
             (2 )       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
    D        (3)                SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
             (4)    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS (Consulting Engineers, a firm)
                                                               Defendants
                                         and

             (1 )       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
             (2)     EASTWOOD & PARTNERS (Consulting Engineers, a firm)
                                                            Third Parties
        AND IN THE MATTER OF                             1989 R NO. 7039

                                  LINDA MARY RIMMER
                          (Widow and Administratrix of the
                       Estate of David George Rimmer deceased)
                                                                  Plaintiff

                                         and

             (1)    THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
             (2)        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
             (3)                SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
             (4)    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS (Consulting Engineers, a firm)
                                                               Defendants
                                         and

             (1 )      SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
             (2)    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS (Consulting Engineers, a firm)
                                                             Third Parties



    H

                                                                              124
(Computer-aided transcript of the Stenograph Notes of
 Marten Walsh Cherer Ltd., Pemberton House, East Harding Street,
 London, EC4A 3AS.    Telephone Number: 01-583 7635.)

MR. W.C. WOODWARD Q.C. and MR. R. PAYNE (instructed by Messrs.
    Hammond Suddards, Bradford) appeared on behalf of the
    First Defendant.

MR. E. GLASGOW Q.C« and MR. S. CATCHPOLE (instructed by Messrs.
    Davies Arnold Cooper, London, E.C.4) appeared on behalf of the
    Second Defendant.

MR. R. TOULSON Q.C. and MR. J. FENWICK (instructed by Messrs.
    Reynolds Porter Chamberlain, London, W.C.l) appeared on behalf
    of the Fourth Defendant.

THE THIRD DEFENDANT was not present and was not represented.


THE PLAINTIFF was not present and was not represented.



                         J U D G M E N T
                     (As approved by Judge)
        MR. JUSTICE STEYN:      The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police

            seeks an order:

                     (a) declaring that notices of discontinuance of
                     contribution proceedings were valid and effective,
                     (b) alternatively, granting leave unconditionally (save
                     as to costs) to discontinue the contribution
  B                  proceedings.

            Rival summonses from two other parties are also before the

            court.     In substance they seek relief to an opposite effect.

                     The matters before the court arise from the Hillsborough
( c !       stadium disaster which took place on 15th April 1989.     That

            disaster, as will be recalled, led to an exhaustive inquiry

            conducted by Lord Justice Taylor, who issued an interim report

           on 4th August 1989 and a final report in January this year.
  D
            In the meantime, and in July 1989, a Steering Committee was

            formed to co-ordinate litigation by victims of the disaster.

           Writs were issued in two separate actions by the widows of two

           men, who were killed in two separate areas of the stadium.

           These actions are respectively called the Chapman and Rimmer

            actions.

                     On 26th July 1989 in Liverpool, in my capacity as a

            Presiding Judge of the Northern circuit, after hearing

            counsel, I issued detailed directions which included a

            timetable for the progress of the actions.      At that stage

            there were two defendants only, namely the Chief Constable and

            the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.      On behalf of the

            Chief Constable it was made clear that he would want to issue

            contribution proceedings against the club, and third party



  H

                                                                             26
proceedings against Eastwood & Partners, engineers who had

been employed in respect of the stadium.

      The plaintiffs accordingly applied for an amendment of

the writ and statement of claim to join the engineers as

fourth defendants.    I granted that amendment.      In the

amended statement of claim the plaintiffs pleaded negligence

and breach of statutory duty against the club, and negligence

against the engineers.    In making the directions I referred

to the actions to be tried as lead actions.       At that stage I

indicated that I had in mind a hearing in the summer of 1990

but I made no formal order.

      In September 1989 the defendants served detailed

defences.    The defence of the Chief Constable made clear

that, if held liable, he would seek a contribution or

indemnity from the club and the engineers.     On 18th October

1989 the Chief Constable issued contribution notices against

the club and the engineers.    Both notices are skeletal and

refer to the grounds pleaded in the statement of claim,

together with some additional grounds in the case of the

engineers.

      On 3rd November 1989, and in Manchester, the matter came

for pre-trial review before Mr. Justice Rose, the other

Presiding Judge of the Northern Circuit.      The Chief Constable

sought a stay.    This was refused.   Mr. Justice Rose ordered

the two actions to be listed for trial in June 1990.      No

order was made in respect of the contribution proceedings.



                           2

                                                               27
I


I©

      A   It was further ordered that a transcript of the Taylor inquiry

          be admitted as a true record of what was said at the inquiry.

                On 15th December 1989 the Chief Constable announced,

          without admitting liability, an undertaking to compensate the
      B   victims.   That left for future adjudication or agreement

          issues regarding nervous shock cases, causation, and quantum.

          And there remained the Chief Constable's contribution

          proceedings against the club and the engineers.
I   i C         On 20th December 1989 the matters came before me in

          Manchester for a further pre-trial review.      On behalf of the
1
          Chief Constable it was submitted that there should be no fixed

          date for the contribution proceedings.      Counsel made clear

          that he could not say whether it would be possible to have a
1         hearing in 1991, 1992 or even 1993.      Having heard the rival


I         arguments I directed that the hearing of the contribution

          proceedings should be fixed for October 1990.      Leave to

          appeal was sought and refused on this point.      No application
1     E
          for leave was made to the Court of Appeal.      I further gave

1         supplemental directions, the only one that I need mention

          being a direction that the defences of each party to the      *
I     F
          amended statement of claim shall stand as defences to the

          third party claims and shall be deemed to be served as such

          defences on 2nd January 1990.

      C         On 15th January this year the Chief Constable purported

          to give notices of discontinuance under Order 21, rule 2, in

          the Chapman and Rimmer actions.   Those notices have led to



      H
the summonses now before the court.

      The first question is whether the Chief Constable was

entitled as of right to serve notices of discontinuance.

Reliance is placed on Order 21, rule 2, which reads as

follows:

  ”2(1) Subject to paragraph (2A), the plaintiff in an action
      begun by writ may, without the leave of the court,
      discontinue the action, or withdraw any particular claim
      made by him therein, as against any or all of the
      defendants at any time not later than 14 days after
      service of the defence on him or, if there are two or
      more defendants, of the defence last served by serving a
      notice to that effect on the defendant concerned".

It is conceded, and rightly conceded, on the basis of the

wording of Order 21, rule 2, read alone, that it does not

authorise the discontinuance as of right within a stipulated

period of third party or contribution proceedings.     The

reason is, of course, that Order 21, rule 2, relates only to

"an action begun by writ".   Order 21, rule 2, can therefore

only apply to third party or contribution proceedings if there

is some provision in Order 16 which makes Order 21, rule 2,

applicable mutatis mutandis to contribution and third party

proceedings.   And that is exactly what is contended on behalf
      <
of the Chief Constable.

      Order 16, rule 8, is the provision governing claims and

issues between a defendant and another party.     Sub-rule 8

provides that the same procedure shall be adopted for the

determination between the defendant by whom, and the person on

whom, such a notice is served, as would be appropriate if the

person served were a third party.     This provision, it is
said, brings into play Order 16, rule 3(4) which reads as

follows:

        "(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this rule,
        the following provisions of these rules, namely Order 6,
        rule 7(3) and (5), Order 10, Order 11, Order 12 and
        Order 75, rule 4, shall apply in relation to a third
        party notice an to the proceedings begun thereby as if

            (a) the third party notice were a writ and the
                proceedings begun thereby an action; and
            (b) the defendant issuing the third party notice were
                a plaintiff and the person against whom it is
                issued a defendant in that action:
        provided that in the application of Order 11, rule
        1(1)(c) leave may be granted to serve a third party
        notice outside the jurisdiction on any necessary or
        proper party to the proceedings brought against the
        defendant.

The words which I have underlined are emphasised on behalf of

the Chief Constable.      It is argued that, in applying Order

21, rule 2, one is for that purpose entitled to treat third

party and contribution proceedings as if they were begun by

writ.      Neither the "foregoing provisions" in Order 16, rule

3(4) nor the provisions specifically mentioned assist.        Order

21 is not mentioned.    The deeming provision defines its own

scope, and Order 21, rule 2, is outside it.        This is the only

foothold in Order 16 on which counsel sought to fasten, and it

yields no support.      It is also important to bear in mind that

there is no gap.      Order 16, rule 6 provides:

        "Proceedings on a third party notice may, at any stage
        of the proceedings, be set aside".   (My emphasis).

        By virtue of Order 16, rule 8(3), this provision also

applies to proceedings between defendants.         Any party, who

seeks discontinuance of contribution proceedings, may
therefore apply to the court for appropriate relief which is

in the discretion of the court and may be granted on terms,

including a term requiring an undertaking not to re-commence

proceedings.      For these reasons I hold that the notices of

discontinuance, purportedly given as of right under Order 21,

rule 2, are invalid.

      That brings me to the alternative argument advanced on

behalf of the Chief Constable, namely that the court should

now grant leave under Order 21, rule 3, to discontinue the

contribution proceedings.     Order 2, rule 3(1) reads as

follows:

      "3(1) Except as provided by rule 2, a party may not
      discontinue an action (whether begun by writ or
      otherwise) or counterclaim, or withdraw any particular
      claim made by him therein, without the leave of the
      court, and the court hearing an application for the
      grant of such leaye may order the action or counterclaim
      to be discontinued, or any particular claim made therein
      to be struck out, as against any or all of the parties
      against whom it is brought or made on such terms as to
      costs, the bringing of a subsequent action or otherwise
      as it thinks just.

There was an issue as to whether Order 21, rule 3 covers the

present case.      This does not seem to me to be a very

important point.     The court certainly has a discretion, in

effect, under Order 16, rule 6, to authorise discontinuance

albeit by the means of setting aside the proceedings.       For

present purposes it seems to me that the exercise of the

discretion would proceed along similar lines, and involve a

similar balancing of countervailing considerations, under the

two provisions.      In so far as it might be relevant I hold
that Order 21, rule 3(1) is on its wording not applicable,

that it is not brought into play by any part of Order 16 and

that only Order 16, rule 6, is applicable.     But, I emphasise

again, in the circumstances of this case it ought not to

matter whether the court exercises its discretion under Order

21, rule 3(1) or under Order 16, rule 6.

      Turning now to the rival contentions of the parties, the

position of the Chief Constable is clear.      He was

disappointed by the strict timetables, and early hearing

dates, imposed by Mr. Justice Rose and myself.      He tried to

exercise what he believed to be a right to discontinue.      I

have held that there was no such right.      Now he wishes the

court to exercise its discretion to discontinue or set aside

the contribution proceedings, subject only to an order as to

costs against him.   It is his case that he should, as counsel

put it, be in the position of dominus litis, in control of the

proceedings, and be free to commence proceedings afresh at any

time within the limitation period.    He relies on a number of

grounds which are set out in an affidavit of Mr. Metcalf.         If

that means a hearing only in 19§1, 1992, 1993 or later,

counsel says that is the price of justice.     On behalf of the

engineers and the club, it is submitted the fixed date ought

to be maintained, and that the court ought only to allow

discontinuance, or order the setting aside of the contribution

proceedings, subject to an undertaking not to bring subsequent

contribution proceedings.    In reality the issue is whether,
on the information presently available, the pending

contribution proceedings in the Chapman and Rimmer cases can

fairly be tried in October and November this year, or whether

justice requires that those proceedings should be put off for

on indefinite period.

      Many of the points advanced on behalf of the Chief

Constable have already been considered by Mr. Justice Rose and

myself at earlier hearings in October and December last year

but I accept that there is some further relevant information.

In any event, I accept that I must reconsider the matter

afresh.   I therefore turn to the grounds advanced on behalf

of the Chief Constable.   First, counsel said that justice is

more important than despatch.     That is, of course, right but

it must be borne in mind that unnecessary delay may itself

work injustice.   These general propositions are not in issue.

Secondly, counsel submitted that the Chief Constable is

dominus litis in the proceedings under consideration, and

ought to be able to control the pace of the relevant

litigation.   There may be some 900 claims and in all or most

of those cases the Chief Constable will seek a contribution

from the club and/or engineers.     It is complex multiparty

litigation.   In such litigation the sporting theory of

justice, or what Prof. Wigmore called the "instinct to give

the game fair play", ought to have no place.     In such

litigation, in the public interest, the concept of a party

being dominus litis ought, as far as possible, to be
subordinated to case management techniques controlled by the

court.     Subject to preserving the protections offered by the

adversarial system, the court ought to control the pace of the

litigation.     The recent observations of Lord Donaldson of

Lymington, the Master of the Rolls, in Horrocks v. Ford Motor

C o . (2/2/1990) provides ample authority for this approach.

Thirdly, it was submitted that the Chapman and Rimmer actions

are not lead actions in any proper sense of the word.      At all

times since the matter came before me in July last year,

everybody has treated the Chapman and Rimmer actions as lead

actions, not only as likely to be determinative of most issues

of primary liability to the victims but as also likely to be

determinative of issues in the contribution proceedings.       A

review of the pleadings, correspondence, and other documents,

has only served to reinforce that view.     But, it was argued

on behalf of the Chief Constable, the fact is that the Chapman

and Rimmer actions are unlikely to be satisfactory lead

actions.   It is said that a trial of those actions will leave

unresolved many issues.    Of course, some issues may be left

unresolved:   that is inherent in the concept of a lead case as

opposed to a representative action.      But I am fully satisfied

that a determination of the two lead actions will by and large

dispose of the issues on liability between the Chief

Constable, and the club and engineers.     And, I believe, that

a relitigation of those issues in other cases will on

perfectly orthodox principles not be tolerated except to the
extent to which there are material differences between the

lead cases and other cases:   See Arnold v National Westminster

Bank PLC (1990) 1 All E.R. 529.    N.W. Water Authority v .

Binnie & Partners (Independent 24/11/1989).     In my view the

final determination of the lead cases, one way or the other,

is likely to result in the ultimate resolution of all, or

virtually all, of the disputes on liability between the Chief

Constable and the club and engineers.    But, in any event, the

Chief Constable is in no position to complain about the

unrepresentative character of the lead cases.    If the point

had any substance, it would have been perfectly possible on an

application by the Chief Constable to add other cases, or

other issues to the lead cases.   That procedure is by now

well understood.   It is in my view clear that the Chief

Constable was satisfied with the two lead cases as likely to

resolve most issues but he was disappointed about the

timetables imposed by Mr. Justice Rose and myself.       In my

judgment he has no valid cause for complaint about the

representative nature of the two lead cases.    Fourthly, it

was argued that the Chief Constable is seriously impeded by

the fact that inquest proceedings have not been completed;

that disciplinary proceedings may be taken against the police

officers;   and that criminal proceedings are under

consideration.

      With regard to the inquest proceedings, a letter dated

26th February 1990 from the coroner indicates that he may
resume the inquest on the limited basis of taking the evidence

of the movements of those killed or injured on 15th April 1989

as well as evidence of the cause of death.     That largely

removes the basis of this argument, which, in any event, was

not a sufficient basis for the Chief Constable's contention.

It is speculative whether disciplinary proceedings will in

fact take place.    In any event, it provides no good reason

for granting an order of the type sought by the Chief

Constable.   The central plank of the Chief Constable's

application is, however, the argument that there may be

criminal proceedings against the police officers who were on

duty at the stadium on that fateful afternoon.     An

investigation by the West Midlands Police Force is presently

under way.   No probability has been demonstrated that there

will be such criminal proceedings.      If criminal proceedings

are instituted, it does not by any means follow that civil

proceedings will be stayed.      The principles to be applied

were laid down in Jefferson v. Bhetcha (1979) 1 WLR 898.        The

court has a discretion, as Lord Justice Megaw put it in the

Jefferson case at page 904 "to stay the proceedings, if it

appeared to the court that justice —     the balancing of justice

between the two parties —     so required, having regard to the

concurrent criminal proceedings ....".     Some indication as to

the way in which the discretion is to be exercised was given

by Lord Justice Megaw in the following passage in his judgment

(at p 905 D - F).



                            11
                                                                17 /
                                                                1JO
          "Of course, one factor to be taken into account, and it
          may well be a very important factor, is whether there is
          a real danger of the causing of injustice in the
          criminal proceedings.   There may be cases — no doubt
          there are — where that discretion should be exercised.
          In my view it would be wrong and undesirable to attempt
          to define in the abstract what are the relevant factors.
          By way of example, a relevant factor telling in favour
B        of a defendant might well be the fact that the civil
          action, or some step in it, would be likely to obtain
          such publicity as might sensibly   be expected    toreach,
          and to influence, persons who would or might      be jurors
          in criminal proceedings. It may    be that, if    the
         criminal proceedings were likely    to be heard    ina very
          short time (such as was the fact in the Wonder Heat case
          in the Victoria Supreme Court) it would be fair and
          sensible to postpone the hearing of the civil action.
         It might be that it could be shown, or inferred, that
         there was some real — not merely notional — danger
         that the disclosure of the defence in the civil action
         would, or might, lead to a potential miscarriage of
         justice in the criminal proceedings, by, for example,
         enabling prosecution witnesses to prepare a fabrication
p        of evidence or by leading to interference with witnesses
         or in some other way.”

    At present there are no concurrent criminal proceedings, and

    there may never be any concurrent criminal proceedings.     If

    criminal proceedings are instituted, and an application for a

    stay is made, such application will be considered on its

    merits.   But on behalf of the Chief Constable it was

    submitted that in a broader sense the Chief Constable is being

    impeded in the preparation of his case because understandably

    police officers have been advised not to co-operate with the

    Chief Constable's solicitors until the spectre of a criminal

    prosecution has been removed.   This is certainly a relevant

    factor.   On the other hand, it is accepted that those

    officers have made statements, which are available, and gave

    evidence before the Taylor inquiry.   The transcript of that



H                             12
                                                               1
                                                               t 7J/
evidence is available.      Their attendance to give evidence can

also be ensured by subpoena.      I accept that the spectre of

criminal proceedings does to some extent complicate the

presentation of the Chief Constable's case.      But I do not

accept that the relevant issues cannot fairly be tried in 8

months' time.      Such a suggestion is indeed controverted by

the formal proposal by which the police agreed not to

discontinue the contribution proceedings if their conditions

were met.      Not surprisingly those conditions, which involved

treating the results of the lead actions as conclusive in

respect of all cases, were not acceptable to the engineers.

The point is that the police clearly thought that the lead

actions could be fairly tried in October and November this

year.    That in outline is a recital of the main points

presented on behalf of the Chief Constable which I have tried

to place in perspective.

        Now I turn to the position of the club and the

engineers.      The interests of the club are important.   The

club runs a business, but is also an important local

institution, makincf a considerable contribution to the welfare

of the local community.      It is, I accept, of great importance

that the shadow of the pending civil proceedings should be

removed from the club as soon as possible.      Putting off the

case for a long time will be most detrimental to the affairs

of the club.      The engineers are also most concerned about any

decision which will postpone the trial date.      The person
   involved is Dr. Eastwood, a 65 year old engineer.     He is a

  partner in a firm which has 8 partners.     They have hanging

   over them allegations of professional negligence which

  potentially relate to hundreds of claims.    They have a

   substantial interest in knowing where they stand.

         Trying to stand back from the minutiae of the case, as

  best I can, it is my view that, on the information presently

  available, there is no reason why a fair hearing of the issues

  could not take place in October or November this year.

  Moreover, in my judgment an early resolution of the totality

  of this complex multiparty litigation is in the best interests

  of the administration of justice generally, and more

  specifically the orderly disposal of legal business on the

  Northern Circuit.

         I am not prepared to accede to the Chief Constable's

  application.    In my judgment the directions previously made,

   and timetable laid down, must stand, subject to any points

   counsel may wish to raise with me within the scope and spirit

   of this judgment.   It follows that I will only set aside the

   pending contribution proceedings in the Chapman and Rimmer

   action upon the Chief Constable's undertaking not to bring

   further proceedings against the club and the engineers, such

   undertaking to be given within 7 days from today.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: First of all, as to the form of the order
   that I ought to make, is the correct order simply to dismiss
   the Chief Constable's summons and to make no order on the
   rival summonses?    I do not think there is any need for a
   declaration.



                             14
                                                                1 vQ
HR. GLASGOW: We do not ask for a declaration.       That is
    admirable, if your Lordship would do that.

HR. WOODWARD: With respect to the form of the order, might the
    order be couched in terms along these lines, if I may suggest
    something (but not necessarily the precise wording of it):
    giving the Chief Constable leave to discontinue upon an
    undertaking in the manner my Lord contemplates and, in the
    event of that not being given, the application be dismissed.
    That would seem to tie it all up. In other words, if we give
    the undertaking then the application would be granted upon
    those terms.   In the event of the undertaking not being given
    the matter would fall.

HR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Yes.   Could a minute of order be drafted and I
    will sign it.

HR. WOODWARD: We have an application, my Lord. We would ask for
    your Lordship's leave to appeal against that order. In the
    event of you giving leave or not we would ask for a stay of
    that order, because it does have a term limit attached to it,
    and for such length of time as my Lord may deem appropriate to
    enable a notice of appeal to be prepared and appeal or
    application to be made to the Court of Appeal, depending upon
    my Lordship's adjudication on the application for a stay, thus
    enabling the Chief Constable, if he is so advised and sees
    fit, to pursue an appeal against my Lord's order. That is the
    application we make.

HR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Are there any submissions on that?

HR. GLASGOW: Only, very respectfully, the obvious one that we are
    still very concerned about the timetable and although we
    cannot prevent my friend from going to the Court of Appeal to
    ask for leave, the matter has been set out now very carefully
    on both occasions and if there had been an appeal from your
    Lordship's order on the last occasion it would have been
    disposed of by the Court of Appeal by now. Wholly properly —
    and we do not complain about this — he has come back for a
    third bite of the cherry.   Your Lordship has dealt with it as
    fully and as carefully as anybody could.   To begin the
    process of taking it to the Court of Appeal now consumes yet
    more valuable time.   We are genuinely concerned about that,
    whether or not your Lordship thinks it right to grant leave to
    appeal against this order.

HR. JUSTICE STEYN: I am going to refuse leave to appeal and I do
    so on the ground — and I say this with the profoundest
    respect to counsel — that I do not believe there are
    reasonable arguable grounds of appeal.   I refuse leave to
    appeal on that ground.   But what I was minded to do is to
    grant an extremely short stay enabling the Chief Constable, if


                                15
        he wants to, to apply within a very short time to the Court of
        Appeal for leave.

    MR. GLASGOW:    We would not seek to prevent that.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:    What I had in mind is 7 days.

    MR. GLASGOW:   We would not say anything about that.
B
    MR. FENWICK (for Mr. Toulson):    We would be content.

    MR. WOODWARD:   In those circumstances , would you grant the stay
        upon those terms, that stay to continue in the event of am
        appeal being pursued.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Yes.    Having refused leave to appeal, I stay
        my order but I stay it for 7 days only.   It therefore follows
        that if any application is to be made to the Court of Appeal
        it would have to be made within those 7 days.   I make clear
        that the reason why I grant such a short stay is that I am
        most concerned such an application could otherwise set at
        nought the timetable which Mr. Justice Rose and I have had in
        mind for the hearing of this litigation.
D   MR. WOODWARD:   I am grateful for that indication. We have been
        in discussion concerning that timetable, not with disrespect
        but with an endeavour to achieve some positive progress and to
        recognise what has happened in the interim period.   My
        learned friend Mr. Fenwick wishes to make an application and
        has certain proposals with which we respectfully concur,
        subject to the court approving of them.

              Might I mention two matters,    The first is, endeavouring
        to look at the pleadings -----

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   We have not yet dealt with all the matters
        directly arising. What about costs?

    MR. GLASGOW:   We would ask for our ‘costs on this occasion.

    MR. FENWICK: We ask for our costs of and occasioned by all four
        summonses, that is our two summonses for declarations and the
        first defendants' two summonses for declarations that their
        notice was valid.   We would also ask that the terms of the
        leave to discontinue or setting aside by the court should also
        include provisions as to the fourth defendants' costs being
        paid by the first defendant in the event of such
        d iscont inuance.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Yes.   Do you have any submissions on the costs
        aspect?



H                                    16
                                                                    1 41
1


1 ©



             HR. WOODWARD:   No, my Lord.

             MR. JUSTICE STEYN: So the Chief Constable is to pay the costs
                 applied for.   I do not believe there is any difficulty about
                 the form of order.   After I have dealt with other matters
                 that counsel wish to raise with me, I will adjourn.   I
                 suggest that counsel draft a minute of order. It will be good
                 enough to do so in manuscript. When you let me know you are
         B       ready I will come in and make the order.   You have two other
                 matters, Hr. Woodward.

             MR. DAVIES (for Mr. Catchpole): May I interrupt, my Lord. Mr.
                 Fenwick and I think and so submit that the costs order also
                 ought to contemplate the presence of two counsel on behalf of,
                 respectively, the club and the engineers.   Would you so
                 certify?
    (.   C
             MR. JUSTICE STEYN:    There no objection to that, is there?

             MR. WOODWARD:   My Lord, no.

             MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Very well, I will make that order.

         D   MR. WOODWARD: My Lord, the first matter I would wish to raise is
                 a matter on which we would seek your Lordship's guidance but
                 not necessarily a definite order. In the event of no
                 discontinuance occurring and the event of this matter
                 proceeding towards trial in the Autumn, it appears to all
                 here, counsel having discussed the matter, that it may be a
                 convenient mode of proceeding for the Chief Constable to
                 prepare a list of points? a list of allegations; a list of
                 issues which then could be pleaded to or answered by the
                 opposing parties, perhaps in the manner of a schedule, thus
                 enabling the court, when it comes to consider the points, to
                 have its mind focused and tuned without having to consider the
                 way the plaintiffs in the action may put their case and
                 without having to look at the volume of pleadings or
                 necessarily having to look at the volume of pleadings.    We
                 consider ‘that may be a helpful idea.

             MR. JUSTICE STEYN: I think that would be an absolutely splendid
                 idea.    That would help the court tremendously. I wonder
                 whether you could not incorporate that in the minute of order
                 and agree on your own timetable for it.    It follows from that
                 that the club and the engineers would have to produce a
                 counter memorandum, otherwise it does not serve very much
                 purpose.    If you would insert that, if counsel are agreed on
                 that, I think it is splendid way of proceeding.

             MR. WOODWARD:   In relation to that also whilst the fourth
                 defendants ask for further and better particulars, which we
                 have indicated we would give them, we would propose (and it


         H                                  17

                                                                               142
        touches on the matter I have just raised) to give the
        information and identify the issues and answer the questions
        in that schedule without necessarily having trammelled with
        all the questions.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:       I think that is an excellent way of
        proceeding.

B   MR. WOODWARD:   We are grateful for your Lordship's indication.
        In those circumstances perhaps we can endeavour to prepare an
        order or minute.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:      Thank you very much indeed.

    MR. FENWICK:   My Lord, in terms of directions may I raise three
        matters. First of all, the further and better particulars.
        We are quite content the first defendant provide them in a
        convenient form. We ask for a formal order that they should
        serve further and better particulars in some convenient form
        within 28 days from today's date.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:      Is there any opposition to that?

D   MR. WOODWARD:   None.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:      That will be incorporated.

    MR. FENWICK:   I am grateful. Apart from the provisions on
        detailed allegations in the Scott or similar schedule that
        your Lordship has encouraged us to include, on the last
        occasion when you made directions on 20th December item 5 of
        the order provided that each of the third parties should have
        leave within 28 days to serve a supplemental defence limited
        to the further issues raised by the third party notice.    We
        think it may be more practical in the event to combine it in
        some way with the schedule, but would you formally order we
        should have 21 days from today's date for that purpose.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   The convenient way of doing that is by your
        counter memorandum.

    MR. FENWICK: Almost certainly. I hope in practice when you have
        seen it, that will provide the best way of dealing with it.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Is there any need for a specific order about
        supplemental defences? Is it not overtaken by your agreement
        that the Chief Constable will serve a memorandum or schedule
        and you will produce a counter memorandum?

    MR. FENWICK: We certainly could do so. It depends whether the
        first defendant limits his schedule to specific allegations
        rather than pleaded matters which we may want to include.   I


H                                     18
                                                                   1
          am sure we can deal with it by agreement between the parties
          in a sensible way.   I do not think there is any challenge to
          our right to plead supplementaries.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN:    Very well.

    MR.   FENWICK: That leaves the question of discovery. The present
          order is for discovery before 29th February. In the light of
B         recent events that has not happened. We think that 14 days
          after close of pleadings is the right date for that.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Except we have to be careful what you mean by
        pleadings. Are you including the memorandum and counter
        memorandum as pleadings?

    MR. FENWICK: When we considered it we were not envisaging that
        being incorporated specifically.   As the fourth defendant, we
        would rather have a specific date and invite you to order the
        11th April.

    MR.   JUSTICE STEYN:That seems satisfactory.   There   is otherwise
          the danger, if we expand and relax the timetable too much,
          that we imperil the hearing dates.   Is that date acceptable
D         to you, Mr. Glasgow?

    MR. GLASGOW:    That date is all right. I wonder whether I might
        say something in support of my learned friend Mr. Fenwick
        because we really are very concerned at departing from the
        timetable that has been set, however good the intentions are
        on all sides. May I just sound a note of caution. W e do not,
        mind in the slightest,    andwe will of course co-operate, if
        schedule is produced.     Butwe hope the position is plain that
        that really can be no substitute for the parties' pleaded
        cases being completed in accordance with the timetable, as      1
         extended by consent today of course. What we are concerned
         about is, with the best will in the world, that the schedule
        becomes a recasting of the case which then leads to further
         interlocutory disputes which, despite the best of intentions
         at the time of inception, as the child, begins to grow and we
         have a new series of interlocutory rows about the schedule
         which we have already had despite the goodwill about the
         pleadings. Of course it helps the court and of course it
         helps everybody else if the pleaded issues which have been
         raised and considered   overthe past six months are reduced to
         a simplified form but thatis no justification or excuse for
        .departing from the framework which we all use in litigation of
        /the pleadings.

          JUSTICE STEYN:  I think what Mr. Woodward had in mind was not
          so much that this would be a substitute for pleadings but this
          would be an aid to the judge at the hearing in a very
          convenient form. You are right. The pleadings define the


H                                      19
           issues and the memorandum and counter memorandum ought not to
           travel beyond the issues.

       MR. GLASGOW: I only had the temerity to raise it because you said
           is it really necessary to make these orders because of the
           schedule.

       MR. JUSTICE STEYN:      Yes, I follow.
  B
       MR. GLASGOW: With respect, it is. May we have the orders and
           stick to them because I would like to make it plain that so
           far as the second defendants are concerned, we have pleaded a
           very full case, we understand the case against us, we regard
           ourselves as bound by this order and will continue to honour
           it. We are happy with the extensions of time and we will also
f o.       co-operate with the simplification of issues by the production
           of schedules but we do want the pleadings in the form that we
           all know and love.

       MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Yes. But you are happy specifically for the
           extension of the discovery period until 11th April.

       MR. GLASGOW:    I am.
  D
       MR. JUSTICE STEYN: It mainly affects the club and the engineers.
           The police do not have anything to produce.

       MR. GLASGOW: Of course. I am sorry to have gone on at length.       I
           wanted to make our position plain.

       MR. JUSTICE STEYN:    Not at all. Mr. Woodward,as far as the
           extension of the discovery period is concerned, the police do
           not have any documents to produce here, do they? It is mainly
           the club and the engineers.

       MR. WOODWARD:    One of the matters which is challenged in the
           pleaded case is the planning and organisation of what
           happened.    There is documentation that relates to that.
           Ther'e are documents which may have to be looked at so there
           are documents the police will have to give discovery on.

       MR. JUSTICE STEYN: I appreciate there are a lot of documents
           which are in the public domain but the solicitors here will
           agree you will not produce on discovery documents that are in
           the public domain; for instance, nobody is going to produce
           the Taylor reports and the transcripts or any of that
           material.

       MR. WOODWARD:       No. At the inquiry a number ofdocuments were
           looked at    and in that sense they are in the public domain.

       MR. JUSTICE STEYN:      Is a convenient way of dealing with that


  H                                      20
4



              simply to put something in the minute of order you draft, that
              none of the parties need produce on discovery anything which
              is already in the public domain? You may find a better
              formula for it.

        MR. WOODWARD:     May we think about that.      We have your point.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN: As far as the extension of the discovery
    B       period till 11th April, is that in order?

        MR. WOODWARD:   It is. I was not clear whether Mr. Fenwick was
            asking for an extension of time to serve a supplemental
            defence.

        MR.   JUSTICE STEYN: In view of what Mr. Glasgow says, he does want
              an order for a supplemental defence within 21 days. He would
              like that incorporated.

        MR. WOODWARD:    May we discuss that.

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Yes. I shall be available. I think it may
            take you a little time and it may well be worth spending a bit
            of time on the order.   You may notice other things you want
    D       to deal with. Let us deal with it while we are all together
            this morning.   I will be perfectly happy with a manuscript
            minute.   I will adjourn.

                                (A short adjournment)

        MR.    WOODWARD: My Lord, we have drafted, in part in fair hand and
              not so fair hand, a minute.    Would it be helpful if I read it
              out?

        MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Certainly.

        MR. WOODWARD:   "It is ordered that (1) If the First Defendants,
            within seven days, undertake not to bring further proceedings
            against the Second and Fourth Defendants in respect of the
            issues raised by the claims of the Plaintiffs herein:    (i) the
            contribution proceedings brought by the First Defendants
            herein against the Second and Fourth Defendants shall be set
            aside;   (ii) the First Defendants shall pay the Second and
            Fourth Defendants' costs of the contribution proceedings.

                    "(2) If the First Defendants do not, within seven days,
              give such undertaking the First Defendants' application dated
              19th February 1990 shall be dismissed.

                    "(3) The First Defendants do serve further and better
              particulars of the Second Third Party notice pursuant to the
              request annexed to the Fourth Defendants summons dated 23rd
              day of January 1990 within 28 days hereof.

    H                                   21
             "(4) Save as aforesaid there shall be no order on the
        Fourth Defendants' summonses dated 23rd January 1990 or the
        Second Defendants' summonses dated 20th February 1990.

              "(5) The First Defendants' application for leave to
        appeal be dismissed.

B             "(6) Paragraphs (1) and (2)   hereof shall be stayed for
        seven days from the date hereof.

              "(7) The directions given herein on 20th December 1990
        shall be varied as follows:  (i) the date in paragraph (5)
        thereof for supplementary Third Parties' defences shall be
        extended to a date 42 days from the date hereof.  (ii) the
        date for discovery in paragraph (7) thereof be varied to 11th
        April 1990.   (iii) the First Defendant shall be at liberty,
        within 42 days from the date hereof, to serve a schedule of
        issues.   (iv) the Second and Fourth Defendants shall be at
        liberty to serve replies to the said schedule within 35 days
        thereafter.   (v) the parties be at liberty to apply for
        further directions in respect of such schedules.

U              "(8) The First Defendants do pay the costs of the
        Second and Fourth Defendants of and occasioned by these
        summonses. Certificate for two counsel” .

              My Lord, that is the minute of order for your approval.

               May I mention two matters.   The first relates to the
        form that the action presently stands in and the entitlement
        to it.    There are two actions at the moment and it would seem
        appropriate that the matter should be consolidated, we would
        submit.    This has been discussed and we understand there is
        no objection to that. Perhaps we could do it by a letter,
        with consent, and submit it to the court.    What is intended
        is to simplify the issues simply by the entitlement that the
        action should continue under the Chapman number, have a simple
        title — perhaps "In re Hillsborough" or something suitable —
        and that should be the entitlement of the action thereafter.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: As to consolidation, the position is that the
        same counsel and solicitors act in both cases?

    MR. WOODWARD:   My Lord, they do.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: I cannot think of any technical reason why
        they cannot be consolidated as opposed to simply being tried
        together.

    MR. WOODWARD:  It would be convenient from the point of view of
        the pleadings because only one lot would be necessary, as I


H                                 22
    understand it.
MR. JUSTICE STEYN: If that is agreed, if you want me to make a
    formal order you can add it to that document or send me a
    consent order and I will sign it.

MR. WOODWARD:   May we do it in that way, by sending a consent
    order.

         The second matter that I wish to raise is a matter that
   is raised in Mr. Metcalf's affidavit.   Very little time was
   spent when we addressed my Lord last week on this, and that is
   the question of adding the Football Association as a third
   party to this action to seek contribution against them.     Of
   course we could do it by issuing a separate writ and
   proceeding along that road and having a further consolidation.
   That would seem to be untidy and unnecessary.   May the Chief
   Constable have leave to bring contribution proceedings, in the
   manner that he has brought contribution proceedings, against
   the other parties against the Football Association.     My Lord
   will recall that when my Lord made the order for third party
   directions in December you gave leave for the first defendants
   to add the third defendants to the main action, that is the
   Council, as third parties in the third party proceedings. I
   ask for a similar order in respect of the Football
   Association.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: The only point that causes me concern is
    whether that might imperil the hearing date.

MR. WOODWARD: There would be that risk and that must be
    recognised.  One would have to see, with respect, how it
    went.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Do you have a pleaded case against the
    Association. I ought not to be granting an amendment until I
    have seen the shape of it. Are you in a position to plead the
    case against the Football Association?
                                  <
MR. WOODWARD: We are not in a position to present to my Lord
    today a pleading against the Football Association.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   May I ask whether your solicitors have
    written a letter before action to them?   I would like to know
    what the date of it is.

MR. WOODWARD:   (Counsel took instructions).   No letter has been
written.

MR. JUSTICE STEYN: When was the question of the Football
    Association being joined first mentioned in court to me?    Was
    it mentioned in December?


                              23

                                                                 148
<4




         MR. WOODWARD:   It was raised on Mr. Metcalf's affidavit.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Was that the first time it was raised?

         MR. WOODWARD:   It was.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN: I had better hear what the other counsel have
     B       to say about this.

         MR. FENWICK: I wonder if you would hear me first.   I should be
             elsewhere in a very few moments.  If I make my submission,
             would your Lordship release me?

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   Yes, certainly.
( P
         MR. FENWICK: So far as we are concerned, anything which upsets
             the timetable of this action would be resisted. Subject to
             that we have no objection to the police seeking indemnity from
             whoever they think fit.   We would submit the most appropriate
             course is either for a summons to be put before your Lordship
             of which the Football Association be given notice so they can
             be here and we can see whether they would seek an adjournment
     D       of the action, or alternatively that my learned friend plead
             his case by way of separate action and then apply to
             consolidate it, by which time the Football Association would
             know what case, if any, was made against them.   To bring them
             in now and then have them applying, in two weeks or a month,
             to set aside all the progress as to timetable we have made
             with your Lordship over the last few months would really
             negate all we have tried to do.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:   In any event I ought not to be granting an
             amendment without seeing if it is a sustainable one.

         MR. FENWICK:   There is no letter before action. We do not seek
             to prevent the police from getting contribution but we submit
             they are not ready yet and it certainly should not be done off
             the back foot in this way.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:    Thank you for your assistance.

         MR. GLASGOW:   I cannot add anything to that.   We see it in
             exactly the same way.   Our only concern is that the claim is
             not formulated. We will not object to the Football
             Association being joined if they are prepared to be joined
             without upsetting the timetable.   I say that now. I have
             already indicated we will not stand in the way of that
             application being made but there has been failure to formulate
             the claim.   It is the second time we have had it in this
             action and that is why we are concerned, that they already
             have leave to join the local authority but have not done so


     H                                  24
<4



             and have not formulated the claim.   That has been holding
             fire for a long time ----

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:      Have they not formulated any claim?

         MR. GLASGOW: No.     They have leave to do so, but there again we
             are waiting.   The last thing we want to do is press them into
             making allegations against others of the kind they have made
     B       against us but if they do not do so then Eastwood and
             ourselves are going to have to make our own running against
             them by fourth party proceedings.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Did I give leave to join the Council without
             having seen the pleaded case against them?

         MR. GLASGOW: Uncharacteristically, your Lordship was in a
             generous mood.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN: It sounds to me as if it was a pre-Christmas
             judgment of mine.

         MR. GLASGOW:   I think, to be serious, the reason for it was that
             we all understand what the case against the local authority
     D       was. It had been ventilated and formulated on previous
             occasions.    But we are a little concerned that so much time
             is passing without that claim being properly formulated and we
             are very anxious it should not happen again.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Mr. Woodward, of course I will listen to any
             application you make, but it does seem to me the right way to
             do it is to take out a summons, give notice to the Football
             Association and put a pleaded case before me and give notice
             of that case to the Football Association. At the risk of
             trespassing into areas that are no concern of mine directly at
             the moment, it does seem to me I ought to say that time seems
             to be running heavily against the Chief Constable both in
             relation to the proceedings against the Council and in
             relation to the Football Association.   If you wanted to plead
             a case against the Council, it had better be done pretty
             quickly.   As far as the Football Association is concerned, it
             seems to me it would be appropriate you bring that application
             before me very quickly indeed.   Time is running and what
             could happen is, if this matter is left in abeyance, the very
             delay in respect of the claim against the Council and against
             the Football Association could in due course be used by the
             Chief Constable as a basis for obtaining an adjournment which
             Mr. Justice Rose and I are otherwise not minded to grant.

         MR. WOODWARD:   Your Lordship's remarks have been observed.

         MR. JUSTICE STEYN:  If I may be even more explicit, I would expect
             that case against the Council, if it is to be maintained, to


     H                                 25
                                                                       150
        be pleaded with the greatest rapidity.   I would have thought
        it could be done by next week.  If an application against the
        Football Association is to be made I will find some time to
        hear it next week.

    MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you, my Lord.

    MR. JUSTICE STEYN: Either route:    either a summons or, in the
B       discretion of your solicitors, a separate writ against them
        and an application to consolidate.   Thank you very much for
        your assistance. Shall I sign that order?

    MR. WOODWARD: If your Lordship would be so kind.   (Same handed).
        Thank you very much.




D




H                                  26
                                                               ?5t
