                 THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

            STATEMENT BY HOME SECRETARY:      17 APR IL 1989



With   permission,     Mr   Speaker,   I    should   like     to     make   a
statement     about   the   disaster   at   the   Sheffield        Wednesday
Football     Club ground at Hillsborough Stadium on Saturday.
E veryone hos been horrified by this incredible tragedy                     in
which 94 lost their lives and 174 were injured.


Shortly after the start of the match there was a surge of
spectators on the Leppings Lane terrace which crushed many at
the front against the perimeter fence. This accounted for
m ost of the deaths and injuries.


The match was due to start at 3 p.m.          To help ensure orderly
access, the gates of the ground were opened at 12 noon,                     At
2.30 p.m. most of the Nottingham fans were in the ground, but
many of the Liverpool supporters were still arriving.                 It was
clear to the police officers in charge that there was ample
capacity still to be filled in some parts of the enclosure
                                                       t
all ocated to Liverpool.


At about 2.45 p.m. there was a large crowd of Liverpool
supporters at the turnstiie* in L v ^ i n s a Lonn hahtnri thfi WfcSf
Stand. There was difficulty in cooing with the pressure on
the turnstiles and the police used loudhailers to urge the
crowd to be patient.



                                                  /At about 2.50 p.m.
JLP O f f i c e
                             TEL No .
                                                             17.04.89   14:40   P.03/05


                                        2.



       At about 2.50 p.m. more Liverpool supporters arrived ond the
       numbers in front of the turnstiles increased.                    Some
       supporters storted to climb the walls ond turnstiles              and
       those at the front of the crowd outside the s t a dium           were
       under considerable pressure from those behind.


       The senior police officer present considered thot there was a
       possible danger to the lives of the spectators at the front
       of the crowd outside the stadium. In order to relieve the
       pressure he arranged for an exit gate near the turnstiles to
       be opened to let a section of the crowd through.       The
       relationship of that oction to the disaster on the terrace
       shortly afterwords is clearly a central auestion to be
       investigated,


        My Rt Hon friend the Prime Minister and I yes terday visited
        the football ground and the two Sheffield hospitals which
        received casualties. 1 would like to pay tribute to all
        those involved in the rescue operations at the ground,
                                                         f
        including the many spectators who gave their help;       and to
        those others, including the hospital staffs and voluntary
        agencies who have since been working so hard treating the
        injured and consoling the bereaved.       We heard many accounts
        of courage exerted on behalf of others.




                                                    /I have asked ...
PLP O f f i c e
                                TEL N o .
  ,   *                                                    11. ' Qi! <89   14-'41   P. 04/05
 r    *
                                            3.



          I hove asked for further factual reports from the police and
          other services, the local      authority and the Football
          Association. Inauests will be held in due course. But over
          and above this, there is clearly need for a full and
          independent influiry to identify the causes of the disaster
          and to exomine what needs lo be done to prevent such uu
          accident happening again,     I have therefore asked Lord
          Justice Taylor to carry out an inquiry, with the following
          terms of reference;

                  "To   inquire into the events at Sheffield
                  Wed nesday football ground on 15 April 1989
                  and to make recommendations about the needs
                  of crowd control and safety at sports
                  events".


          [Mr Brian Johnson, the Chief Constable of Lancashire] has
          agreed to assist the inquiry as on assessor; and arrangements
          will be m a d e as necessary for other qualified assessors to be
          appointed and for the inquiry to be provided with technical
          advice and support.     I am asking that the     inouiry should
          proceed with all possible speed.       Lord Justice Taylor will
          visit Sheffield tomorrow to begin his investigation.             I am
          grateful to h im for agreeing to undertake this task.



                                                     /However, we need ..
However, we need also to take a wider view.                   The Government
believes that the future of football in this country lies in
a national membership scheme in designated grounds and now it
seems also in providing oil seated accommodation at maj or
football clubs.  This would involve the disappearance of
terraces at those grounds.           It might also involve amendments
to   strengthen    the    Football     Spectators      Bill    so   that    its
provisions   for    the     licensing       of   grounds      matched      this
concept. We shall be considering these matters urgently and
bringing changes forword as soon os possible.


An appeal fund is being set           up   by the    civic    authorities of
Liverpool, Nottingham       and Sheffield.          The Government will be
c on tributing £500,000 immediately towards this fund.


This was a devastating tragedy.             Our deep sympathy goes to
the families of those who died, to those recovering, and to
those still fighting for life and health.                We owe a duty to
these passionate supporters of football to examine urgently
                                            f
ond thoroughly the causes and background, ond to do all in
our power to prevent such a thing happening again.                      We have
to set our sights high and find a better way for British
football.
                        THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                     LIMITED
                                                     Founded 1863

                                     Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                   President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                         Chairman: F. A. MlLLICHIP

   Chief Executive:                                                                      Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
R. H. G.    K elly   f c is
                                                                                                7e/ex:261110
                                                                                           Facsimile: 01-402 0486


                              16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
 Our Ref:      RHGK/MD/PFS/80                     Your Ref:                        17th IApril 198 9.



 To:        All Member Clubs




 Dear Sirs

                                              Re:      Ground Safety

       Following the tragic events at Sheffield Wednesday F.C. last
 Saturday, you are instructed to undertake, in conjunction with
 your Local Licensing Authority, an immediate review of ground
 safety.    This should include the perimeter fencing installed, the
 agreed capacity levels of all standing areas and the routes to and
 from the ground.

      A report should then be forwarded to The Football
 Association, stating any immediate action taken to implement
 changes and any longer term measures that you have initiated.
 You should also advise us if no changes have been found necessary.

                                              Yours faithfully




 c. c.         County Football
               All Senior Leagu




                                  Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW
                                  Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
   1 fi.tA<l . t .o n ..         or*.........                        a t*                      « lT ? r r . wrrw* r»/*    ... T*..* .   /*             T/Nnr- _ ...........U AAJ




                                                                                           FAX                  TO: _^»4>CS»                      <L<acg&»
                                                                                       FAX NO: o v - ^ S .a . -                         pAQE;   _ \ _ 0F.
                                                                                       ATTENTION OF:                                                         ,
                                                                                       PROM:     0> »*,.                   DATE:             Vfc ■ ^    . a ft
                                                                                       COMPANY:          a» utPe                        FAX NO:
                                                                                           - i f Notes from 3M
                                                                                                                                                            AttNcrrSM




                            PRESS RELEASE


                           Yesterday the Home Secretary formally announced that
                           I^ard Justice Taylor has been appointed to carry out a full
                           and independent inquiry into the tragic events of Saturday
                           in order to identify the causes of the disaster and to examine
                           what needs to be done to prevent such an accident happening
                           again.


                           The directors of S.W.F.C. welcome this development and will
                           naturally co-operate fully with Lord Justice Taylor's
                           inquiry.               We hope that its findings in due course will help
                           those who were so sadly bereaved, to cate to terms with their
                           grief and will contribute to safety at major sporting events
                           in the future.                      In the meantime no further press statenents
                           will be made on behalf of the Club.


                                                                                                        G.H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A.
                                                                                                                         18 April 1989




Hillsborough, Sheffield 86 1SW. Telephone: (0742) 343122
Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6. Tetex No. 547709 WEDNES
Fax No. 0742 337145 Registered in England No. 62478

Ch*)UTi»n: H.E. M cQoe, Secretary: Q.H. Mac*i«l|. F.C C.A, M anager: R Alkinson
Dtoednr*- m. S fieppara,   j p „ f.c .A .   < v i o ^ : h 5 . L .   Seetgm, O .B E ,
C. Wootfw»rd, K T. Addy. 6. B trro i. Q.K, Hutay.
                                                                                                                    W 'C CV\

                                                                                                                     ■A. Q t




                                                            0 t,VDED 'S4


                               THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
           Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 I |G. T elephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786.



24/20324                                                                                              26th April 1989.




TO ALL CLUBS



Dear Secretary,

                               Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry

     As you will be aware, the above Inquiry is being conducted
by Lord Justice Taylor.

     A preliminary hearing takes place at Sheffield Town Hall
on 28th April at 11.00a.m. the purpose of which will be tc hear
applications on behalf of those who wish to be represented at
the oral hearings and to give directions as to the procedure to
be followed.

     Apart from oral evidence, Lord Justice^Taylor will
consider written submissions bearing on his Inquiry.  Any club
wish anything to contribute should write to the Secretary to
the Inquiry:-

     Mr. R.M. Whalley,
     Room 66 2
     Home Office
     50 Queen Anne's Gate
     LONDON
     SW1H 9AT

                                                             A




               All correspondence to b e addressed Co The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
