                             IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                     A!
                             QUEEN'S 3ENCH DIVISION


                                                                         The Court House,
                                                                         Castle Street,
                                                                         Sheffield.
                     B
                                                                         3rd February, 1986



                                                         Before

                                        THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM




                                                 JOHN CHARLES HARRIS
                                 (On Behalf of the South Yorkshire Police Authority)
                                                     (Plaintiff \
                     D
                                                           -V-



                                      SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED
                                                    (Defendant)




                                                      APPEARANCES;
                                For the Plaintiff;                   MR. D. BENTLEY Q.C. and
                                                                     MR. W. B. PHILLIPS
                                                                     (Instructed by J.C.
                                                                      Harris, Solicitors,
                                                                      Barnsley)
                                For the Defendant:                   MR. J. GRIFFITHS Q.C.
                                                                     and MR. M. CHAPPLE
                                                                     (Instructed by Clegg &
                                                                      Son, Solicitors,
                                                                      Sheffield)


                     H
 HARPHAW. LTD                          From the Notes of J.L. Harpham Ltd.,
• S h o r th a n d W rherv                   Official Court Reporters,
:*T lS L D S1 2DX                       55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                I N D E X TO T R A N S C R I P T


                                                                                   Pa Se


                                EDWIN MARSHALL Sworn
                      B
                                 Examined by MR.   BENTLEY                           1.

                                  Cross-Examined by MR.      GRIFFITHS               M.

                                 Re-Examined by MR.     BENTLEY                      6.
                                HARRY SHILLITO Sworn

                                 Examined by MR.   BENTLEY                           9.

                                  Cross-Examined by MR. GRIFFITHS                   11.

                                 Re-Examined by MR.     BENTLEY                     12   .
                                DOMINIC PAUL APPLEYARD Sworn
                      D
                                 Examined by MR.   BENTLEY                          13.

                                ROBERT JAMES GOSLIN Sworn

                                 Examined by MR.   BENTLEY                          m.

                                  Cross-Examined by MR. GRIFFITHS                   40.




         V       )




                       H
HARPHAM.             ltd .

S h o rth a n d V r l t t r i
 * : ELD S1 2 0 X
                                                                             ;rdFebruarv,    1? 3 6



                                                      )WIN MARSHALL

                   A                               Examined by MR.      BENTLEY:

                                Q. Your full n ame and address please? - A. Edwin Marshall.
                                   I reside at

                            I   Q. You   are a retired Police Officer? - A. Yes.

                     1          Q. You joined the ole Sheffield City Police Force       in
                   B |             1531? - A. Yes.
                            i

                            |   Q. And retired from police service on the 17tn of April,
                                   1970 with the rank of Chief Superintendent? - A. That
                                   is correct.

                                Q. I think during your career with the Sheffield Police there
                                   were two periods when you had responsibility for the
                                   policing of the Bramall Lane ground of the Defendant
                                   club? - A. Yes.

                                Q. I think the first of those periods was between 1954 and
                                   1957? - A. Yes.

                                Q. Then again you undertook that duty between 1965 and 1970?
                                   - A. 1963.
                   D
                                Q. I think at that latter period you were by then Chief
                                   Superintendent? - A. Correct.

                                     During those two periods was. it your responsibility to
                                     liaise with the Sheffield United Club about the policing
                                     of their matches?  - A. That is correct.

                                Q.   Could I perhaps deal with the m a tter in this way: before
                                     the beginning of the new football season in August would
                                     you have contact with the club? - A. Oh, yes.

                                Q. Tell his Lordship what would h a ppen before the beginning
                                   of the season? - A. Prior to the season commencing we
                                   always went down to the ground and made a thorough
                                   inspection of all fixtures and fittings, that is,
                                   seating, crash barriers and railings round the ground
                                   and exits and everything like that.     We made a thorough
                                   inspection.

                                Q. When you say "we", who would make this inspection apart
                                   from yourself? - A. Another Officer and very often Mr. Newton
                                   was with us, who was the then Secretary of the Sheffield
                                   United ground.

                                Q. Would there be discussion with Mr. Kewton or other club
                                   officials about the forthcoming season? - A. Yes.

                                Q. What would be discussed? - A. It was a question of deciding
                                   first and foremost who the opponents were going to be.   Say
                                   for the first match if it was one of the regular commitments
                   H
MARPHAM, LTD                                                  -   1 -
S h o r t h a n d Writer*
- * 1 E L 0 S1 2DX
 here there was not likely to be anything unusual
vs

happening, we decided upon the number of Officers they
would require for special duty on the ground.   We
invariably contacted Mr. Newton before each natch
just to ensure they either wanted the same number or
it might be a local derby so we would probably want a
few more men or something of that nature.

’
was it the practice during the season to draw up
operational orders for each match that was held? - A.
Yes.

Orders telling the Officers who was in attendance? - A.
The orders were drawn up in my office.

Telling those involved what was to be done? - A. What
their duties were.

Would a copy of these orders be given to the club? - A.
It was not, not in my day.   I understand it did happen
later on.

Would there be any other discussion between yourself
and club officials during the season, apart from this
initial one at the beginning? - A. Not unless there was
something wrong s t r ucturally or s o m e t h ing like that and
then we always contacted|                    | who was the
Chairman of the Ground Safety Committee.           If there was
anything relating to fixtures and fittings we contacted
him.                                                            -

Was the club charged for the policing provided?         - A.
Yes, sir.

Did they pay? - A.    Yes,   there was never any argument.

Turning to match days if I may, because I think in the
course of your long police career you yourself have perfomred
this particular police duty, attending football matches
at the Bramall Lane ground and helping to  police the
spectators and the ground? - A. Yes.

Obviously one of the tasks that would fall to be performed
by Police Officers inside the ground would be the arrest
of any person who committed an  offence? - A. Yes.

Was that all you Officers were concerned with when you
went to the ground on match d a y s , arresting people who
committed offences? - A. No, we were really there - we
were looked upon as servants of the club.       We assisted
with keeping gangways clear and that type of thing and
preventing climbing on the pylons and coming over the
fencing on to the ground, and that sort of thing.
You might say a thousand and one jobs that we more or
less did.   Obviously, if a crime was committed, then
as Police Officers then it was our duty to see tothat.
Can I perhaps turn to one particular matter? Often,
I imagine, in the past when you were attending the
ground there would be very substantial crowds,
particularly at local matches with the other Sheffield
club? - A. Yes.

With particularly large  crowds there is always the
dancer of people being crushed and injured by the
press of people? - A. That was the reason why I say
one of our duties was to ensure that all the gangways
were kept clear and that barriers were all all right,
the crash barriers and that sort of thing, but the
main thing was to keep the exits and entrances clear.

But that task of protecting those who were there against
crushing injury, who would undertake that task? - A. We
did and we assisted the stewards.   They had some
stewards there as well.

Did the club in your day have its own ground regulations
specifying how spectators and persons who entered the
ground should behave? - A. No, I never remember seeing
those.

However, were there other tasks, apart from crowd safety
and arresting offenders, that you and other officers would
find yourselves engaged in on match days? - A. As I say,
our main consideration was that the people who had gone
to wauch a foowDaii. n^atch, we wanted tnem to watch in
comfort and we did everything we could to ensure that
happened and as you have already said about controlling
crowds, that was one of the main things to ensure they
could see it in comfort.

In those days it was not usual for the playing area  to be
fenced, of course? - A. Oh, yes, always.   The playing area
would always be fenced.

Not the kind of fences we see these days? - A. Oh, not
to that extent.   They are about eight feet high now
with spikes on, but not that type of thing.

In your day there would be a small perimeter fence which
was climbable? - A. Yes, but it was not easy to climb.

If spectators attempted to get on to the pitch during
play, what would be done about that? - A. Well, they
were escorted outside the ground.

I think you have mentioned also people would be turned
out if they started climbing pylons or ground structures?
- A. If they were interfering with the comfort of the
other people there they would be turned out.
                                         Cross-Examined by MR. GRIFFITHS:

                     Q. You policed Brarnall Lane in the fifties and sixties?
                        - A. Yes.

                     Q. Would you agree with me that cospared with today there
                        was two major differences:   first, the behaviour of
                        football crowds was very different then from what it
                        is today? - A. Yes.
               B
                     Q. By and large they were well behaved in those days, with
                        very few exceptions? - A. Yes.

                     Q. Do you support Wednesday or United, or perhaps just
                        from home? - A. Well, that is it, mainly from home
                        these days.

                     Q. I do not know whether you know, but I would like to
                        read you three short sentences about something that
                        happened in 1980 at Sheffield W e d n e s d a y ’s ground in
                        this city.   What I am reading is a passage of a
                        description by a newspaper:

                                   " C u r r a n ’s sending off so angered a section of
                                    Wednesday supporters that they clambered over
               D                    the protective fences to invade the pitch,
                                    tore lumps of concrete out of the terraces to
                                     use as ammunition and caused sufficient mayhem
                                     for play to be suspended for half an hour while
                                  - the Police and Alsatians restored order.
                                     Jack Charlton appealed for calm and was assailed
                                     by his own fans.         The situation was described
                                    as rioti n g . ”

                          I expect as a local man         you had at least heard of that
                          incident? - A. 0'n, yes.

                     Q. That type of incident, within your knowledge, has it been
                        multiplied at other football crounds   - Luton, Millwall,
                        Leeds? - A. According to press reports.

                               MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   I do not think Mr. Marshall
                          is in any better position than I am.  He either takes it
                          from the television or the press.

                                    THE WITNESS:    Exactly.

                     Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:   That sort of thing did riot trouble
                          you as a potential problem in the fifties and sixties?
                          _   t

                               MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   In those days we used to take
                          our children to football matches.   We d o n ’t now.

                     Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:   Again, how many of you would go
                          to Bramall Lane in those days?   How many police officers
               H          approximately?  Half a dozen? - A. No, far more than that.
HA S »rtA M , LTD.
SJiorthattdWriters
-F JE LD S1 20 X
                              Q. I put half a dozen because West Ham at that time had
                                 half a dozerspolice officers? - A. It would be more like
                                 twenty.

                              Q. And the crowds vers, of course, in the fifties and sixties
                                 very, very much larger?   Do you recollect approximately
                                 how many would be, say, at a derby game - Wednesday and
                                 United? - A. They would get up to, say, 40,000, but we
                                 should have far more than twenty man on duty.
                   B
                              Q. I understand that, but the grounds would, on occasions,
                                 be absolutely full - 45,000-odd? - A. Yes.

                              Q. And a popular cup game, again the grounds filled? - A.
                                 Yes.

                              Q. Have you been recently to Bramall Lane? - A. No.

                              Q. You would not be surprised to hear from what you have
                                 read that of course it is somewhere round the 12,000
                                 mark? - A. Yes.

                              Q. I ought to make it clear I have no witness who goes
                                 back as far as you with your knowledge of the ground
                                 and so I am not in a position to agree or disagree with
                    D            you as to what you said you used to do.       Can I ask you
                                 just one thing about your presence there?       You mentioned
                                 you would go before  he g a ~ e , inspect the fixtures and
                                 fittir.cs? - A. That as before the season started.      If
                                 we had a big match coming up - derby matches - we would
                                 probably have another look round and make sure everything was
                                 all right if it was well into the season.      I did not if
                                 it was only at the commencement of the season.
                    E
                              Q. So once or twice a season you would go and look at the
                                 fixtures and fittings, crash barriers and so on? - A.
                                 Yes.

                              Q. At the ground itself you said that occasionally you would
                                 be on duty and even in those days have to arrest people?
                                 - A. :es.

                              Q.    What would that be for?  What sort of offences?   - A.
                                   Well, it is a question of where to start.

                              Q. Was it for violence or pick-pocketing? - A. More likely
                                 for violence.  If you got your  rival fans together
                                 something silly like that could happen, raise the
                                 temperature, and then we had go t to take action.

                              Q.   The real job for your twenty policemen   when the game
                                   was about to start was to watch out for that kind of
                                   thing and guard against it? - A. Yes, and throughout
                                   the match.

                              Q. And throughout the match.    The major concern you had as a
                     H
harpham        ,   ltd

S h o r t h a n d W riter s

?F !ELD S I 2DX
                                policeman was the maintenance of law and order in the
                                ground? - A. Exactly.

                            Q. And all the other things were subsidiary to your concern
                               to m a in t a i n the Q u e e n ’s peace and law and order? - A. Yes,
                               sir.

                            Q. Similarly, for all the other officers that you had under
                               your command? - A. Yes.
                  B!
                                     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:           I do not understand.  Vnen
                                you say ’’main c o n c e r n ” does that mean the most important
                                thing that you had to do, or does it mean the thing that
                                we spend most of our time doing?           They may be very
                                different.

                            Q        MR. GRIFFITHS:   Can I approach it in this way?
                                First, when there was no trouble of course you had the
                                chance to watch the game and I suppose that would be
                                most of the time you were in there, is that right? -
                                A. Yes.

                            Q. But was your principal concern in the sense that it
                               was your duty to watch out for, guard against and quell
                               violence and similar breaches of the peace? - A. Certainly,
                   D           yes, sir.

                                              Re-Examined by MR.        BE?\'TLEY:

                            Q. Kow important did you regard the safety of persons -on
                               the terraces, safety from crushing? - A. It was extremely
                               important, the safety of all people in the ground.   That
                               is what we were there for to ensure they could watch the
                               match in comfort and in safety.

                                     MR.   BENTLEY:    Does your Lordship have any questions?

                                     MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:       No, I have not.

                                     MR. BENTLEY:      Thank you, Mr. Marshall.

                                     MR. GRIFFITHS:    Would this be a convenient moment
                                tomake my application?

                                     MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:        Yes.

                                     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Might I invite your attention to
                                the amended Defence and Counterclaim?    Your Lordship
                                will see that there we set out     what in our    respectful
                                submission is what is called normal police duty.  If
                                you would be kind enough next to go to the Counterclaim,
                                in my copy it says page 9, and at the bottom - it is right
                                at the end of the pleading.

                                                              -   6 -
                   H
m arpham ,       ltd   .
S h o r th a n d W riter*

-F IE L D S I 20X
                                         MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:       Which part of the C ounter­
                  A                 claim?

                                         MR. GRIFFITHS:  It is the Prayer.   Your Lordship
                                    will see that in that the Prayer is for a declaration
                                    that it is the duty of the Police to ensure that at home
                                    fixtures of Sheffield United, peace would be kept, to
                                    preserve all property inside and outside the stadium
                            i
                                    etc., irrespective of any request.   What we would...
                  B
                                         MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   I do not understand how it
                                    reads at the moment.   There must be a word or two
                                    missing.  It is a nonsense.

                                         MR. GRIFFITHS:          I am ver y sorry, there is missing
                                    from your L o r d s h i p ’s copy and, indeed, from mine, after
                     C              "offences’1 the words "against the persons and properties*'.

         (       s                       What your Lordship will see is that goes to the
                                    police duty.  The draft amendments which I would invite
                                    your Lordship to look at, go, of course, to what is the
                                    central question here, that is, the issues of principle
                                    to which I referred earlier.   A declaration that in
                                    respect of the attendance of police officers at home
                                    fixtures at the stadium no payment is or has at all
                     D              material times been due for those of the said officers
                                    present who satisfied the police duty as defined in
                                    paragrsph 5, but is only due in respect of officers (a)
                                i   requested by the Defendants and (b) to fulfil roles other
                                i
                                    than police duties.   Eight, an account and 9, an order
                                I   for the payment of the money found due on the account.
                                !
                     E!                  My Lord, what I hope that does is to raise what my
                                    learned friend referred to as the second general matter,
                                    which will be for your L o r d s h i p ’s decision in the case.

                                         MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:  It does not raise it, it asks
                                    me to deal with it, whether or not it is raised will
                                    depend upon the evidence.

                     F                   MR. GRIFFITHS:   Yes, but in my submission it is
                                    raised in the case.   It has been and is certainly intended
                                    by the parties throughout that that issue should be
                                    litigated.   Your Lordship m a y have seen in the third
                                    bundle that at the time of the Bolton Wanderers...

                                         MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   What chance have I had to
                                    look at the third bundle?   Do not assume I know anything
                     G              about anything in that bundle.

                                         MR. GRIFFITHS:   Could I then just amplify  slightly
                                    what my learned friend said in opening about the Bolton
                                    Wanderers incident?


                                                                  -   7 -
                     H
HARPHAM. LTD.
S h o r th a n d W riter*
AFIELD S I 2 0 X
                                Your L or d s h i p will recollect he told you there
                           was a game due to be played on the 3'ist December, 1983.
                           In an exchange of telexes, which is to be found in that
                           bundle, the club made a specific request for such
                           Officers as the Police Constable thought nece s s a r y to
                           maintain law and order to be present, but left it to
                           him in his di s c r e ti o n to decide the numbers.

                                    The Chief Constable, or the Yorkshire County
                  B        C o u n c i l ’s reply was, "No, unless you make a specific
                           request under S e c t io n 15 we are not prepared to come.
                           Secondly, unless you do m ake a request, we will
                           apply to the M a g is t r a t e s to have the whole game
                           c a n celled."

                                That m a t t e r was, if I can use a loose word " s e t t l e d ”
                           by a final telex which encompasses an agreement to make
                           a request l e a v i n g ’’without prejudice” to be argued
                           before a suitable Tribunal - your Lordship is that
                           Tribunal - the question of whether or not in the
                           circumstances posited there was an entitlement for
                           payment if what the police were being asked to do was
                           maintain law and order.

                                As I am sure your Lordship appreciates, the
                  D        issue in this case is, of course, an important one, not
                           only for my clients, but generally for other clients.

                                MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   If I had any doubt about it,
                           the Yorkshire Pest left me in no doubt this morning.

                                MR. GRIFFITHS:       The Prayer which I have invited
                           your Lordship to a l lo w us does, I hope, assuming the
                           Pleading justifies it and assuming the evidence, of
                           course, does a l l o w your Lordship to make a decision
                           as to the points of principle and everyone has known
                           throughout that is what this case really is about.
                           It is not about £50,000.

                                Therefore, I would invite your Lordship to
                           allow that amendment.

                                MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:          Anything to say, Mr.
                           Bentley?

                                MR. BENTLEY:   If my learned friend thinks this will
                           assist the Court to resolve the outstanding issues then I
                           do not oppose the application.

                                MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:          Very well.     Then I will
                           allow it.

                                MR. BENTLEY:       I will call next Mr. Karry
                           Shillito.


                   H                                      -   8 -

HARPHAM, LTD.
S h o r th a n d Writer*
AFIELD S I 2 0 X
       -i




                                        HARRY SHILLITO Sworn

                                       Examined by HR. B E K T L E Y :

                    Q. Your full name and address? - A. Harry Shillito,


                    Q. You too are a retired police office.   I think you
                       joined the Sheffield City rolice in 19^6? - A. Yes.
            B
                    Q. You retired from the Force with the rank of Chief
                       Superintendent in 1976? - A. I did, sir, yes.

                    Q. I think in your early police career you attended as a
                       constable at football matches played at the Bramall
                       Lane stadium? - A. I did, sir, yes.

                    Q. Very late in your career, I think in 1973, you took
                       over the role which Mr. Marshall, the last witness,
                       had performed? - A. Yes, I did, sir.

                    Q. Namely, that of exercising responsibility for the policing
                       of football matches at the Bramall Lane ground? - A. Yes.

                    Q. You heard Mr. M a r s h a l l ’s evidence, Mr. Shillito,   as to
            D          the practice in his day? - A. Yes.

                    Q. A visit to the ground before the start of the football
                       season, inspections, discussions, provision of officers?
                       A. Yes.

                    Q. In your time between 1973 when you took over the
                       policing r e s p on sibility and 1976 when you retired, was
                       the situation any different than in Mr. M a r s h a l l ’s day?
                       - A. Things were pretty much the same.        We carried
                       out the same policy.        I think crowds were getting
                       a little bit more out of hand.        I think there were
                       certain clubs which came to Sheffield.        One in
                       particular at that time, though to a lesser extent today,
                       Manchester United had a very large vociferous following.
                       On occasions like that we had to take extra precautions
                       and by that I m ean we had to increase the number of
                       police officers within the ground and outside the ground
                       too.     It was my job to make sure I l i a i s ed with the
                       Secretary at the time, a                         He is no
                       longer w i t h the club now.     We used to discuss the number
                       of officers appropriate for the forthcoming match.          It
                       might vary from 30 officers in the ground to as m a n y as
                       80, depending on the club, whether it was the local derby
                       match or cup-tie or the club Manchester United who at that
                       time was a success with a big following.         They had their
                       problems among their followers.

                    Q. So you and club officials would look at a forthcoming
                       match and together assess the police requirements for
                       that match? - A. We would be told by Intelligence that
            H
HARPHAM. LTD.
:Shor«h»ndWriter*
FFlELD S1 iOX
       -I




                                  there would be X number of coaches coming.  I remember
              A                   at one particular match at Eramall Lane Manchester United
                                  had something like 70 coaches arriving in Sheffield,
                                  so there was quite a big responsibility.

                               Q. Perhaps you could confirm this.    In your day was
                                  the club charged and did they pay for the policing
                                  they received? - A. They were charged and they paid.
                                  It all depended on the conversations I had, or my next
              B                   in command had with the Secretary.    If he agreed' to
                       i          the numbers there was never any problem of paying.     At
                       i          times he would try to knock off a few but we would
                                  reply by saying, ’’You are going to get a bigger crowd.
                                  There will be more money coming in.   You should be
                                  able to pay i t . ” We solved it amicably.   There was
                                  never any problem.
               c               Q. Was the role of police officers who attended the ground in
       (                          your day simply limited to maintaining law and order or
                                  did they discharge and perform other functions? - A.
                                  No, I think it all revolved round m a i nt a i n i n g law and
                                  order.    We had men at the access point on to the
                                  terrace.    At some stage the terraces would get too
                                  full.    We would see a problem arising with people
                                  pushing.    We would have an officer there to stop it
               D                  and there would be no more let in at the terraces.           This
                           i
                           I      happened in several parts of the ground from time to time
                           1
                           i      and officers along with stewards from the club - stewards
                           i
                           i      always like the presence of an officer there to give
                           i
                           i
                                  them'a little backing because many were the times they
                           i      would not pay attention to stewards.
                           i
                           I
                           i
               E|              Q. But they could to an officer? - A. Yes.

                               Q. What you are seeking to do is to prevent people lower
                                  down the terraces being hurt? - A. Being crushed.

                               Q. What other tasks did the officers perform in your day
                                  who attended the ground? - A. During my time I think
                                  problems were getting greater.   There was talk of
                F                 high fences around the ground although at that time
                                  Sheffield United had not erected fences, because some
                                  of the followers of the other clubs used to like to
                                  run across the pitch to get to the other side.    They had
                                  been shepherded into one particular part o f the ground and
                                  then they tried to get to the other side if they did not
                                  think that part of the ground was suitable for them.   We
                                  had to prevent mass exits from one part of the ground
                G                 to the other side, so we would line the policemen up to
                                  prevent that.   There was always minor thefts - pick-pocketing
                                  - going on.   We had a central office for people to contact
                                  when this sort of thing happened so we could despatch
                                  officers to where it occurred.   Plain  clothes officers
                                  used to attend for that particular purpose.

                H                                             -   10 -
H A R P H A * . LTD.
Sh»rlh»f»d Writer*
'F IE L D S : 23X
Did the police officers who attended the ground have
any say or part in deciding who was admitted and who
was not? - A. At that time we did have men at the
turn-stiles outside and there were tiraes when
occasionally some people were not admitted, either
through drunkenness or something like that, with
cans of beer and what have you.      That did occur.
Or making them cf.sper.se with their drink before they
entered the ground.      There was the time too, as I
recall, Sheffield United were building their n e w stand
and there was a lot of rubble on the city side of the
ground and we had to bear in mind the possibility of
stone throwing, brick throwing, because there were
ample weapons for that particular     object.

           Cross-Examined by MR.   GRIFFITHS:

Mr. Shillito, I did not quite get your first answers.
You did this duty from 1973 to 1976? - A. Indeed I did
and prior to.that.

That is when you were in charge? - A. Yes, but    from
1966 to 1973 I v;as Chief Superintendent at the   Woodseats
Division in Sheffield and during my time there    the
responsibility for Sheffield United was put on    to that
Division so I had it before I came tc west Ear    in 1973.

But your intimate involvement was 1973 to 1976? - A.
Yes, when I was stationed at West Bar.

It sounds from what you say that compared with what
Mr. Marshall tola us, there was becoming a build up
towards the present situation with crowd behaviour?
- A. You could see it coming, yes.

Did that worry about crowd behaviour take the concern
in your mind that there might be violence on the ground?
- A. Yes.

You mentioned, for instance, the question when the
stand was being built  of a lot of rubble and stones?
- A. Yes.

What was your worry about that? - A. Throwing that in the
crowd.

     MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:   He said they were potential
weapons.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   You said, when asked about your
view of the policing that it all revolved around law
and order? - A. Yes.

As far as crowd control was concerned, was your interest
in crowd control because if there got to be pushing or
people too packed, there was the potential spark for
violence? - A. Yes.
Similarly, with the stopping of people coning in, you
have mentioned beer cans and alcohol, was that the same
reason? - A. Yes.

The preventing of people climbing pylons or going over
fences, was that the same reason too? - A. Yes.
Encroachment on the pitch too and attacking the referee,
that was beginning to show its ugly head in those days.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Supposing they encroached
on the pitch but did not attack the referree, was that
all right? - A. No, sir, they were ejected from the
ground.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Was the reason for that if they
encroached on to the pitch without attacking, but again
it had the possible spark of a conflagration, with
opposing fans objecting and the fear of rioting and the
like? - A. Yes.

You mentioned t hat your officers and so on would
sometimes, by their uniformed presence, assist the stewards
to move sections of the c r o w d , was that again for the
reason you have given, to prevent them packing too close
and trouble spots arising? - A. Yes, crushing against the
barriers and the barriers breaking, which they have in
the past,   of course.   Yes, this was toprevent that.

And the concern that if that happened again you had the
potential for violence setting up? - A. And serious injury
of course.

But the potential      for violence? - A. Yes.

Did you find that   for instance it is known in policing
that some people deliberately try and set up surges in
crowds? - A. Yes, this does happen.

As a means of aggravation leading to trouble? - A. Yes,
o v e r - e n t h u s i a s m . Whenever the ball was near the goal
mouth everybody would surge forward and the weight caused
barriers to give way and people to be maimed.

What sort    of crowds were coming in your day? - A. I think
they were    in between 20,006 and 30,000.   At a big match,
of course,   more, M 0 , 000.

               Re-Examined by MR. B E N T L E Y :

You have been asked about the crowd surges and it has
been put to you that your real concern about surges
in the crowd was that this might cause violence and
disorder? - A. No.   Injury first of all, followed by
violence and disorder because if somebody gets injured
then somebody is going to blame somebody in the crowd
for pushing and shoving and that would lead to violence.
     MR. BENTLEY:   Thank you, Mr. Shillito.   Mr.
Appleyard please.

           DOMINIC PAUL APPLEYARD Sworn

              Examined by MR.   BENTLEY:

Your Tull name and address? - A. Dominic Paul Appleyard,


You are a retired police officer? A. Thatis correct.

I think you spent almost the whole of your service with
the Sheffield Pol i c e ? - A. All but about one year.

You retired from the Sheffield City Police, I think, in
1965 with the ran k of Superintendent? - A. That is
correct.

I think like most police officers on occasions you were
deployed to football grounds on match days to do duty
there? - A. Yes.

I think your principal involvement with the policing of
football matches really came in 1954 when you were
transferred to the Chief Constable's office? - A. I was
in the Chief Constable's office at the time, but I went
or. to the Accounting Section in 1954.

I think your duties in the Accounting Section involved
the rendering of accounts for special police services to
persons and bodies who had been provided with those
services? A. That is correct.

Were accounts for special police services rendered to
the Sheffield United Football Club? - A. Yes, they were
rendered on a m o n t h l y basis - a calendar month.

Were they paid as regularly as they were rendered? - A.
Yes, regularly paid.

I imagine that accounts would also be rendered to the
other Sheffield Football Club, Sheffield Wednesday?
- A. That is correct.

Were the two Sheffield Football Clubs the only bodies
or organisations within the city who were sant accounts
for police services? - A. No, there were quite a number
of people.   The odd cricket match when they came to
Bramall Lane.   That was sent, of course, to the
Cricket Club at Leeds.   The greyhound racing at Ollerton
and Hyde Park.   Speedway racing.    I can recollect other
instances where I personally went as a young constable.
We used to send a person occasionally to the old theatre
in Cambridge Street and to the odd picture house on a
Saturday night.
     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Not always? - A. Not always.
I personally have been and never saw any trouble.

What did you call it, Mr. Appleyard, the old... - A. It
was the theatre in Cambridge Street which was pulled down
after the war.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:       I have no c.uestions.

     MR.   BENTLEY:     Thank you, Mr. Appleyard.         Mr.
Goslin.

              ROBERT JAMES GOSLIK Sworn

               Examined by MR.     BENTLEY:

Your full name and present post?  - A. Robert James
Goslin, currently the Deputy Chief Constable of the
Cambridgeshire Constabulary.

Between 1980 and 1984 I think you were one of the
Assistant Chief Constables in Sheffield? - A. Yes, I
was.

That is in the South Yorkshire Police in fact? - A.
Yes indeed.

That post involved you in particular in responsibility
for the policing of football grounds within the county
of South Yorkshire? - A. Yes, sir, I was the Assistant
Chief C o n s t a b l e , O p e r a t i o n s , which took in that
responsibility.

I think you have had responsibility for the policing of
football matches during the course of your career whilst
working in other Police Authorities? - A. Yes, that is
right.          I started my police service in Bolton.    I was
involved as a police constable, sergeant and inspector
and later superintendent, policing Bolton W a n d e r e r s 1
ground.           I was then a chief inspector at Old Trafford.
I was involved in policing the Manchester United football
ground and then in South Yorkshire, of course, I had
responsibility for the five football grounds within South
Y o r k s h i re .

During your time at Bolton and Manchester U n i t e d , was it
the practice of the Police Authority to charge those football
clubs for policing football matches? - A. Yes, it was.

Turning to South Yorkshire now if we may, I think in South
Yorkshire too during your time it was the policy of the
Police Auth or i t y to charge football clubs for the policing
provided at football matches? - A. Yes, it was, sir.      If
I can explain the system it might be of assistance.       The
charging was a retrospective charging in that the number of
police officers for which the club paid was decided upon
by the size of the gate for that particular game.

So far as the level of charges is concerned, I think it
was the Police Authority itself which laid down what scale
of charges should be applied? - A. That is correct.

I wonder if you could have a bundle of documents?       I was
proposing just to go to the front of the folder of
documents.       I think we can see in the bundle whi-ch his
Lordship has, Minutes of the Police Authority starting
at page 1(c) with a Minute of a Police Authority meeting
held on the 7th of January, 1575.       Just looking at the
bottom of the first page of that Minute, item 165, one can
see a r e s o lution passed as to the scale of charges which
will be levied upon private employers of police services
for the future? - A. Yes,sir.

Then I think going through the bundle of documents one
finds similar Minutes at page 3 for 1976;  page 5 an
increase in 1977;  page 6 another Police Committee
meeting, this time September 1978 where the rates are
further increased.   The following page, page 7, a meeting
of the Committee on the 30th of July, 1979? - A. I have
that, sir.

And again the hourly rates are revised.   A little later
the same year, page 8, October, 1979, the rates are
further increased to take account of new pay awards? -
A. That is correct.

Then page 9, October 1980, the Police Committee resolves
to increase the charges further.  The 30th of March, 1981
is Minuted, I think, at page 10.  Again the scale of
charges is increased and this Minute records that a survey
of special duty rates by the West Mercia  Constabulary
in September 1980 had shown the rates charged by the
sevenforces in the No. 2 Region were substantially below
those charged by most other forces and were in fact more
than £1 below the average charge for police constables.
What is the No. 2 Region? - A. It is the sort of n o r t h ­
eastern region of the country.

And the rates are increased.    Then at page 1 1 a meeting
of the Police Committee on the 4th of September, 1981 and
at the foot of the page new rates brought into effect.
Again, page 12, a meeting in March 1982 of the Police
Committee and here there is a reference to the fact that
the Police Committee are n ow agreeing to adopt the rates
assessed by the West Yorkshire Metropolitan Police and
are going to apply those in their area.    Then overleaf
on page 13 the rates are set out? - A. Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:    Is that a convenient moment,
Mr. Bentley?
                i



                                        MR.   BENTLEY:     My Lord,      I am sure it is.

                                                   (Luncheon a d j o u r n m e n t )

                               Q.        MR. BENTLEY:   Mr. Goslin, before the adjournment
                                    you were assisting the court by looking at some of the
                                    Police Committee Minutes dealing with scales of charges
                                    for special police services.   I think we had reached
                                    page 14 of the bundle? - A. That is right.
                      B
                               Q. The 4th of October, 1982 was the occasion of a further
                                  Police Committee meeting and here again we see that a
                                  resolution was passed in c r ea s i n g the scale of charges
                                  for police officers provided on loan to private
                                  employers? - A. Yes.

                               Q. The following month, November 1982 saw another Police
                                  Committee meeting where the question of charges was
                                  dealt with again and a resolution was passed on that
                                  occasion, as appears, in c r easing the charges for the
                                  hire of police horses and certain other specialised
                                  vehicles? - A. Yes, sir.

                               Q. I think we then move to the 31st of December, 1982, at
                                  that Police Committee m e e t i n g there was a resolution
                      D           passed taking note of the mee t i n g of the Working Group
                                  about which we shall hear more in due course? - A.Yes, sir.

                               Q. Then finally iusttaking natters into 1383, at a Police
                                  Committee meeting held on the 28th February, 1983, at page
                                  18 of the bundle there is a resolution passed in relation
                                  to the revised criteria for police services and on the
                                  following page the matter is dealt with again and the
                                  important resolution is perhaps the first resolution that
                                  subject to any national criteria    which might be forthcoming,
                                  it be a recommendation to t h e Police Advisory Sub-Committee
                                  that the charges for police services levied for football
                                  league clubs in South Yorkshire be calculated on a
                                  differential basis related to attendance levels? - A. Yes,
                                  sir.

                               Q. Then we see the next m e e t in g Minuted in the bundle, a
                                  meeting on the 8th of July, 1983 at page 20, the
                                  resolution being passed that this new scale of charges
                                  which is to be based u pon attendance levels be implemented
                                  as from the 1st of April, 1983? - A. That is correct.

                               Q. And another resolution passed to the effect that all the
                                  football league clubs in the South Yorkshire area be requested
                                  to settle their outstanding accounts? - A. Yes.

                               Q. In August, 1 9 8 3 at page 21 the Police Committee received a
                                  report about the action that is being taken to recover sums
                                  owing from the football league clubs in the county for
                                  police services.      At page 22 a Committee which met on the
                      H
  HARPHAM. LTD.                                                    -   16 -
:! S h o r th a n d W riter*
£ -F IE L D S1 2 0 X
              (




                                   5th September, 1583 approves a new scale of charges?
                                   - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. Finally, and this is perhaps the last Police Committee
                                 minute that relates to the period, th e subject of the
                                 Police A u t h o r i t y ’s claim, a Committee meeting held on
                                 the 28th of November of 1583, page 24 in the bundle
                                 and there is an item at 150 dealing w ith charges for
                                 police services.            It is resolved tha t revised charges
                    B            for the hire of police horses and use of vehicles on
                                 special duties be adopted with effect from the 1st
                                 of December, 1583? - A. Yes.

                              Q. So there we have the picture from 1975 to 1983 of the
                                 Police Committee from time to time laying down an increased
                                 scale of charges for policing private functions? - A.
                                 That is correct,  sir.

                              Q.   So far, Hr. Goslin, I have asked you simply about police
                                   services provided at soccer club grounds.   During your
                                   period of office as Assistant Chief Constable in South
                                   Yorkshire, were they the only bodies who were called
                                   upon to pay for policing? - A. No, they were not.    The
                                   racecourse at Doncaster is an example where charges
                                   were made for the hire of policemen.
                     D
                                   Are there other examples which you can give? - A,        For
                                   the cricket ground at Padley Park.

                              Q. Where the Yorkshire matches are now p layed? - A-. Once a
                                 year we used to provide policemen for that and we would
                                 charge the club accordingly.

                              Q. Just perhaps to get out of the way some of the documents
                                 that we have in this case.   If you would be good enough to
                                 turn to page 34 of the bundle?   I t hink this is a specimen
                                 of the invoices that were currently in use during your
                                 time as Assistant Chief Constable?    This is an invoice
                                 to the Defendant club dated 15th Oct ober, 1982, invoicing
                                 them for police services provided at a football match
                                 held on the 13th October, 1982? - A. I have no direct
                                 knowledge of these invoices.   This was dealt with by
                                 another Department.

                              Q. I follow that, but this is an example of the kind of
                                 invoices which  were used? - A. Yes, indeed.

                                            MR. BENTLEY:       My Lord, I think for the sake of
                                   completeness one can say that pages 34 to 61 in your
                                   L o r d s h i p ’s bundle are the invoices which relate to the
                                   police services which are the subject of the present
                                   claim.

                                        THE WITNESS:      Yes.


                     H                                           -   17 -
 harpham        . LTD.
! S h o r th a n d W riter*
IFFIELO S1 20X
    I"          ■'
                 I




                                       MR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, as I understand it, and my
                      A           learned friend will correct me if I am wrong, it is not
                                  disputed by the Defendant club that the services
                                  specified on the various invoices were provided as
                                  set out on the invoices.

                                      MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:       Yes, thank you.

                      B      Q.        MR. BENTLEY:   Of course, you will no doubt be as familiar
                                  as anyone with the provisions of Section 15 of the Police
                                  Act of 1964? - A. Yes, I am, sir.

                             Q. The Section that speaks of special police services being
                                provided in response to a request? - A. Yes, sir.

                             Q. During your time as Assistant Chief Constable when
                      C         police services were provided at the soccer grounds in
                                South Yorkshire, what requests were made about those
            %                   services being provided?   How did it come about that
                                they were provided? - A. I inherited a system.   It
                                continued throughout my time in South Yorkshire, whereby
                                prior to each season a meeting would be held with
                                representatives of the five clubs in South Yorkshire,
                                the five football league clubs.   I would chair the meeting.
                      D         It was attended by the Divisional Chief Superintendents
                                and, where possible, the Secretary and Chairman of the
                                clubs.   If they could not attend they would send their
                                representative.    During the meeting the policing of the
                                football grounds during the preceding season was
                                discussed and any problems encountered were gone into in
                                some detail.   Inevitably there was a discussion of police
                                charges, not by way of suggestion that they were not met,
                      E         but as a general complaint that they were too high in
                                comparison with other clubs throughout the country.   The
                                clubs were informed at that meeting, which would take
                                place July or August, that in September of the year
                                under discussion, because of the pay rises given to the
          1                     police services, there would be an inevitable rise in the
                                charges.   The method of policing the grounds throughout
                                the following season was fully discussed.
                     F
                             Q. When the season started were police provided? - A. Yes.
                                When the season began the Divisional Commander of the
                                relevant Division would discuss generally with the
                                Secretary the numbers of police officers required to
                                police that particular game.    That, of course, would
                                depend, or the numbers would depend, upon the visiting
                                club and its reputation.   An agreed number of police
                     G          officers'was settled on.   I should point out that the
                                number of police officers who performed duty inside the
                                grounds was far greater in number than those actually
                                paid for by the club.

                             Q. Was any charge made for the services of police officers
                                who attended in the streets around soccer grounds? - A.
                     H
.                  LTD.                                        -   18 -
;<! S h o rth an d WrJter*
£FF1ELD S1 2DX
                              No.   The charges made against the football club were
                              purely and simply for officers engaged exclusively on
                 A            duties inside the ground.   The number of these officers
                              was often supplemented by these officers who had u n d e r ­
                              taken outside duties, duties outside the ground prior to
                              the game.   Once those duties were finished they would
                              go in to reinforce the police contingent inside the ground.

                         Q. Can I deal with another point arising out of that?                           vvhere
                              did the police manpower come from to police soccer matches?
                              Were you us i n g your normal caily manpower and diverting
                              it from other tasks or what was happening? - A . No, it
                             fw o u1d be impossible to do that given the ~&o3-±rrlTrg"~~"
                           ) j r eTTcrireceRt— a - f e - - ^ o o 11 g r o u n d .   In fact o fficers would
                           | perform d                         u                  t             wsr.e brought
                           a in--from rest day duties.                   In other words, had their
                           I" rest days cancelled or were retained on duty having completed
                           ’ a tour of duty or brought on early prior to beginning their
                              normal tour of duty.

                         Q. So e s sentially the policing work inside the ground is
                             being done by officers who a r e either w o rking rest days_or
                             working ov-agt-i-ise?- - A^rSsner;'allv speaking.     There were
                          I a number of officers already on duty who would perform
                          I duty in or around the ground, but generally speaking
                          f JLjisi^e~4^^— grxLund they would be cancelled rest day
                            jpersqnnel...   _ "       ~              ------------- ----— — ”*

                         Q. Would any plain clothes officer be deployed within the
                            ground? - A. They would be but they were not usually
                            charged.

                         Q.   I would like to pass next to the work that was actually
                 E            done inside the ground by officers who attended on match
                              days.    One task which they would obviously perform - I
                              think there is no dispute about this - would be to arrest
                              offenders and to prevent, so far as they were able, the
                              .•ommission of criminal offences? - A. Yes, of course.
       i.    ;

                         c        i icers on police duty inside the ground have other
                              * ^.^ponsibilities than those? - A. Yes, indeed.     Officers
                 F            w . o were on duty inside the ground, and again I would
                                  •-s the point that all those inside the ground were not
                              i^td for by the club, became in effect for the purpose
                              of the ground regulations, servants of the club.       There
                              are matters which are published in the ground regulations
                              which would not constitute by themselves an offence
                              against the law, such things as keeping the gangways
                              clear, such things as searching people before they come
                 G            into the ground.      The ground regulations said if they
                              were not prepared to be searched they would not be granted
                              admission.

                         Q. It might be helpful to look at the ground regulations of
                            the club.   I think this is at page 198 of the bundle.
                            Mr. Goslin, if we look at these regulations I think we
                 H          can find examples of the kind of   functions and duties

. HARPHAM, LTD.
»! ShcHlh»r*d W riter*                                         -   19 -
SFFIELD S I 2DX
     you refer to.   I think the first five regulations are
     really not germane.   They deal with questions such as
     admissions and matches which are cancelled because the
     weather is inclement, but number 6:

          "Unauthorised persons are not permitted to
          enter upon the field of play."

     That clearly is a main regulation.  Is that a regulation
     which officers would enforce? - A. Indeed, yes.

Q. I suppose there could be a number of reasons why someone
   might try and get on to the pitch?   It might be for
   the hostile purpose of attacking the player or official
   or simply in an attempt to congratulate a player who has
   just scored or displayed some piece of skill? - A. There
   are a variety of reasons.

          MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   If he is going to commit a
     criminal offence you do not need the ground regulations.

          MR. BENTLEY:   That is right, but I was simply seeking
     to make the point that many people who run on to the
     pitch might be in breach of regulations, but would not
     thereby commit a criminal offence:

Q. If we look to number 7 we find another regulation, this
     time dealing wit h the taking of photographs inside the
     ground.       The regulations prohibit that. Would the
     police concern themselves with that matter? - A. Had there
 ... ^c-t been a ground regulation we would not have concerned
     0‘.;r.R<?lves.

Q,           MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:    .That was not the question.
     Ti     ;^ being a ground regulation, would the police then
     o o r .:_ "n themselves? - A. Yes.

Q. If they saw me aiming a camera at somebody would they do
   something about it? - A. Yes, they would.

Q.        MR. BENTLEY:    Another item, regulation 8:   only
     persons specially authorised by Sheffield United are
     permitted to offer newspapers, periodicals or any other
     articles for sale at Bramall Lane.    If, for example, one
     of the club stewards or officials pointed out someone
     to a police officer and said, "That man over there is
     selling newspapers or rosettes and he is not authorised"
     would you expect one of your officers to deal with that?
     - A. Yes, I would, sir.

Q.    Then   unnecessary noise such   as that from the use of radio
     sets or behaviour likely to cause confusion of any kind,
     is not permitted in any part of the ground.    One of the
     types of behaviour that could cause confusion is somebody
     in the crowd wit h a whistle, blowing it and perhaps causing


                                -   20 -
                                 confusion on the field of play? - A . In which case I
                                 would expect one of my officers to take action under
                  A              the Ground R e g u l a t i o n s .

                              Q. Hatter      10 we have had reference to already:

                         j             "The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands
                         I              or other buildings in the ground is strictly
                         i              fo r b i dd e n . "

                         i       Is that a prohibition which officers would enforce? -
                         |
                                 A. Yes, indeed.

                              Q. Just as an example, if I was minded to try and get into
                                 a match without paying I might try and climb over the
                                 wall to get in.   Would Officers on duty be expected to
                                 deal with that? - A. Yes.
                   c
                              Q. So if I had paid to go on the terracing where one s t a n d s
                                 to watch the ma tc h and then attempted to climb up into
        ( ■
                                 the grandstand where there is a seat available, again is
                                 that something you r Officers would intervene to deal
                                 with? - A. Yes.

                              Q. And   11:
                     D                 "Offensive weapons, glasses, flags, banners and
                                        other similar articles are not permitted."

                                 What would be done about that Ground Regulation in
                                 practice? - A. We would enforce the Ground Regulation
                                 but for the offensive weapon we would resort to criminal
                                 law for that one.
                     E
                              Q. If you have got something like a banner - on the face
                                 of it no criminal offence? - A. The Ground Regulations,
                                 we would deal wit h it under rules.

         i       '            Q. During your time as Assistant Chief Constable was there
                                 ever concern about bottles of drink being brought into
                                 the ground by spectators? - A. Certainly.   The Officers
                     F           would be briefed prior to taking up duty at the ground
                                 that they would not allow people into the ground who
                                 were carrying bottles of liquor.

                              Q. The final Regulation we see here, number       12:

                                       "All persons entering Bramall Lane are admitted
                                        subject to the above Ground R e g u l a t i o n s , the
                     G                  bye laws of the City of Sheffield and the Rules
                                        and Regulations of the Football Association and
                                        Football League.   Sheffield United Football
                                        Club reserves the right to remove from the ground
                                        any person who does not comply with them or
                                        whose presence is a source of danger or annoyance
                                        to o t h e r s ."
                     H
 karpham .         lto.                                         - 21 -
; S h o r th a n d W riters
 ~SELO S t 20X
Would persons who broke the ground regulations be
ejected if they came to the notice of the police?
- A. Yes, they would.

     MR. BENTLEY:   If ve just go on a little further
in the bundle, I think your Lordship will see at the
end of the bundle two documents both headed, "Manpower
and Overtime Estimates for Policing Football Matches",
both have been served under the Civil Evidence Act.
I understand there Is no dispute about them:

Mr. Goslin, they deal with all the South Yorkshire clubs,
but it may be that page 206 is a page which may have
some relevance here.   I think this is a table which
purports to show club by club the action that police
officers have taken at grounds during the previous
season.   The first column dealing with arrests for
Public Order Act offences and then breach of the;
peace where nobody seems to have been arrested or
ejected at any of the grounds and then "Ejections under
Ground Regulations"? - A. Yes.

We see that Sheffield United - 70 home supporters and,
I assume, that is 16 away supporters, being ejected?
- A. Yes,that is what it means.

So that is people being taken out of the crowd and put
out of the grounds not because they have committed
criminal offences, but because they have offended against
the ground regulations? - A. Yes, sir.

Just for the sake of completeness, if we look at the next
document, which is the same analysis for the season
1 9 8 3 / 8 4 , page 215 of the bundle, I think we see in the
case of Sheffield United Public Order Act offences, 10
home supporters arrested, 7 away supporters arrested and
then "Ejections under Ground R e g u l a t io n s " , 55 home
supporters and 22 away supporters ejected.             This seems
to mirror the picture as far as this club is concerned
in the previous season, more people are put out because
they have breached the ground regulations, it would seem,
than are arrested for Public Order Act offences? - A.
Exactly.

This is a matter we can perhaps more conveniently deal
with when we look at some of the Minutes of the various
Working Parties there have been.   I think we shall find
evidence of discussion between the police on the one
hand and the clubs on the other, as to how the ground
regulations may be altered and improved to give a wider
power to ceal with people who, it is thought, are better
out of the ground than in it? - A. That is correct.

Can I turn from that to another matter?       How far were you,
           V




                          as a senior police offcer, responsible for the policing
                          of soccer matches, concerned with crowd safety, as opposed
                          to disorder, violence and criminality? - A. Crowd safety
                          took an equal amount of our concern, as did the enforcing
                          of the law.  One of our things we talked about is to
                          allow the match to be played to the comfort and safety
                          of the spectators.

                       Q. No doubt as we have already heard matters like crushes
               B          in the crowd and so on? - A. Ve would intervene to
                          relieve tha t pressure and crush.

                       Q. So the d o cuments are identified - I do not think at this
                          stage it is perhaps necessary to labour these at any
                          length - but in the bundle I think we can find at page
                          62 a document w h i c h is entitled "Standing Instructions
                          for the Po l i c i n g of Football M a t c h e s ” . This rather
                          long document sets out general instructions as to how
                          this impo r t a n t duty is to be discharged? - A. That is
                          correct, sir.

                       Q. In addition to standing instructions, it laid down the
                          policing policy, I think, for each football m a tc h which ~
                          was to be policed by your force an operation order would
                          be issued? - A. Yes, sir.
               D
                       Q. At page 78 of the bundle we see examples of just such an
                          order;   this being the operation order for the Sheffield
                          United/Portsmouth match to be held on the 15th of January,
                                 - A.            •Vif*

                       C. I think Mr. Goslin, as you have already indicated, during
                          your time there were complaints from the clubs about the
                          amount that t hey were required to pay for policing? - A.
                          That is right.

                       Q. I think this was not simply a complaint from Sheffield
                          U n i t e d , I think the other South Yorkshire clubs were
                          saying the same, "We are having to pay too much.              We
                          cannot real l y afford it.      Elsewhere in the country the
                          Police Autho r i t i e s do not charge clubs a n y t hi n g like as
                          much as we have to p a y ”? - A. That is correct.

                                MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     Can I understand where we
                         ' are?   This o p eration order is to be found at page 78.
                           How far does it continue into the bundle?

                               MR. BENTLEY:  It continues for a considerable
                          distance, up to page 101, my Lord.

                                   J U S-TICS 3 0?E H A M        So that is an operation
                          order for a singlee day?

                                MR.   BENTLEY:     My Lord, that is right.


               H                                            -   23 -
HARPHAM, LTD.
S ho f1h»nd W riter*
-F IE L D S I SOX
         MR. BENTLEY:      I would just like to trace the
history of this matter through briefly with the documents
if I nay.        It m a y be of assistance if we go to page 112
in the bundle.          I am not suggesting that this is the
first time this matter was ever voiced by the clubs
to the police, but perhaps it records a fairly important
m e e t i ng which I think you attended.     It is a meeting
held on the 8th of October, 15S2.          You attended, as
did the Vice Chairman of the Police Committee and a number
of other officers from your force attended.          We then
see listed the representatives of the local soccer clubs
who were also at this meeting, including                  |a
Director of Sheffield United and Mr. Chester the Secretary
of the club? - A. That is correct.

The purpose of the meeting was "To Discuss charges
Levied by the Police for Officers on Du t y at Football
M a t c h e s ” , that is the heading? - A. Yes. Mr. Chester
is no longer the Secretary of the football club.        He
was at that time.

If we just go through the Minutes briefly, item 2.
             Iwas Vice Chairman and he reminded those
present the m e e t i n g had been arranged in order that
representatives of the South Yorkshire Football Clubs
could put forward their ideas for a l le v i a t i ng some of
the financial burden placed upon them by the policing
of matches.     The meeting would be a l i stening brief
to the points of view of those present.          Then item 3,
Mr. McGee,  Chairman of Sheffield Wedn e s da y starts the
ball rolling by stated that it was rather for football
clubs to speak with one voice, they were unanimous in
respect of police charges, condemning them as being
excessive.    Mr. McGee       then asked why the football
clubs in South Yorkshire were being mace to pay two
to five times more than clubs in other areas for
the policing of their grounds.         Then it was recorded
as giving an answer to Mr. M c G e e ’s   question, Mr.
Goslin stated that the Forces were not a s king a
realistic amount when one considers all the attnedant
circumstances surround the policing of matches, not
least of which is the increase in the salary of
police officers.         The meeting proceeds, according to the
Minutes and for my purposes if I refer you to item 8
in the Minutes.         We see in this item you saying, half
way down item 8:

     " H e . .."

T h a t ’s you:

       "...then outlined the criteria which operated
       in South Yorkshire, a copy of which had been
       circulated to all clubs, stating this criteria
       was being looked at again, but it was felt the
       u nderlying problem was the inconsistency of
       charges throughout the country."
          The meeting continues and winds up at page 116
     with Mr. HcC-ee placing it on record that the visiting
     clubs were always most complimentary about the manner
     in which South Yorkshire Police Officers policed their
     football grounds.

          The matter continues in some of the other Minutes
     that we have but it may well be that we can go next to
     page 122.   I think this is a m e e t i n g of the Working
     Group on the effects of professional football on'the
     community, held 15th December, 1982.         Representatives
     of the Police Committee a t t e n d , as do certain other
     local Councillors and then representatives of each of the
     clubs, including Mr. Chester, the Company Secretary of
     Sheffield United? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think we can see at             the foot of the page that the
   Terms of Reference of             the Wor k i n g Group are set out (a)
   to examine the charges for police services in South
   Yorkshire, p a r t i c u l a r l y .where attendances fall below an
   agreed pre-determined level and...

Q.        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:    What does (a) mean, where
     the attendances have fallen below what was estimated?
     - A. One of the concerns of the smaller football clubs
     was that the criteria laid down started at a small
     numbered crowd, so if they had an  attendance of 45,000
     they would have to pay an initial figure which would
     be far in excess of a realistic figure.   What they were
     asking for is the basic criteria before police charges
     started, to be raised.

Q.         MR. BENTLEY:    I wonder if we can next go to page
     136 in the bundle?     I think we can see this is a
     meeting of the Working Group on the 28th of January,
     1983.    Representatives of the Police Committee and the
     Local Authority and the clubs and, on this occasion,
                     [ a Director of Sheffield United attends on
     behalf of that club, as dees Mr. Chester the Company
     Secretary.    We can see item 2 is "Charges for Police
     Services" and the item reads:

         "At the m e e t i n g on 15th December, the Chief
          Constable had been requested to prepare a report
          on the present criteria for levying charges for
          police, possible future criteria, the extent of
          co-operation between the clubs and the police,
          and the extent of community related activities
          already being undertaken by the clubs.

          The Working Group considered a report
          i ncorporating the information requested.

          Whilst the effect of the revised criteria could
          not be estimated with a n y real certainty (the
          football clubs being charged retrospectively,
          based on the actual number of spectators

                                     -   25 -
           present), it was likely that the total annual
           charges to Football League Clubs in South
           Yorkshire would be reduced by seine £50,000 per
           annum.11

     I think the criteria referred to there, which it is
     hoped will produce that saving as far as the clubs are
     concerned, is the one which appears at page 140? - A.
     That is correct.

Q.    It is one of the annexes to the report.   It sets out a
     formula for calculating charges which really depends
     upon the level which the crowd attains at the match;
     the more people go the higher the charges will be
     because more officers will be charged for? - A. That is
     correct.

Q.   Finally, following that through to page   142, on the 2nd
     of June, 1983 we find the Working Group meeting, again
     representatives of the Police Committee present and Mr.
     Chester the Company Secretary of Sheffield United also
     attends.   Item 2 is "Charges for Police Services” .
     Effectively I think the clubs are being told, and this
     appears in the recommendation, that this new scale of
     charges had been approved by the Police Committee, will
     be brought in, but only with effect from the 1st of
     April, X9S3? - A. That is correct.

Q. I think that is the first recommendation that the
   implementation of the revised scale of charges for the
   services of the police at football matches from the 1st
   of April, 1SS3, be noted and then the clubs are
   requested in item 2 to settle their accounts.   I do not
   think the clubs were over happy at finding the new scale
   of charges was only to have effect from the 1st of
   April, but that is what the Police Committee had decided
   and that is what the clubs were being told? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. Really by this time am I right in thinking the situation
   was this, the clubs had said to the Police Authority,
   "We are having to pay too much” .  The Authority had
   looked at the method of calculating the levying charges
   and had produced a new formula which would give some
   relief to the clubs? - A. That is correct.

Q. They were being told this new scheme would come into
   effect from the 1st of April, 1983.   I think now having
   revised the charges in some measure the Police Authority
   were now taking the stance, "Well, we have revised
   charges, we now want what is owing, paid”? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. I think you were in this situation by the middle of
   1983, that quite a large debt had built up in respect of
   each of five clubs who had not made payments whilst this
   negotiation was continued? - A. That is correct.


                            -   26 _
          MR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, I wonder if it might be
   convenient next just to go to the correspondence in this
   case and see how it builds up?   Most of it is standard
   form and need not occupy any Court time:

Q. I think if one goes to page 151 of the bundle first. I
   appreciate this is not a document that comes from you,
   Mr. Goslin, but just locking   at the document it isclear
   what it is.   It is a letter   in October, 1973 to
   Sheffield United telling them that they are going to
   have to pay higher charges from the 1st of October, 1973
   for the policing of football matches? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Of course, that letter would follow a decision taken at
   the Police Committee which we would find in the Minutes
   we have looked at? - A. That   is correct.

Q. If we go through the pages that follow, 152, we find a
   letter to the same effect of January, 1975.   153 is a
   letter of the 18th December, 1975 telling of a further
   increase and then I think the first letter from the club
   at page 154, signed by the then Secretary              to
   the then Chief Constable Mr. Barratt, acknowledging the
   letter of 18th December, telling them the charges are
   going to be increased.   Paragraph 2 reads:

          "It is noted that the revised charges are
          effective from 1st November, 1975.   This
          decision will cause this Club and others in the
          area difficulty as we have all to obey Football
          League Regulations or be subject to a fine.    The
          Regulation calls for the disbursement of the gate
          receipts less expenses (including Police Charges)
          which are obtained by telephone in advance of the
          monthly statement from your Accounts Office.
          These payments must be made within six days of
          the match being played and obviously as you will
          gather, the monies for the month of November and
          early December have been sent to the Clubs and
          League respectively.   We understand that the
          first match we were advised of the new charges
          was the Manchester United game on 13th December.

          Accordingly, we ask that special consideration be
          given to the waiving of the additional charges
          for matches on 1st November v Manchester City;
          15th November v Leicester City and 6th December v
          Tottenham Hotspur, because of the special
          circumstances outlined above."

   The comments of the Chief Constable are asked for and I
   think his reply, and this would be from your predecessor
   no doubt, reference ACC:

                          -   27 -
       "Dear

      Thank you for your letter...

      I can advise you that the matter was discussed by
      the Police Authority at their meeting on 9
      December 1975, who gave careful consideration to
      the question of a retrospective increase and
      decided upon 1 November 1975, when in fact the
      pay rises prompting the increased charges took
      effect on 1 September 1975.

      I regret therefore that the effective date cannot
      be changed but there is no objection to the use
      of this correspondence in seeking recompense from
      the Football League and the clubs involved."

Then I think we find another letter from            at
page 156, a letter dated 21st September, 1976, to Mr.
Barratt, the then Chief Constable:

       "I am writing to ask you for sympathetic
       consideration concerning our ground policing
       requirements here at Bramall Lane.

      In recent months we have had many discussions
      with Superintendent Lambert (Woodseats) of your
      Kackenthorpe Division regarding this subject.
      My Chairman, | ^              ]is of the opinion
      that the policing requirements should be as per
      the Home Office circular, i.e. one constable per
      thousand spectators and in recent weeks as there
      has been a severe drop in the average number of
      spectators attending matches here at Bramall Lane,
      we have asked Superintendent Lambert to revise
      the basic police numbers attending for duty on
      match days.    Our average gate is now
      approximately 15 - 16,000 and it is my Chairman's
      considered opinion that a force of 15 police
      constables plus the appropriate supervision is
      the correct number for which the club should pay
      in our present financial circumstances."

Then he asks that the matter be considered and would
like these revised numbers to operate with effect from
the 25th September when there is a match against
Blackburn Rovers.

       The reply from the Assistant Chief Constable is
dated three days later, the 24th September, 1976:

       "Dear

       Thank you for your letter of 21 September 1976,
       about policing requirements at Bramall Lane.  I
       fully appreciate the Club's changed circumstances
       and would wish to be as helpful as possible.
            . ■X\




                    A                Nevertheless, my concern is with the public
                                     safety and I regard the old yardstick of one
                                     policeman per 1,000 crowd to be entirely
                                     irrelevant to the current situation which has
                                     unfortunately altered so dramatically since that
                                     formula was suggested.   There are matches for
                                     which this criterion is acceptable and there are
                                     others for which it quite clearly is not.
                    B
                                     We need to judge each game on its merits and
                                     recommend police coverage accordingly.1'

                              He then says in the final paragraph:

                                     •'The number of police officers for the Blackburn
                                     Rovers fixture has, I understand, been agreed to
                                     our mutual satisfaction and we will view future
                                     fixtures appropriately.    I hope to come along to
                                     Bramall Lane very soon when perhaps I could have
                                     a discussion with              to iron out any
                                     further points."

                              Then at page 158, one of the standard letters telling
                              the club that the rate of charge is going up.    This
                    D!        time it is a letter dated November 1977, page 159.
                              A similar sort of letter for 197 8, October of that year,
                              page 160.   It has a different format but it is the same
                              kind of letter, a letter of 12th July, 1979 saying the
                              rates are to be increased as set out.

                          i          Page 161, another letter dated 17th October,
                          i
                              1979, containing the same information that charges are
                    E         going up and then a circular letter, page 162, sent to
                              all the football clubs in South Yorkshire, dated 5th of
                              June, 1980:

                                     "Dear Sir,

                                     In order to ensure that we are able to properly polic?
                                     forthcoming football events, having regard to the
                    F                problems of public safety, crowd violence etc.,
                                     we have recalculated what we consider to be the
                                     appropriate number of police officers to be
                                     employed inside the ground.

                                     The policing levels as from 1 July 1980, will be
                                     charged at the special services rate applicable
                                     in relation to the crowd attendance as set out
                    Gi               on the attached schedule.   Where the number of
                                     spectators is likely to be less than one thousand
                                     the police cover will be negotiated separately on
                                     each occasion.

                                     For the purpose of the calculation referred to in
                                     relation to crowd figures in excess of one
                    H                thousand it is proposed that we round up to the
                                     nearest thousand any number between five hundred
. HARPHAM. LTD                       and one and nine hundred and ninety-nine.
jI   Shprth»r>d Writer*

F.FF1ELD S1 2DX
                                                     -   29 -
          I have written this far in advance of the new
          season so that you have a reasonable amount of
          time to properly consider the financial c o n s e ­
          quences of our decision."

     Then on the 3rd D e c e m b e r , 1$80, a letter from the Chief
     Constable to the Secretary of the Sheffield United Club
     which is really dealing with the question of increases
     which have taken place and are about to take place in
     the charges levelled.           It is a rather fuller letter
     than the earlier one.

          The 6th of April, 1981, page 16*», and this is a
     letter referring to previous correspondence concerning
     the approved charges for the hire of police officers and
     paragraph 2 says:

          "However, a recent survey has shown that the
          charges for the North East Region were s u b s t an ­
          tially below those charged by other police forces
          and it has been agreed that new standard rates
          should come into effect on 1st May, 1981.      Details
          of the n e w rates are shown in the Appendix to this
          letter."

     In   fact I think we have seen that particular item appearing
     inthe Police Committee    Minutes when we looked at those?
     - A. That is right.

Q. Then it goes on to deal with the method of calculation.

Q.        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Which is the north-east
     region? - A. That is the number 2 region referred to in
     the Police Committee Minutes.

Q.        MR. BENTLEY:   Mr. Goslin, at page 165 there is a
     letter dated Ulth September, 1981, telling the club that
     the charge rate is going up.

          A similar letter dated 23rd September, 1982, again
     notifying the club that the rate of charges is to increase.

          Page 167, a letter to the club dated 6th October, 1982
     telling the club the new charges have been approved by the
     Police Committee and on the 10th November, 1982, a letter
     from the Assistant Chief Constable, that is yourself? -
     A. Yes, it is.'

Q. To Mr. Chester, reducing the charge for one particular
   match, a match against Manchester City, to £500.

          MR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, in fact we see this
     reduction reflected in the invoice at page 3*J:

Q. The reason you reduced it was that this was a friendly
   match, which was attended by a comparatively low crowd?
   - A. That is right.

                                  -   30 -
        A
            \



                             Q. Special considerations which led the Police Authority
                                to be prepared to reduce the charges on that occasion?
                                - A. That is right.

                             Q. At page 169 we have got letters from you to the Secretary
                                of Sheffield United... - A. Not from me, sir.

                             Q. I am looking a t the extension                    ? - A.
                                Hy name has no      at the end.                 is an
                  B             Officer with the County Council.

                             Q. I should have realised.     The County Council Legal Section
                                requesting payment of the sum then owing £37,000, following
                                it another letter at the end of March, over £50,000 by
                                now.   There is a document exhibited to that at page 171
                                setting out h o w the sum is made up.

                                     Page 172 is a letter from the club but it is not
                                germane to the issue.

                                      Page 173, 8th June, 1983, the County Treasurer is •
                                again asking Sheffield United to pay the amount that is
                                owing in respect of police charges.    Then on the 13th
                                of July of 1583 Mr. Chester at Sheffield United is being
                                told by the County Treasurer that a proposal which the
                   D            Chairman of Sheffield Wednesday, Mr. McGee, has sent
                                on behalf of all the South Yorkshire clubs that the amounts
                                due for the 1982/83 season be paid by ten monthly i n s t a l ­
                                ments commencing in September, 1983, is quite unacceptable;
                                pointing out the amount due has accumulated since August
                                1582.

                                     Then on the 1st of August, 1983, we have the County
                                Treasurer writing to all the five clubs in South Yorkshire
                                saying that if they do not pay legal action will have to
                                be taken.

                                     The 8th of August, 1983, a letter from the Chief
                                Executive of the County Council enclosing a schedule of
                                outstanding accounts and threatening proceedings if they
                                are not paid.   This produced a response from the club,
                                from Mr. Chester, dated 11th August, 1983.   It may be
                                worth reading this letter in full:

                                     "Further to recent correspondence and negotiations
                                     Sheffield United would like to clarify their position
                                     by indicating their acceptance of any agreed m e t ho d
                                     of payment, endorsed by the remaining four South
                                     Yorkshire Football C l u b s , relative to police charges
                                     due.

                                     It is anticipated that agreement to settle those
                                     charges due in no way impairs or prevents continued
                                     negotiations between the South Yorkshire County
                                     Council andSouth Yorkshire Clubs to arrive at a
                                     more reasonable level of retrospective charges and
                    H                to bring about an equalisation compatible with the
                                     remainder of the County.
WAR PM AM.        LTO .
ShC H ihv nd W r i t e r s
                                                           - 31 -
~ F1ELD S1 2 0 X
          A
             \




                                          Figures have been provided by the Clubs to
                   A                      give your Authority an indication of the anomalies
                                          prevailing.   In the case of Sheffield United*s
                                          experience within Division 3 of the Football League
                                          the percentage of police charges to gross gate income
                                          during season 8 2 / 8 3 represented an average of
                                          13*79 as against an average of 5.41 away from
                         »                Bramall Lane.     Based on the figures presented
                         f
                                          a charge of 5.41$ of gross gate income
                   B;
                    i                     would represent a police account for l e a g u e *
                          i               matches of £15,484.45, an over charge to existing
                                          charges of £24,001.41.       Surely a sufficiently
                                          high anomaly to justify some considerable revision.

                                          As an individual Club we have entered into
                                          correspondence with both the Home Secretary and
                     c                    Minister of Sport.   Resulting from same we have
                                          been advised that special police services are
                                          provided upon the request of the organisation
         (       >
                                          requiring such services.   In the interest of
                                          public relations between our Club and the Police
                                          our ground has always been available as an open
                                          door to the Police force at their discretion.   We
                                          feel that being charged for discretionary policing
                       i                  is not within the spirit, or the law, as advised.
                     d !                  Especially as a non-designated g r o u n d . ”
                              i

                                     That is a reference to football grounds which are designated
                                     as grounds in respect of which a Safety Certificate is
                                     required? - A. That is correct, a Division 1and Division 2.

                                  Q > L - I n k attached to that letter    were certain   statistics
                                        applied by the club supporting     the argument   that they
                     E                    - j-d there.

                                            That produces on 19th August, at page 180, a
                                     ic ; ,‘nse from the Chief Executive saying in effect that
                                     ths charges are not going to be reduced but offering at
                                     the "r.ottom of the page payment by instalment:

                     F                   "I am instructed to say that the County Council
                                           will accept payment as set out below and will
                                           not issue proceedings provided these payments
                                           are received on the due date s .”

                                     Then on page 181 we see the instalments which are required
                                     and the dates on which they are required to be paid.

                     G                    Then on the 25th August, 1983, another letter advising
                                     the rate of charge is to be increased.   31st August, 1983
                                     a letter from the Club signed by Mr. Chester:

                                          "We thank you for your letter dated 19th August 1983
                                           and enclose herewith our eheaue to the value of
                                           £14,173."
                     H                                          -   32 -
  KAftPHAM, LTD.
• I S h o rth a n d Writer*

iTFFJELDSI 2DX
         J.
        ' V




                             So that is the first instalment that the Chief
                  A          Executive was asking for in his last letter? - A.
                             Yes.

                           Q. It goes on:

                                  "This payment is being made without prejudice
                                   to any action we, or you, may wish to take over the
                                   question of retrospection of police charges.  A
                  B                matter we are still in disagreement over and
                       I           which is the subject of continuing talks between
                       I           u s .11

                              Then on the 5th September,      1983, at page 184 and the
                              6th September, 1 9 8 3 ...

                  C                MR. GRIFFITHS:        I do not want to create any
                              difficulties and it may be that it is my fault, but
        ('    '
                              the numb e ri n g in m y bundle appears to be totally
                              different to my learned f r ie n d’s.    I think the
                              reason for this is that during the luncheon adjournment
                              I was provided with further documents to add to my
                              bundle.     I did not appreciate that that entailed the
                              re-numbering of all the other documents.        I wonder
                              if my learned friend could draw attention to the
                  D           old n umbering as well as the new?

                                   MR.   BENTLEY:   Yes, of course:

                           Q. I think these next two letters which are the County
                              C o u n c i l ’s own documents really deal with the question
                              of the costs.          I do not think we need to trouble with
                              that, and the same with page 186.          At page 187 we do
                  E           get a letter of some importance, 14th O ct o ber, 1983»
                              It is a letter from the new Club Chairman,
                              to Mr. Wright, the Chief Constable:

        i                         "Further to our telephone conversation I write
                                   to request that the invoices be cancelled in
                                   respect of police services inside the Ground,
                  F                apart from the specific requests for such
                                   services that we made by letter during last
                                   season.

                                    Sheffield United Football Club is not a designated
                                    ground and as such doesnot come within the Safety/
                                    Sportsground Act, which is restricted to the First
                                    and Second Divisions.
                  G
                                    When I became Chairman in the 1981/82 Season, I
                                    wrote to the the Home Secretary, Mr. Whitelaw,
                                    in connection with Police charges, and he made
                                    it perfectly clear that the Police entered the
                                    ground at the request of the Club and as such
                                    payment would rest entirely with the Police
                                    Committee of the appropriate Local Authority.
                  H
 HARPHAM, LTD.
•? Shorthand Writer*                                      -   33 -
•T F IE L C S1 2DX
                                     During the 1982/83 Season, which is the one
                                     in question, I took particular care to write
                                     to your Office and request Police Services on
                                     the occasions when the Club considered we Eight
                                     have difficulties in controlling the "local
                                     Derby" crowd, and for such occasions we
                                     naturally are prepared to pay for such services,

                                     We have never, nor would we ever, deny access
                    B                to our private property to the Police, for we
                                     realise that to do so could result in yourself
                                     requesting the cancellation of a match, if, in
                                     your opinion, a Police presence was necessary
                                     inside the ground.

                                     As an ex-member of a Police Committee, I would
                                     always support the Chief C o n s ta b le ’s recommendations
                                     on such m a t t e r s , but the invoices rendered are
                                     for services that were not requested within the
                                     framework of the law, as it stands at the
                                     present time.

                                     With reference to the charges made for matches where
                                     Police presence was requested, we consider these to
                                     be too high, when compared with other Clubs
                    D                and other Counties.    The charges made by South
                                     Yorkshire Police constitute between 13 and 16$ of
                                     our total gate receipts, as against neighbouring
                                     counties., whose charges, on a recent survey, show as
                                     low as 1 and 2%     This is a matter I intend to
                                     tak e up with the County Council in the near future.

                                     I do not wish to become involved with the Local
                                     Authority at this stage, and request that you
                                     seek guidance from The Home Office on the
                                     question of Police Services inside the ground, in
                                     particular to our non-designated ground, when such
                                     services have not been requested.

                                     Many thanks for understanding our situation."

                                     First of all, Mr. Goslin, can you help about this?
                                In paragraph 1              talks about writing letters
                                specifically requesting police services for particular
                                matters.   Have you any recollection of ever seeing such
                                letters? - A. None whatsoever.   I cannot find them in
                                the files.

                                      MR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, we are very nearly at the
                                 end of this correspondence, but at page 189 we do come
                                 to another letter which is of some importance:

                              Q. It is a letter from                     dated the 26th October,
                                 1983 to the Chief Constable:


                     H                                      -   34   -


 HARPHAM, LTD.
! S h o r th a n d W riter*
; -F IE L D S1 2DX
     "Dear

        I have given further thought to the question
        of police at football matches and wonder
        whether you would agree to close circuit
        television cameras operating all round the
        ground;  operating from a central control
        room, either at the top of the stand or in the
        present police setup at the ground.

        If we were to install such apparatus, then it
        could be argued that there is no necessity for
        police to be within the ground, but would be
        outside and in readiness for any problem that
        may occur.   Although a presence within the
        ground could still be requested for the 11local
        Derby" matches.

        Your thoughts on the matter would be a p p r e c i a t e d ,
        as I note that a police presence w ithin the ground
        is still operating at great strength;    albeit at
        no cost to us."

        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   What does that last bit
mean,    "albeit at no cost to us"?

     MR. BENTLEY:   I think what is meant, although I am
speculating, is that in view of his last letter
has cast on the Police Authority for the future the burden
   paying for any policing they provide.

        MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:      Yes, I see.

     MR. BENTLEY:   Then going to page 190» o r iginally
page 183, I think this is a letter,               from you
- A. It is a letter from the Chief Constable.

It is, yes.        I would like to deal with the first two
para g ra p hs :

        I refer to your letter dated 14 October 1983,
        and having looked into the implications am now
        in a position to reply more fully.

        I know that Mr. Goslin, my Assistant Chief
        Constable (Operations), together with Chief
        Superintendent B r o o m h e a d , had a meet i ng with
        you in your office and discussed the general
        situation in relation to the policing of foot­
        ball matches, and in confirmation I would make
        the following comments."

Just to try and jog your memory and set the thing in
context, if we go back to the previous letter of the 26th
October. 1983 .     I think this is you endorsing and notin g
               ’s letter to the Chief Constable asking to
speaic t.o m m and really effectively saying that it is
   time we spoke to              about whether he wants
   the police at the ground or not? - A. That is correct.

Q. Do you recall following that letter, the l etter of the
   26th October, 1983, having a meeting with
   - A. Y e s , I do.;

Q. Can you tell his Lordship about that meeting? - A. As
   a result of the letter received on the 26th October,
   the Chief Constable, following our discussions, directed
   me to seek a mee ti n g with              Ito discuss the
   whole situation.      At that meeting i explained to
                the provisions of Section 10 of the Safety
   of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and the implications to his
   football club were police officers not to attend.       The
   provisions of that section allowed the Local Authority
   to seek an Injunction against an organisation such as
   a football club if they consider safety measures are
   inadequate.

        MR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, we have a copy of the Act.
   It is Section 10 of the Act.   I wonder if I could just
   hand that in to your Lordship?

        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:         This is an application to ths
   Magistrates' Court?

        MR. BENTLEY:      That is right.

        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   The M a g i s t r a t e s ’ Court do not
   issue Injunctions.   It was rather a broad use of the thing

        MR. BENTLEY:      The effect is very similar, but not
   an Injunction:

Q. So, Mr. Goslin, you had drawn                 s attention
   to that provision at this meeting? - A. Yes, I did.     I
   then went on to discuss w i t h t h e            financial
   implications of the South YorKsnire Foiice supplying
   police officers for his football club without recompense.
   I pointed out there was a budget to which the Chief
   Constable had to operate, that this took account of the
   fact that revenue would be received from football clubs
   and that as they were a commercial private organisation
   seeking the services of policemen at a function organised
   by them then they were liable for charges, as special
   service police o f ficers under S ection 15 of the Police
   Act.   I reminded.                that the subject of charges
   was under discussion and had been discussed with the
   County Council.

Q. Following the meet i ng with                   we then get the
   letter from the Chief Constable,         pages 190 and 191.

        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   I do not understand that.
   The note on page 189 is not dated until the 4th of November


                                 -   36 -
That is after the Chief Constable's letter and it would
seem t h a t h a d         not then been seen?

     MR. BENTLEY:    I wonder if you could assist? - A.
Yes, the dates - I can agree only that my note on the
4th November is correct, but I had several meetings with
             and the meeting referred to in the letter
from the Chief Constable on the 27th October was a meeting
which took place with               and Chief Superintendent
Broomhead in order to discuss the whole question-of finance
at Sheffield United.

     MR. BENTLEY:   I think I can help.       If one goes back
to page 187 one s e e s | ' s       letter of the 14th
October.   If one follows through to page 190 one sees the
letter from the Chief Constable dated the 27th October,
1983 referring to that letter of the 14th October and
saying "I note Mr. Goslin has had a m e e t i n g with you in
your office".   My Lord, I think the whole ma tter is
really explained.

        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   What you are saying is that
pages    190-191, that is not replying to page 189?

     MR. BENTLEY:    Exactly.  There is a letter on the
8th November at page 193 making that clear because it
says at paragraph 2:

      "I can only presume that your letter of 26
       O c t o b e r ... was written before you had received
       m y letter dated 27 October."

        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:      That is not surprising, is
it?

     MR. BENTLEY:   No, not surprising at all.            That is
the cause of the confusion.

        MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:   I think I can see now.

     MR. BENTLEY:   Mr. Goslin, just dealing with the
letter of the 27th October, and I think without going
through it and my learned friend if there is anything
germane will no doubt refer to it, really is setting
out broadly the matters which you have told his Lordship
about? - A. Yes, indeed.

Bearing S e c t i on 10 of the 1975 Act in mind and so on.
                  gets a reply
                           A % to his letter suggesting
                                               >11m
                                                  )W        that
closed circuit television be used, the letter of 26th
October, 1983, on the 8th November, 1983.            The final
paragraph says:

      "The provision of CCTV facilities both inside
       and outside football grounds for crowd control
       purposes already applies in various parts of the
              -I



                                           country, is of great assistance to the police
                    A                      and in that connection your comments are most
                                           helpful.   Such equipment however is always
                                           used as an aid for the police and in no way
                                           reduces the requirement for a physical police
                                           presence inside the ground as now occurs."

                                     A. Yes.

                     BI           Q. On page  194 there is a letter from                  to the
                                     Chief Constable dated 25th N o v e m b e r , 19^3:

                                          "Dear Mr. Wright,

                                           I have now heard from Home Secretary in reply
                                           to my query in connection with police charges.
                     C                     As we are meeting next Thursday, 1st December,
                                           1983, I will bring along photostat copy of his
          (                                letter which more or less confirms the position
                                           I have taken all along in connection with
                                           police charges..."

                                           MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:        What is that?

                     D                    MR. BENTLEY:   As I understand it, if you do not
                              \      invite the Police you do not have to pay for them:
                              t


                                  Q. It goes on:

                                          "...albeit no different than the previous Home
                                           S e c r e t a r y ’s letter.
                     E                     I acknowledge your letter of 8th November, 1 9 8 3
                                           and although I discussed police operations in the
                                           ground with Mr. Gosling, the Assistant Chief
                                           Constable and Chief Superintendent Broomhead I
                                           still take the same view that charges in an
                                           undesignated ground are not lawful unless a
                                           specific request for police presence is made
                     F                     and I confirm that we have not made such a
                                           request apart from three matches during last
                                           season and this season."

                                     What was the upshot of that letter when it was received?
                                     What was done by the Chief Constable's office when that
                                     letter was received? - A. The letter of the 25th November
                                     was recei ved by the Chief Constable.   As I can recall,
                     G               it was not discussed with me because matters which were
                                     referred to in there were already in hand by the South
                                     Yorkshire County Council, that is, the recovery of charges.

                                  Q. It is the final part of that letter where really what seems
                                     to be being said is "if we have not made the request we do
                                     not have to p a y " , what was the situation to be as regards
                                     future matches, as you understood it at that time? - A.
                     H
 HARPHAM, LTD.
! S h o r th a n d W riter*                                          -   38 -
FFIELO S1 2DX
               ./




                                    As I recall I then went t o Sheffield United Football Ground
                                    and spoke to              and discussed the whole situation
                                    with him and again reiterated the possibility of my having
                                    to go to the Local Authority under Ssetion 10 of the
                                    Safety at Sports GroundsAct if we did not send policemen
                                    in there.    In other words, if no request was made for the
                                    police presence.

                               Q. In the end the matter was resolved in this way:  when told
                       B          point blank if they did not make a request an application
                                  would be made to the Magistrares' Court, a request was
                                  ultimately made by the club for police services for the
                                  match that was in the offing against Bolton Wanderers?
                                  - A. That is right.

                                         MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:         Where do I find these
                                    telexes?

                                         MR. BENTLEY:     Your Lordship will find these in the
                                    Defendant's bundle.

                                         MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:       They are not in the Crown
                                    bundle?

                                         MR. GRIFFITHS:   They are in bundle 3 at page 129 and
                       D            following pages.

                               Q.        MR. BENTLEY:     Just one other matter that emerges,
                                    I think, from some of the other papers we have got.     One
                                    of the forms of liaison which took place during your ter m
                                    of ' 'ice between local soccer clubs and the police was
                                          ;Iding of joint meetings to discuss problems like
                                    .   h--vll hooliganism and football problems? - A. Yes,


                               Q.              upshot of a course of meetings that took place a
                                    pronf->.*xl that the Ground Regulations be amended to give
                                    the > r^ ice wider powers to turn people out of the ground?
                                    - A. I cannot recall whether a proposal was made.      I
                                    can recall the m atter was discussed certainly in r el ation
                                    to the searching of people who wished to go into the
                                    ground.

                               Q. I think there is a document in bundle 3 that can conveniently
                                  be looked at at this point.   It is page 77.   This is a
                                  letter from you to Mr. Chester dated 12th August, 1981:

                                        "Dear Dick,

                                         I refer to our mee t in g held last Friday at Force
                                         Headquarters and am forwarding to you as promised
                                         the wording of a ground regulation which we would
                                         ask your Board of Directors to consider for
                                         inclusion at your football club -


                       H                                          -   39 -
 HARPHAM, LTD.
[ S h o r th a n d   Writ***
FFIELD S I 2DX
             1




                                      'The Club reserves the right for its servants
                                      and agents and formembers of the police forces
                                      to deny access to or to remove from this
                                      Ground any person who does not comply with
                                      ground regulations and with the rules and
                                      regulations of the Football .Association and
                                      the Football League or whose presence on
                                      the ground is or could reasonably be construed
                                      as constituting a source of d a n g e r , nuisance
                    B                 or annoyance to other spectators.'

                                       I hope that this will prove to be satisfactory and
                                       that we can look forward to its implementation in
                                       due course."

                                  I think that is Regulation 12? - A. That is right.

                                      MR.   BENTLEY:   Yes, if you would wait there please.

                                            Cross-Examined by    MR. G R I F F I T H S :

                              Q. Can I get from you one point, I hope, of agreement, that
                                 over theyears the relations between the Police Force in
                                 which you were the Assistant Chief Constable and the
                                 Sheffield United Club have been very good? - A. Indeed
                    D            yes, they have.

                              Q. Leaving aside the issue of principle in this case, there
                                 has been the closest co-operation by the club in assisting
                                 the Police in any way that they could? - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. That co-operation has gone outside the mere policing of
                                 grounds, it has embraced discussions on how the community
                                 could become more involved in football, particularly at
                                 times of high unemployment and so on? - A. That is correct.

                              Q. It would be fair to say that the issue of principle in this
                                 case is not between the Police and Sheffield United, it is
                                 between the Police Committee for South Yorkshire and the
                                 club for being, as it were, the paymasters? - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. You heard Mr. Marshall giving evidence this morning and
                                 describing, or agreeing, that since the fifties and sixties
                                 compared with today, the Police and, indeed, the clubs, are
                                 facing a very different situation so far as crowd control
                                 is concerned. - Is that your experience too? - A. Yes,
                                 indeed.

                              Q   In those'days there was really little need for more than
                                  the minimum of policing with the odd bad egg? - A. Yes,
                                  that is correct.

                              Q. You heard me read to him a description of the game in 1980
                                 between Sheffield Wednesday and Oldham.   You, of course,
                                 were in this Force at the time? - A. Yes.   I think that game
                     H           took place at Oldham.

 HARPHAM, LTD.                                               -   40   -
1 S h o r t h a n d Wrtterv

AFIELD S I 2DX
             i

                              Q. You were in the Force at the time? - A. Yes.
                    A
                              Q. No doubt that and similar incidents have come to your
                                 attention in your professional capacity? - A. Yes, indeed.

                              Q. Is it the unfortunate fact that every season at several
                                 grounds there have been, in recent years, incidents amounting
                                 almost to riot? - A. Yes, sir.

                     B        Q. I am not picking on Sheffield Wednesday, despite -my
                                 paymaster today, but in 1981 Sheffield W e d n es d ay had a
                                 confrontation in Luton in which their coaches were destroyed
                                 within the ground? - A. Yes.

                              Q. Then another local club, Barnsley, it had a wave of
                                 destruction in Barnsley when Newcastle came to visit in
                                 October, 1981? - A. Yes, sir.
                     C
                              Q. A local derby in November, 1981, Rotherham and Barnsley,
                              ^ the police were involved in going in and out of the
                                 crowd almost throughout the game? - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. In February, 1982 Sheffield United and Scunthorpe, a lot
                                 of trouble in the town and then the Police having to go
                                 on to the terraces in order to break up contesting fans?
                                 - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. I will not go through the rest right up to the present day.
                                 With clubs involved in this area and other clubs there
                                 have teen like incidents? - A. Yes, there have.

                              Q. Now the development of this public law and order problem
                                 has led to a number of committees, culminating recently in
                     E!          the Inquiry by Mr. Justice Popplewell.   However, prior to
                                 that there had been Home Office and other committees looking
                                 at the proper way for the police and the clubs to deal with
                                 that situation? - A. Yes, that is correct.
          i
                              Q. Officer, I do not suppose it will be of any controversy,
                                 is the essential of policing football m atches to
                     F           segregate the home supporters as much as possible from
                                 the visiting supporters? - A. As a rule, yes, sir.

                              Q. For instance,    at Bramall Lane, the Bramall Lane end of the
                                 g r o un d ...

                                      MR. GRIFFITHS:   My Lord, your Lordship will find a
                                 map at page 2 of bundle 3:
                      G
                              Q. If we look at that, Mr. Gcslin, the left hand end is
                                 the Bramall Lane end, the right hand end the Kop.  South
                                 Stand with car park.   Behind it is the Bramall Lane end,
                                 the end to which the visiting supporters are guided? - A.
                                 Generally speaking, yes.


                      H                                       -   41 -
 HARPHAM. LTD.
! S h o r th a n d Writ a n
AFIELD S I 2DX
In order to further the segregation have arrangements
been m a d e to sterilise, that is, keep vacant, a part of
the terraces between the away s u p p o r t e r s ’ bit and the
s tanding p ortion of the John Street Stand? - A. Yes,
sir.

That is part of the segregation policy? - A. Yes.

In pursuance of the segregation policy do the police
really break down their operation into three parts:
first the arrival of supporters, particularly opposing
supporters, until they get into the ground.       Second,
policing w i t hi n the ground and third, the departure
of spectators, particularly the visitors? - A. Yes.
Every m a t c h has got these three phases.

Dealing w i t h the first of those phases, the supporters
come, the majority, by train or coach?      Sometimes special
trains? - A. Yes.

Arrangements are made by the police for them to be met
- those who come by train - at Sheffield Station, held
there until a pre-determined time and then taken under
escort by police horses and policemen to the ground?
A. That is correct.

They are only allowed in through certain turnstiles so
as to deb ou c h them into the places where you want them?
- A. That is correct.

Then similarly, after the game, the visiting supporters
retained in the ground,    u s u a lly for half an hour or
up to h al f an hour can I say? - A. Yes, up to half an
hour.    It certainly would be unlikely to be longer than
that.

Allowing the home supporters to clear out from the ground
and its surroundings and then the visitors marched - I do
not use the word offensively but merely descriptively -
marched back to the railway station or the coach park?
- A. Yes, indeed.

Now those three parts of the operations are all inter­
dependent, are they not? - A. Yes, to a greater or lesser
degree.

In your duty to maintain law and order you would not
regard it as sufficient merely to be with i n the ground
awaiting the kick-off, and trying to suppress trouble
then? - A. No, indeed.

Because trouble can start outside and is, indeed,
unfortunately quite deliberately engineered, is it not?
- A. Yes, sir.

Un fortunately by some Sheffield people as well as by people
from elsewhere? - A. That is correct.

                              - 42 -
And just as you would not be happy if it was only allowed
in the ground, you would not be happy if there was not a
police presence within the ground so as to control what
goes on in there? - A. That is quite right.

Now the problem within the ground is this, and again it
may not be the right word, but what I mean is the loyalty
of the supporters of a particular team to its own team
tends to create quite a lot of high emotion in a
supporter? - A. Yes, indeed.

That high emotion can lead to incidents if something
adverse takes place to their team? - A. It is not restricted
merely to something adverse, but that conduct would
certainly have an effect upon the crowd.

For instance, one of the dangerous times during a game is
just before the final whistle when the disappointment of
losing is in some of the people there possibly? - A. Yes,
one of the^flash points is at that time.

Would you accept that it is very important in your
policing within the ground to be able to identify flash
points? - A. Yes, sir.

And deal with them very quickly? - A. Yes.

Because if you do not, experience has shown that they can
escalate - I do not say out of control - but into a very
serious situation within a matter of minutes? - A. Yes,
indeed.

For instance, an opposing fan running on to the field
waving his colours or banners may be a provocation? -
A. May be a provocation, yes, sir.

Therefore, using that as one example, not the kind of
thing that the Police would allow to happen? - A. That
is correct.

The reason you would not allow it to happen is because
of your role in preventing disorder of the type we have
been talking about? - A. Additionally r of course , by the
ground rules people are not allowed on the playing area.

  But let's be realistic.      Your true consideration when you
  sec- that sort of thing happening is the danger and the worry
  as to what may happen if, for instance, not one man goes,
  bdt he is-followed by a group of others.         You have then got
:.a band of opposing supporters on the field and the home
  supporters go in to quell them, that is your real fear?
  - A. Yes, indeed.     You may deal with the situation by
  leaving the man on the pitch by blocking...          Or immediately
  concerning yourself with stopping the man on the pitch.
  The main concern is to get him off (a) for escalation of
  violence and (b) to eject him from the ground on the grounds
  bf^the GrOung‘~Hegul'atloim;     -- —  . ..__________________ ______
     i       ■



                     Q. But the u n de rlying reason is to prevent a flash point? -
             A          A. Yes, it is.              --- --------

                     Q. Again you made reference to not allowing people in with
                        glasses or bottles.   Experience has shown that these
                        tend to be used'as weapons? - A. Yes, indeed.

                     Q. Therefore, in your role of preventing a riot situation
                        escalating from a flash point, you think it is correct
             B          to prevent any weapons, including glasses, bottles and
                        the rest being taken in? - A. Yes, there is an added
                        ingredient wit h the bottle side.

                          You prefer them not to drink? - A. Absolutely.            We do
                          not want to increase the state of intoxication.

                     Q. Again if we lo o k at that, the reason basically for not
             C          wanting them to drink is that that again tends to act
                        as a lessenor of their behaviour? - A. Yes, indeed.
     (   }
                     Q. If their behaviour is lessened you get again the flash
                        point syndrome with escalation to riot potential? - A.
                        Yes, sir.

                     Q. I think it was Mr. Marshall who talked about climbing
             D          up the pylons.         Again, without going through every
                        d e t a i l , this is another example where the chap who
                        climbs the pylon is a hazard because he m a y well do so
                 I
                        to get himself into a position where he can make
                 |      offensive gestures and you have got a flash point? - A.
                        There is a dual reason for that.        One is a safety reason.
                        If people go to the top of the pylon there is a very
                        real danger of electrocution.         There is also the possibility
             E          that they will generate disorder from the positions that
                        they occupy.

                     Q. Because one of the prime motivators of disorder, unfortunately,
                        is the propensity of spectators to abuse ve r bally or by
     (   )              gestures either the players, the referee or the other side
                        and you get a response from the opposition? - A. That is
             F          true, sir.

                     Q. You were taken to the Ground Regulations at page 189.

                                   MR. BENTLEY:        I think it is page 198 in your
                          L o r d s h i p ’s bundle.

                     Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:            These are the old Ground Regulations?
             G            - A. Yes', they are.

                     Q.    They  are not the ones that were changed in 1983, they
                          precede the ones for 1983? - A. Yes.

                     Q. The last one had in it a provision which allowed the police
                        to remove people from the ground but did not allow them to
                        deny access? - A. That is correct.
             H
HARPHAM, LTD.
Shorthand WrHtr*
                                                             - HU -
FF1ELD S I 2DX
The purpose of the amendment which my Lord s a w in the
letter which my learned friend referred to at page 77
in my bundle 3, was to allow the ground rules to deny
entry as well as to merit expulsion? - A. Yes.

That was because so far as your law and order policing
was concerned it was desirable to be able to prevent
trouble makers coming in either because the y were known
trouble makers or, alternatively, because the circumstances
- banners, drink or whatever - identified them a s trouble
makers? - A. Yes.

You, when you wrote to the club saying "Would you please
alter your Ground Regulations" viewed that regulation as
an aid to the Police in its law enforcement job? - A.
And is en s uring the safety of other spectators.

Because if a riot takes place the spectators are liable
to be injured? - A. Yes, you would not need to get to. the
extent of a riot.

If people are t hr owing b o t t l e s ,swinging poles or whatever,
it is the innocent who usually suffer? - A.Yes, indeed.

So your m o ti vation in requesting that condition was a
law and order m ot i vation and the safety of others which you
had in mind, which you explained, was if a bad egg were to
abuse the public whilst in there, either by. throwing or
fermenting trouble... - A. Or mis-use of whatever they
were carrying.’

...there would be the possibility of injury to innocent
people just as there is in any potential riot situation?
- A. Yes, indeed.

Would it not be correct that so far as you are concerned,
Regulation 6, for instance:

    "Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter
     upon the field of play."

You view t h a t , as you have said a mome n t or two a g o , as
a law enforcement matter to prevent an escalation from the
spark? - A. Yes, and also prevent the game being stopped.
If one gets people on the field the referee will stop the
game, which again is a flash point.

One of the worst things is when everyone is kept waiting?
- A. Yes.

And idle hands lo o k for evil things to do in that situation?
- A. Yes.

Again, number 9, noise from radio sets or behaviour likely
to cause confusion of any kind is not permitted in any part
of. the ground.    Again, from your point of view, that
is the same principle? - A. It is the safety,, the
comfort and the welfare of the spectators we are
concerned about.     The mere fact that s o m e b o d y is
playing a radio,is not by itself likely to cause a
public or d er situation - obviously it can develop
into that - but in these circumstances we would
enforce it strictly because it is a Ground Regulation,
unless there are attendant circumstances.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   You mean you will stop them
having their radios blaring in my ears even if I am
unlikely to punch them on the nose? - A. In a football
ground?

Yes.   - A. Yes,   by virtue of. the Ground Regulations.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:  One of the reasons for that is
that not everybody is as self-controlled as m y Lord.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:       It is not self-control.
I am much olderJ

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   But again, noise, confusion,
matters of that sort, there is that flash point? - A.
Yes, indeed.

For instance, you want to avoid on the radio the result
from the other Sheffield side, again because of flash
point?

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:       I think he is just saying
he wants to stop the noise:

Is that right? - A. Yes.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:    But the underlying motive is
flash point? - A. Yes.    Because it says ’’You will not
play radios" we stop them playing radios.

But the reason is flash point? - A. Yes, a reason is
flash point.

That is the primary reason as far as you are concerned?
- A . If someone was playing a radio in a stand and there
were no complaints from people sitting nearby, we would
still tell them to stop playing the radio.

     MR." JUSTICE BOREHAM:  Even if surrounded by agreeable
lovely, mature ladies who would not dream of objecting to
anything at all? - A. We would not wait for a complaint.
If we heard a radio we would tell them to stop playing
the radio.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Forgive me for pressing you.   The
reason for that being that it is very difficult to size
up the demeanour and nature of the people surrounding and
therefore you prevent that sort of thing, in case?
                                       MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Mr. Griffiths, you have got
        •a ;                      better points, I think, than this one.

                             Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:   Again, look at number ,1i , for
                                  instance, which I think is the only one we have not
                                  dealt with:.

                                      "Offensive weapons, glasses, flags, banners and
                                       other similar articles are not permitted.”
               B
                                  Again, obvious flash points? - A. Yes, indeed, sir.

                                       MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     Would that be a convenient
                                  moment?

                                       MR. GRIFFITHS:   If your Lordship pleases.
                C                      MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     Very well.

        ( 1             :




                D




              .E-'


        (

                 F




                 G




                 H                                            - 47 -
HARPHAM. LTD.            !
                         i
S h o r th a n d Wrtter% ;
                         3
TIE L D S1 M X
                              IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                  A
                              QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION


                                                                         The Court House,
                                                                         Castle Street,
                         I                                               Sheff1eld.
                   B                                                     A-"c.h February,   15 B6
                         i


                                                         Before

                                          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM
                    C


                                                  JOHN CHARLES HARRIS
                                  (On Behalf of the South Yorkshire Police Authority)
                                                      (Plaintiff)
                    D
                                                             -V-



                                        SEZFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED
                    E                                 (Defendant)




          * )

                     F                                 APPEARANCES:

                                  For the Plaintiff:                  MR. D. BENTLEY Q.C. ana
                                                                      MR. W. B. PHILLIPS
                                                                      (Instructed by J.C.
                                                                       Karris, Solicitors,
                                                                       Barnsley)
                     G            For the Defendant:                   MR. J. GRIFFITHS Q.C.
                                                                       and KR. K. CKAPPLE
                                                                        (Instructed by Clegg
                                                                         Son, Solicitors,
                                                                         Sheffield)


                     H
 KA.RPMAM, LTD.                          From the Notes of J.L. Earpham Ltd.,
I S h o r th a n d W riter*                    Official Court Reporters,
•FFIELD S1 2DX                            55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                  INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                                   Page


ROBERT JAMES GOSLI N (Cont)

      Cros s- E xa m in e d by M R e GRIFFITHS       1.
      R e-Examined by MR. BENTLEY                   23.


CHo INSPo GoE. PA Y N E S worn

      E x a m i n e d by MR* PHILLIPS               30.
      C r o ss - Ex a mi n ed by M R e GRIFFITHS    36.


DR. W I L F R E D EASTWOOD S worn

      E x a m i n e d By MR. GRIFFITHS              40.
      C r o ss - Ex a mi n ed by M R 0 BENTLEY      48.


                           H Sworn

      E x a mi n ed by MR» GRIFFITHS                51.
                                              4th February, 1986




Mr. Goslin, I was reminded overnight, there are four incidents
that I n e g l e c t e d to put to you yesterday, but w h ic h y ou m a y k n o w
of, and I must just quickly do that.          I will do it as shortly as
can.  In September, 1981, and I am g ) ing to take one club, Leeds
United, w h i c h is a neighbouring club here, though n o t policed by
your Authority, and tell you of four incidents for your comments.
In September, 1981, in a game against Coventry City, at Coventry,
quotes:

      "The Leeds fans were angry at seeing their team beaten
      four-nil.  They ripped up seats and used the wood and
      metal as missiles.  One Policeman r e ceived 15 stitches
      in the face after being hit by a f lying seat, while two
      other Officers were also injured.   The Police spokesman
      said; 'This shows that, policing or not, there m ust be
      a strong Police control at matches'".

and then it describes 59 arrests, most of them in the .town centre
Bid y ou have knowledge of that incident? - A. Only fro m reading
in the papers - no personal knowledge.

Would you agree with the statement by the Police spokesman, that
it is that kina of incident which is the h i g h water mark, which
you are there as Police to prevent? - A. Certainly to prevent,
and to deal wi t h should we fail in our prevention.

And that is -the principal reason, is it not, for the n e c e ss i ty to
have Police at football grounds? - A. Yes.-— i-wtrsl^make the""
point we are there as servants of the club, for those Officers
who are p ai d for by the club, and we therefore have a dual role -
we would do tasks on behalf of the club that we would not do on
behalf of l a w and order.

But the principal reason you are there ... - A. Is to m ai n ta i n
law and order and ensure the safety of the spectators watching
the football.    v— — ----------- -

Right, and again, going to the next year, May,            1982,   Leeds agains
West Bromwich Albion:

     "The game was marred by scenes of crowd violence.      At
     the end some of the 4,000 Leeds spectators p a ck e d in ...
     attempted to stop the game.  100 Poli c em e n made a baton
     charge up the terrace - an unprecedented event on an
     English football ground.  It was onl y the latest outbreak
     of violence by the notorious Leeds fans".
A. I am aware of that, yes.

Then January,    1983, Derby County against Leeds, not far from
home:

      "Leeds United supporters caused an estimated £2 0 , 000-
      worth  of damage.   Police made 47 arrests, 29 Leeds fans,
      before and after the three-three draw.         Ten Police Officers
      were injured and eight spectators ta k en to hospital.        The
      worst of the damage was caused by Leeds fans, r ipping up
      seats behind one .of the goals and h u r l i n g them down on
                                      the De r b y s u p p o r t e r s ” .
                                 A. Again, I am aware of that.

                 A            Q. A nd then b r i n g i n g it almost up to date, March, 1985, Sheff i el d
                                 United against Leeds United - and I am sure y o u will have this
                                 one in mind:

                          i            "At half-time we witnessed the p e a k of the Leeds
                                      barbarism.       Seats were ripped up and thrown at the
                          i           Police, fo l lowed by bottles, iron bars, snooker balls
                                      and a ny thing else they could find.     Police made 50
                 B !                  arrests ...."
                   I             A.Could yo u r e m in d   me of the date?
                   I

                              Q. 23rd March, 1985.        -   A. Yes,    sir.   I was not in this County   at
                                 that stage.

                              Q. Did it come to y o u r k no w ledge? - A. I am aware of it, yes.
                  C           Q. Against that background, m a y we look at the Standing I n s t r u c t ­
                                 ions? In para. 1.1, y o u set out the core of the objective:
        (
                                      "Additionally, b y standardising our procedures w h i c h
                                      have b e e n evolved through experience we should be mor e
                                      able to ensure the safety of spectators; look to the
                                      pr ot ection of residents and business concerns l i kely
                                      to be a ff ected b y the influx of football supporters into
                  D                   their area; provide good value for money to the clubs
                                      who pay for the hire of our services; and display a
                                      high standard of smartness and professionalism before
                                      large gatherings of the public".
                                 A. Yes.

                              Q. And the n ex t page sets out the "Command Structure", 2.2 - it
                                 sets out the duties of the Officer outside the ground:
                  E
                                        "The duties of the officer outside the ground wi l l
                                        encompass the p re v ention of public disorder, the
                                        supervision of car and coach parks, anti-vandalism
        i                               patrols, the supervision of licensed premises in the
                                        v ic i ni t y of the ground, and the escorting of groups
                                        of supporters to and from the ground."
                  F
                                 - all those l a w and order matters.  Then next page, para.
                                 5.1 y o u set out some six matters to take into account w h e n
                                 estimating manpower, and those are really all directed, are
                                 they not, to the likelihood or otherwise of trouble - l a w
                                 and order trouble? - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. Then 5.3, y o u set out the importance of not under- e st i ma t in g
                  G              the Police commitment, and again make specific reference to th-:
                                 reputation of the home and visiting supporters, and set out
                                 various things, such as the Police control room, p ri soner
                                 reception an d so on that have to be looked to? - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. Then on the n ex t page, para. 6.4, where you are dealing w i t h
                                 plain clothes personnel:

                  H                     "The m ai n function of detective and plain clothes
                                        officers at football matches is the prevention a n d
KARPHAM, LTD.
S h o rth an d W rllc n                 detection of crime outside the ground ...."
FFIELD S1 2DX
                                                                    - 2 -
                             A. Yes, sir

                          Q. Then in 6.5, the y are also to be use d to gather intelligence
                             for use inside the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

                          Q. A n d that is intelligence for l aw and order? - A. Yes, indeed.

                          Q. Then we come to transport, and that includes provision for the
                             carriage of prisoners; overleaf on page 11, police horses -
                             again, the use of horses is in a law and order context, is it
                             not? - A. Yes, sir.

                          Q. They are to he use d for segregating the opposing fans, and
                             for escorting them from the railway station to the ground, and
                             ha c k again, for the reason you mentioned yesterday, namely to
                             prevent mayhem, if I can put it like that? - A. That is right.

                          Q. Police dogs, the same goes, they also are p u r e l y a l a w and
                             order role? - A. Yes, sir.

                          Q. An d indeed y o u say that although they are not to be used on
                             a crowd, the last sentence of 7.8:

                                   "This advice does not preclude the officer in charge
                                   from allowing them to be paraded around the perimeter
                                   track before the kick-off and during half-time so as to
                                   interest the spectators in their presence."
                D
                             It is not a Crufts Show - it is to let them k n o w there is a
                             means of keeping law and order, i s n ’t it? - A. Yes, sir.

                          Q. Then specialist equipment, if we go to the paragraph on p . 12,
                             what that is r eferring to is spotters w i t h binoculars up in
                             the tops of the stand, in radio contact w i t h the police eonfc rol
                             room, and the object of that is to be able to spot crime or
                             potential crime and trouble, and send in Officers to arrest,
                             directed by the spotters who have a clear v ie w ? - A. They are
                             there in an endeavour to anticipate trouble and if trouble
                             does start, to highlight the ringleaders so we can remove
                             them.

                          Q. Once offenders have been located by the spotters, other Officers
                             can be guided into the crowd and directed by radio to the
                             persons to be arrested? - A. That is right.

                          Q, Purely law and order? - A. Yes,       sir,

                          Q. I don*t think we need detain you on Special Constables or
                             the media, or refreshments.  The movement of spectators, para.
                             8.1, you set out the basic strategy, which is the entire
                             segregation of the opposing factions.  That is to be done in
                             three stages, before during and after the match, setting out
                             that this is all one Police operation, from arrival at the
                             railway station to dispatch back home again three or four
                             hours later? - A. Yes, sir.

                          Q. A n d the thrust of that is l a w and order? - A. Yes, it is.

                  H
                                                         -   3 -
HARPHAM, LTD.
S tio rth » n d Wr!t*r»
r F I ELD S I 20X
                                 Q. Then on the ne x t page, 13, you set out the Operations Room
                                    and that is r e al l y liaison, i s n ’t it, "between the match and
                                    Police Headquarters, in case there is desperate trouble where
                                    y o u nee d reinforcements or something of that sort? - A. That
                                    is correct.

                                 Q. Page 14, y o u talk    about processing prisoners and then crime
                                    prevention.    Y o u say y o u h a d a survey completed by the crime
                                    prevention officer, and in item (i) it is really, so far as
                                    l aw and order is concerned, to prevent the theft of cash
                                    f rom gates receipts, licuor ...? - A. Prom the sale of liquor
                       B            inside the grounds, yes, sir.

                                 Q. And you look & X the conveying of money and so on.      At 12.6
                                    yo u mention:

                                         “If the v i s i t ng supporters have a reputation for
                                         violence, endeavours will be made to bring forward
                                         the kick-o f f time •.."

                                    - again thrusting at l a w and order - that is the purpose of
                                    that, i s n ’t it? - A. Yes, sir.

                                 Q. Inspections of football stadiums - y o u describe the work i ng
                                    party, of wh i ch the Police are one element, but the Fire
                                    Service and lots of others are elements? - A. That is right.

                        D        Q. Then at appendix A, page 17, you set out a Proforma Operation
                                    Order? - A. Yes, sir.

                                 Q. Can I get this right, that for each match the Officer in
                                    charge - and that, for the last f ew years, has been Chief
                                    Superintendant Broomheaa, has it not? - A. That is right.

                                 Q. Issues an Order based upon this? - A. Indeed, for every
                                    match played at Bramall lane.

                                 Qs And that deals wi t h where the Police are to go, what they are
                                    to do, what their duties are? - A. Yes, indeed.

                                 Q. And there is a n oral br i efing of all the Officers involved an
                                    hour or two before the game, in the gymnasium at the ground?
                                    - A. That is right.

                                 0, In which he goes through, telling them what their duties are.
                                    If we can glance at 1.1, that is where y o u put in your
                                    intelligence, and y o u give the example, e.g., previous
                                    s':counters bet w ee n the two clubs resulting in serious out­
                                    breaks of public disorder, etc., and what you are looking at
                                    is the l a w and order side - is there a history of bad law
                                    and order? - A. Absolutely, sir.

                                 Q. A nd then intention:

                                         "It is the intention of the police to facilitate
                                         the playing of the m a t c h and to ensure public order
                                         arid safety both'inside a n d ‘outside -the ground; to
                                         segregate and control opposing fans and prevent
                        H                u nnecessary obstruction of the highway and damage
                                         to property."
. HARPHAM, LTD.
■ I S h o r t h a n d W riter*
EFFIELD S1 2 0 X
                                    A. Yes,   sir.
                                                                - 4 -
                                Q. "Safety" - what you have in mi n d there, is it not, is natters
                                   y o u were referring to yesterday wh i ch we heard ea? lier this
                                   morning, seats being thrown, b il l ia r d balls, etc.? - A. Less
                                   than that - it is to ensure those people who wish to go to
                                   the m a t c h can do so in comfort and safety, and I would go b ac k
                                   to the objectives at the beginning, a n d the safety is at a low
                                   k e y as wel l as a hig h key.

                                Q. A n d again, if I may take an example \vhich may not be exact,
                                   but w h e n y o u say to allow people to a t tend the football match,
                                   it is r e a ll y analogous to the problems there were during the
                        B          recent miners* strike, with r e gard to the picketing - it is
                                   to a l l o w people who have a lawful right to do something to do
                                   that, and the Police do not take sides but stand between, in
                                   order to al l o w people to go about their lawful business? - A.
                                   Yes, there are certain comparisons, but we are involved,
                                   certainly at a football game, b oth inside and outside the game,
                                   in assi s ti n g people to clear gangways, wh i ch has not got a
                                   public order connection, it is a safety measure to ensure there
                                   is no u n n ec e ss a ry crushing, so people are not injured, so it
                                   is, if y o u like, a lead up to a publi c order situation, but
                                   we are v e r y concerned we do n o t have a situation that could
                                   occur p ur e ly and simply because of overcrowding, without a ny
                                   public order situations at all.

                                Q. But that aspect of it, the overcrowding for instance, is dealt
                                   with b y different people - that is dealt wit h by the ground
                        D          certificate, not by the Police on the day? - A. No, that is
                                   laid down in the ground certificate, but the enforcement of
                                   the regulations and rules in the ground certificate are
                                   carried out b y the stewards of the club and Police Officers
                                   employed inside the ground.     -

                                Q. That is a separate thing and, for instance, in the certificate
                                   it says y o u m a y have so m a n y people in this stand, so ma n y
                                   people on that terrace, that is a separate thing from y our
                                   duties on a m a t c h day? - A. No, I am talking about the
                                   distribution of spectators on a m a t c h day.     If one part of
                                   the ground is allowed to have 10,000 spectators, obviously
                                   if one gets an uneven distribution y o u will have pressure,
                                   and therefore it is our responsibility, together with the
                                   stewards, to ensure the d i st r ibution of the 10,000 is spread
                                   evenly in that area, so y o u do not get crushing.

                                Q. Well, I will come back to that.       You set out the method
                                   during the match.    P rom k ic k-off to ten minutes before the end
                                   of the game is Phase 2, and then Phase 3 is after the game,
                                   and the next page, it says there should be a briefing.       It
                                   mentions the sort of people involved, deals with the question
                                   of prisoners, and if we can then go on, at Appendix B, it
                                   sets out the procedure for briefing, then a description of
                                   the event about to take place is to be given, along with the
                                   ::vstem of Polichg to be adopted, escorting and segregation
                                   of fans etc., the basic reasons for the officers* presence,
                                   and what is expected of them - that is to facilitate the
                                   attendance of spectators, exercise crowd control, maintain
                                   public order, prevent vandalism, give attention to licensed
                                   premises, bars and other locations where problems of public •
                        H          order m a y be anticipated, and then the dogs, about task
                                   cards, and about intelligence reports of the general reputation
    MARPHAM. LTD
I   S h o r th a n d W riters
                                   of the v isitors? - A. Yes.
•FFIELD S t SOX


                                                               -   5 -
                                 Q. Again directed to law and order? - A. Yes.
                                 9

                                 Q.        "Instruct that no persons will be ejected from the
                    A                      ground w i t h o u t first being taken to the Police r o o m
                                           and th ei r particulars noted".

                                      That is p a r t of the objective of locating troublemakers
                                      isn*t it? - A. No, it is to ensure we have a proper record of
                                      people who hav e b een handled by the Police.

                                 Q. So that is a P o l ic e law and order requirement? - A. Indeed,
                    B               yes.  We o b vi o u s l y need to have the fact we have -dealt with
                             I      someone, that information.

                                 0. Then A p p e n d i x 6, y o u set out the duties of the various people
                                    involved, the Officers? - A. Yes.

                                 Q.        "Officers on the playing area track prevent spectators
                                           s itting on the b o un d ar y walls, fencing, or climbing. No-
                    C                      one to be allowed to have their legs on the p l a y i ng area
                                           side.   Officers will be spaced evenly in close proximity
                                           to the gate."

                                      - then -

                                           "No u n a ut h or i se d person must be permitted to encroach
                                           u pon the p i t c h p erimeter track before, during or after
                    D                      the match.        A n y person doing so will be detained ana
                                           taken to the Police room.          Officers wil l n ot pursue
                                           such offenders but wait until they return.             In the
                                          'event of anyone persisting someone will have to do
                                           something about it."

                                      That is to p r e ve n t flashpoints? - A. If y o u are looking purely
                                      and simply at no. 3, yes, that is to prevent flashpoints.          If"
                    E                 one takes no. 1, that is p u rely and simply a safety m e a s u r e .

                                 Q. And, in fact, I a m right in saying that because this is 1980,
                                    the time we are talking about, that was not possible because
                                    you h a d got a p er i me t er fence all round, so they could not do
                                    it except on the ma i n south side, which is all seated? - A. Yes.

                    F            Q. So it wo ul d be odd if people sat on the       wall instead of their
                                    seat? - A. Yes.

                                 Q. So that is h i s t o r y ? - A. But no. 2 would apply, where we are
                                    siting officers close to the gates opening.         They would be
                                    opened in the event of a crushing taking place in that part
                                    of the crowd, to bri n g them out on to the pitch to alleviate
                                    crushing.
                     G
                                 Q. They ma y be open ed for quite a number of reasons.     First, they
                                    were opened, wer e they not, in a recent game, in order to move
                                    one section of fans away in order to prevent confrontation wit h
                                    opposing f a n s ? - A. That I cannot say, but certainly, yes,
                                    there will be other uses than that for the gate.       They would
                                    also be u s e d f o r Policemen to go into the ground to deal w it h
                                    trouble in the ground, and also should a crush develop, as
                     H              happened at a m a t c h at Sheffield Wednesday, where we brought
                                    spectators on to the pitch because there was a crushing,
 HARPHAM. LTD.
I S h o rth a n d W riter*
                                    although there was not an excess of spectators.
iTFlELO 51 SOX

                                                                  -   6 -
Q. I suppose the other ma j or possibility for evacuation in these
   days, unfortunately, would be an IRA bomb threat, whose
   v er a ci t y y o u h ad reason to believe in, for instance? - A. V e r y
   much so.

Q. A n d that is something always on your mind,         isn't it? - A. Yes,
   indeed.

Q. Can we look at the next group of Officers - turnstile duties,
   i.e., maintain orderly queues, watch for offensive weapons,
   safety of the m o n e y - all l a w and order? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    And    then not to   take bottles,          toilet rolls or missiles in,   th
     the same point? - A. Yes.

Q.   A nd     then no. 7,       I am sure y o u   would wish me to refer to:


            "Officers engaged on duties in the stands will take
            up positions at the rear.          Passageways will be kept
            clear and the n e c e s s a r y advice and support given to
            stewards".

     That goes back to what y o u were saying earlier does it,
     i.e., that y o u say it is a support  the stewards role? - A.
     Yes, sir, and also these people will be in a position to see
     any breaches of the ground regulations because of the position
     they have placed themselves in.

Q. No. 8:

            "The Officer in command will ensure there is at all
            times someone b y the D i r e c t o r ’s Box, to prevent entry
            to the B ox b y irate or celebrating supporters, and
            also at players* dressing rooms".

     Again,   l aw and order?   - A. Yes.

Q. Public Order Duties - again I need not go through those - they
   are all l a w and order, aren't they? - A. Yes, sir.

Q * Appendix F, Control of Spectators - a crucial period for
    disorder is in the half h o u r preceding the game - "Try and
    use entertainment".- then - "Segregation is essential.     You
    should persuade the club to have barriers because they are
    better than hu m a n barriers". - A. Yes, sir.

Q. xhen two paragraphs on:

            "The most common w a y to attempt to capture the
            opposing supporters' end is by home supporters trying..."

            MR. JUSTICE 30RSHAM:        Where are you reading from?

            MR. GRIFFITHS:      The third paragraph, m y lord, page 29:

Q.          "The Police should be in a position early to prevent
            this, but sometimes the supporters take care to be
            unidentifiable until in sufficient numbers to cause
            t r o u b l e ."


                                    -   7 -
                                 L a w and Order? - A. Yes.

                              Q. Then two paragraphs on:

                                         "Officers should never go into the crowd alone
                                         to deal w ith trouble."

                                 What y o u fear is they will be overwhelmed? - A. Yes.

                              Q. Then,    continuing:
                   B                     "Where serious disorder occurs in a section of the
                                         crowd, it is not good strategy to attempt to clear
                                         the whole terrace, w hether onto the pitch or o t he r ­
                                         wise.  It is better to drive a double line of police
                                         officers, preferably f r o m the rear or side of the
                                         terrace, towards the centre of the trouble."

                                 It is m u c h more difficult to do that,    of course, if the
                                 gangways are obstructed? - A. Yes.

                              Q. And that is a reaso n why y o u .do n o t want the gangways
                                 obstructed? - A. One reason why, yes.

                                 Next paragraph,     second sentence:

                    D            "In the event of a surge onto the playing area to
                                 avoid violent scenes on the terraces, clearly police
                                 attention must be directed to stabilising that position and
                                 spectators can then be returned.  In an event of an
                                 invasion designed to disrupt play, all uncommitted officers,
                                 and as a last resort police dogs on short leads, should
                                 go onto the playing area and clear it under the direction
                                 of the officer in command .... if necessary by a ’s w e e p 1
                                 of the playing area."

                                 - A. Yes,    sir.

                              Q. L aw and order?.- Yes,    sir.

                              Q. Then p ost match, second paragraph, y ou refer to the matter
                                 we discussed yesterday,on h o l d i n g ba c k visiting supporters
                                 until y ou have discharged the home supporters.         Again, a
                                 l a w and order matter? - A. Yes, sir.

                                      MR. GRIFFITHS:         M y Lord, I do not propose to go through
                                 the rest of it, because your Lordship has seen the Proforma,
                                 but I w o u l d dr a w attention to pp. 31-55, w hi c h is an actual
                                 game played, against Luton, where what y our Lordship has seen
                                 as the P r of o rm a takes place, and my learned friend helpfully
                                 reminds"me that there is a different one in use in 1982-83,
                                 in his bundle, which he referred to yesterday, your Lordship
                                 will recollect:

                              Q. But b o t h of the m based on w ha t we have just been looking at ? -
                                 A. Yes, sir.

                     p|       Q. Would y ou look at p. 56? That r e a l l y is a briefing directed
                                 to law and order, almost in its entirety, is it not? Would
 harpham .         ltd

I S h o r th a n d W riter*
•FFIELD S1 2 0 *                                               -   8 -
   you read through it? Were you present? - A. Not at the
   briefing, sir, no.      Not purely law and order, sir.  If I
   could re fe r y o u to the ninth paragraph, on gates and fences:
   "All gates in the fence will be manned throughout" - I think
   we have d i scussed that, where there is a large element of
   safety invol v ed in that aspect of the briefing.

Q. M a y I take issue:

        "All gates in the fence will be m a n n e d throughout and
        only Police Officers, officials or prisoners should be
        allowed through them.  They will n ot be used to allow
        spectators from one part of the ground to go to
        another."

   - A. It does n o t exclude the possibility of them being moved
   to avoid a crushing, from one part of the ground to the other.

Q. Would y o u accept, Officer, having b e e n through that document,
   that so f a r as the briefing given to Poli ce Officers is con­
   cerned, on site, it is 99 per cent r e s t ri c te d to enforcing
   l a w and order? - A. I think it is difficult to put a percentage
   on it.    There is a very hi g h level of l a w and order involved
   with Police at football grounds.           There are ground regulations
   which involve the Officers on duty inside the ground, and the
   pre-game p ol i ci n g and the post-game policing, which is purely
   law and order in its entirety.           It is inside the ground, where
   it is the safety element of the spectators which has not got a
   law and order connection, which comes into being.           We have
   that r es p on s ib i li t y by becoming, for that time, engaged inside
   the ground.

Q. Taking those three elements you have referred to, would you
   agree that unless you were to train a quasi police force, the
   only p r oper w a y and satisfactory w a y of ensuring law and order
   is through the Police inside the ground? - A. Yes, I would,,
   sir.

Q. Would y o u agree that so far as the ground regulations are
   concerned, some of those, as we saw yesterday, are aimed at
   the l a w and order situation? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Some, indeed, were at the instigation of the Police,        to assist
   them w i t h l a w and order? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And w o ul d y o u accept this, that things such as cameras are
   matters whi c h the club could, if they wished, enforce them­
   selves?     That is not beyond the stewards? - A. No.    The
   difficulty of enforcing any sort of rule and regulation inside
   a football ground is the reaction one wil l get from the person
   whom one is dealing with, and therefore, as you have seen, we
   locate Police Officers where we can, close to stewards, to give
   them that degree of authority when they are endeavouring to
   enforce those rules and regulations.

Q. That m a y be v e r y sensible once the Police are there, but do y o u
   not accept the enforcing of that sort of regulation is of v e r y
   small importance indeed? - A. Yes, it is, but I am not satis­
   fied it could be done solely by stewards without unfortunate
   repercussions.

                                - 9 -
                         Q. Let us take an analogous situation:    no smoking areas in either
                            public transport, shops, places like that, those have to be
                            enforced a nd*reinforced customarily b y the shopkeeper, and
               A            the bus or train authority, without Police assistance? - A.
                            Yes, they are sir, b u t they are not dealing with a volatile
                            football crowd.

                         Q. Officer,I mus t just suggest to you the enforcing of that wo ul d
                            be p erfectly co mpetently done by stewards.      For instance,
                     i      people b ri n g i n g cameras in are likely to be fairly respectable,
                     j
                            sensible people, are they n o t ? - A. They could well be, sir,
               B!           yes.

                         Q. Then d e a ling w i t h crushing, is that the question m e ntioned by,
                            I think, ________________yesterday, when he talked about the
                            danger of crowds surging forwards onto crash barriers, and
                            people b e i n g h u r t ? - A. Yes, the mai n aspect of it.

                c        Q. "What training h a v e y o u g i ve n your Police Officers to prevent
                            that? - A. The tr a i ni n g g iv e n to them is to divide the crowd,
                            to therefore relieve the pressure.           We hav e seen in here whe r e
       (                    we use double lines of Police Officers wh e n the situation gets
                            to critical stages, w h e r e b y we can funnel more reinforcements
                            in, not m e r e l y to deal w i t h trouble but to deal wit h crushing.

                         Q. Would y o u agree that once a surge of the type you mention
                            starts”, it is impossible f o r anyone to do anything  out it?
                D           - a . To do anything about that immediate surge, yes, I would.

                         Q. A n d secondly, w o u l d 3>-ou agree with the expert I am going to
                            call, that the design of the Sheffield ground was so arranged
                            after Ibrox, m e a n s that that type of surging is not going-to
                            h appen? Were y o u here then? - A. Here in Sheffield, yes I
                            was, and m y response wou l d be yes, I wou l d say the chances of
                            that sort of sur gi n g has b een almost eradicated.
                E
                         Q. K a y I n e x t ask y o u to look, because it eomes u p in the
                            correspondence, at page 107, and it is the Minutes of the
                            M e e t i n g of the Fo o t b a l l League Secretaries, and so on, w i t h
                            you, on the 9th August, 1983, and if we turn to page 108, we
       i
                            see y o u were di s cu s si n g an item on hooliganism, a letter sent
                            from the Footba l l League to the Clubs, and y o u discussed one
                F           aspect of that, and on page 109, third paragraph, you, as
                            Chairman, moved, on            to the second part of the letter, whi c h deal
                            wit h the i ncreased          use of stewards:

                                  "The Chairman  called f o r the views of the m e e t in g and
                                  a lengthy discussion ensued.     Mr Chester ...”

                            That was the then Secretary of Sheffield United? - A. Yes.
                G
                         Q. He part e d with the Club, did he? Not on, I don*t say terms
                            of animosity, but not on v e r y good terms, and went to Sheffield
                            W e d ne s d ay in the identical job? - A. I have no knowledge of the
                            reasons f o r the move at all.

                         o ... At any rate, he poi nt e d out the Police were in attendance at
                               grounds to administer l aw and order, whereas stewards were
                 H             there purely in an administrative role.     There was then a
                               discussion ....
HARPHAM. LTO.
S horthand Writer*
'F IE L D S1 2 0 1
                                                            -   1 0   -
        MR. J USTICE 30REHAM:  What does the expression,
   "administrative role" mean?

        MR. GRIFFITHS:   M y Lord, in the role of supervising,
   where people go, showing them to their seats and things like
   that; opening and shutting gates at entry and so on:

Q. Then Mr. V a u g h a n points out various things, as does
   Superintendent Mole and Chief Superintendant Watson.                The nex t
   paragraph:

        "The consensus of opinion was that stewards' were
        used m a i n l y in the seating areas of grounds and to
        use them on the terraces and in an increased^ crowd
        control capacity would expose them to an unacceptable
        degree of danger with few beneficial all-round results."

   And the danger we are talking about is being beaten u p
   physically? - A. Yes, very m u c h so.

Q. The Chairman,      that is yourself,        summarised by saying:

        "...it was the feeling of the mee t i ng that an
        increase in the role of stewards at football
        grounds was undesirable and that the status quo
        should be maintained."

   - A. Yes,   sir.

Q.fcAnd the status quo was the Police looking after l a w and order
  land the stewards looking after the administrative functions?
    - A. That is correct.

   M ay we next look quickly at p. 72? That is the sort of form
   that is here as a specimen, which the Police produced wh e n they
   wanted people to ask for special Police services? - A. That is
   correct.

Q, Am I right in saying not a single one of those was ever filled
   in by Sheffield United? - A. You are correct.

Q. May we go next to p. 103? Before I ask y o u about it, I would
   like to as k y o u a little bit about the interior workings of
   the Police, the Home Office and the M i n i s t ry of Sport.     We have
   seen at an earlier stage that                    had wri tt e n to the
   Home Secretary, and after this date to the next Home Secretary,
   then Mr. L eon Brittain, and those replies in due course, but
   in the interval the Home Office has written to you r Chief
   Constable, received a reply from him, and incorporated such
   as they think right in their reply to                  ? — A. Yes,
   that i s ‘correct.

Q. That is the usual thing,      is it not? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. And I assume that as an Assistant Chief Constable, Operations,
   when such a thing comes in from the Home Office, the Chief
   Constable will depute you to look into it and y ou will fee d up
   the information to him, upon which he will base his repl y ? - A.
   That is correct, if it is in my area of responsibility.


                                 -   1 1   -
                            Q. And this would h e ? - A. This would he.

                            Q. A nd y o u would p ro bably put before h i m a draft which he might,
                                or not, correct? - A. It might be that w a y or by discussion.

                            Q. Whe n I say a draft, one use d to receive the suggested draft
                                letter w h i c h y o u could use if y o u wanted, or amend as y ou
                                wished? - A. Yes, or by discussions.

                     i      Q. The l e tter to Mr. Macfarlane, the M i n i s t e r of Sport, that
                   g |        pr e su m ab l y would have been drawn to the Police by then - can
                     j        you h e l p us? - A. This one I have no knowledge of, sir, that
                               I can recollect.

                            Q. In that letter, the last paragraph on that page, we see
                                           saying:

                                       "I have b een particularly careful since the date
                                       of that letter ....”

                                    MR. BENTLEY:   M y Lord, w ith respect, this cannot be
                               admissible.  It is purel y self-serving, and this Officer has
                               no knowledge of it.

                                    MR. JUSTICE BOREEAM:                 There is no point in putting it
                               to him.
                   D                   MR. G R I F F I T H S :   M y Lord,        it seems a short way ....

                                       MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM;              We have not got a Jury, you know.

                                       MR. GRIFFITHS:            I appreciate that.          M a y I formulate the
                               Question then?

                                    MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:         You are entitled to.  There is no
                               point in putting this letter to this Officer.        If y o u have got
                               a question to p u t to him, put it, but n ot this letter.       He
                               says, "I d o n Tt k n o w anything about i t ” .

                                       MR. GRIFFITHS:            I quite appreciate that, m y Lord.

                                    MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:                 If y o u want to formulate a question
                               ”V all means.

                                       MR. GRIFFITHS:            M y Lord, the question I want to put is
                                -is:

                                              >. ' x wil l see in that last paragraph,
                                                                                  makes m e n t io n
                                   the fact, according to him:              ;

                                       "We have made requests b y letter for specific games,
                                       and are prepared to pay for these games only".

                               Later on, in October, in the correspondence with Mr. Wright,
                               exactly the same point was made? - A. Yes, it was.

                            Q. Have you yourself any knowledge of any specific requests ever
                   H           made by            L or the responsible officers of Sheffield
                               United, lor roxice to come to the ground, since the date of
HARPHAM, LTD.                  that letter? - A. The only one I can recall is the match,
S h o r th a n d W riters
FFIELD S I 2 0 X
                                                                    -   1 2   -
                                    Li nc o l n City versus Sheffield United.   The date I cannot
                                    r e m ember - towards the end of 1983.    Certainly in previous
                                    letters I have no recollection of requests, nor have I been
                A                   able to find any in our files.

                                         HR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, with respect, if my learned friend
                                    wishes to pursue this line of enquiry, the fair course is to
                                    put to this Officer, the letter said to have "been written.

                       i                 MR. JUST I C E BOREHAM:   Yes.  I repeat, I am not a Jury.
                                    I think I k n o w what to sift from questions and answers.
                 b     !
                       I       Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:   Apart from Lincoln City, you have no
                                    knowledge of any specific requests?

                                         MR. JUS T I CE BOREHAM:        Are y ou suggesting there were
                                    reauests?

                 C                        MR. GRIFFITHS:       My Lord will h       e   a   r   |   *   s   evidence.

                                          MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM:   Ve are entitled to k n o w where we
      ('
                                    are   going.     Are y o u saying there were requests?

                                            MR. GRIFFITHS:     Yes,    m y Lord.

                                            MR. J USTICE BOREHAM:       Have y ou got the letters?
                 D                          MR. GRIFFITHS:     No, m y Lord.
                           I                MR. J USTICE BOREHAM:       They were written requests, were
                           i
                           i        they?

                                            MR. GRIFFITHS:     Yes,    they were:

                               Q. Y o u have no knowledge of written reque.sts              then? - A. No, m y
                  E               Lord.

                                         MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM:     Are y o u suggesting there were
                                    real r equests?

                                            MR. GRIFFITHS:     No, my Lord.

                  F                       MR. JUS TI C E BOREHAM:       I a m r a t he r baffled by all this,
                                    but n e v e r mind.

                                            MR. GRIFFITHS:     May      I ....

                                         MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:      I tell y o u what is in   my mind. I
                                    see no point in asking an Officer who has said nothing about
                                    it, "Have y ou any knowledge of requests", and there never were
                  G                 any requests.   It seems a waste of time.

                                         MR. GRIFFITHS:   My Lord, save that one of the issues in
                                    this case is whether or not Sheffield United have      requested ..

                                         MR. JUS TI C E BOREHAM:         Well, I h ave told y o u           what is in
                                    my mind.
                  H                         MR. GRIFFITHS:      I am obliged, m y Lord:
HARPHAM, LTD.
S h o rt h* n d W riter*
                                                                      - 13 -
FT!ELD 51 2DX
                               Qo Can we turn to 111 please.   That i    s   f   s    letter of
                                  14-th October, to the Chief Constable, 'presumably drawn to y o u r
                                  attention? - A. Yes, I hav e seen this.
                     A
                               Q.     And drawn to y e a r attention at the time? - A.    Yes,   sir.

                               Q.     And m y Lor d has r ead the first paragraph previously,     then   the
                                     third paragraph:

                                           "During the 1982/83 Season, which is the one in
                     B                     question, I took particular care to write to y o u r
                                           Office and request Police Services on the o'ccasions
                                           w h e n the Club considered we might have difficulties
                                           ...     We never, n o r would we ever, deny access ...."

                                     and so on.  In the n ext paragraph he mentions he had b ee n a
                                     member of the Police Committee in a different part of the
                                     country, and is sympathetic towards Police problems, and then
                     C               overleaf, a complaint about the level of charges, sayings

                                           "The charges made b y South Yorkshire Police constitute
v        ( j                               b e t w e e n 13 and 16 p e r cent of our total gate receipts,
                                           as against n e i g h bo u r in g counties, whose charges, on a
                                           recent survey, s how as low as 1 and 2 per cent".

                                     - A. Yes,   sir.
                     D         Q. Now, that was r eplied to by the Chief Constable, or was it by
                                  you?  I notice it says "ACC (OPS)". - A. This would be one of
                                  the drafts I p r epared for the Chief Constable. He wo u l d hav e
                                  signed it.

                               Q. You refer first to the m e e t in g which y o u told us of, on the
                                  26th was it? - A. I cannot recall the date.
                      E        Q. He says he is going to send on the invoices to the Legal
                                  Services of the South Yorkshire County Council, and i n the
                                  next paragraph, the last two sentences:

         i       )                         "Should the situation arise where police officers
                                           were not to attend a football match, then obviously
                                           the r isk of disorder would be greatly enhanced".
                      F
                                     ' :.;iat was you r phrase,   I suppose? - A. Yes, sir.

                               Q.|       Shat I wo u l d be right in saying that it was you r v i e w that
                                      r    the Police not at a match, leave aside anything else for
                                      ’ . aoment, there wou l d be an unacceptable risk of the l a w and
                                            situation get t in g out of hand? - A„ Yes, indeed, sir.

                      G        Q. i A jhj has t h a t b e e n the position throughout the period we have
                                  Ibesn considering, i.e., 1982 onwards? - A. Yes, sir.           I hold
                                 ( that belief, sir.

                               Q. Then in the n e x t para g ra p h the Chief Constable sets out his
                                  problems, that on the one side he has to provide efficient
                                  policing, and see that law and order is maintained? - A, Yes,
                                  sir.
                      H
  HARPHAM,           ltd   .
                               Q 4 On the other hand he has to satisfy the Police A u t h o r i t y as
,1 S h o r th a n d W riter*       to costs? - A, Yes, sir.
                                1
EFFIELD S I 2DX

                                                                     - 14 -
                            Q. And this was writ t en at a time, was it not, when there were,
                               in fact, some difficulties between your Force and y o u r Police
                               Auth or i ty as to the costing of policing the strike? - A. N o t
                               in 1983, no.

                            Q. Not in October,      1983? - A. No, sir.     The dispute started in 198

                            Q. I am sorry,      The n overleaf, you refer in y our letter to the
                               fact:

                                      "...that y o u made specific requests for police officers
                  B                   at some derby fixtures last season, but that no requests
                                      h ad been made by y ou rself for police attendance at any
                                      other fixtures.    However, I would point out ..."

                                 - and he deals w i t h the meetings which y o u gave evidence about
                                 yesterday, at wh i c h the Secretaries were present, and the
                                 question of charging was discussed? - A. That is right.

                                 There is no  suggestion, is there, in that letter, that his
                                 letters were ne v e r re c e i v e d or anything of that sort? - A. No,
                                 other than that we could n o t find any copies of letters, n o r
                                 had I seen them, n o r anyone else working for me.         We did n o t
                                 say that in the letter, no.

                            Q.   So far as the meetings of the South Yorkshire Football Clubs
                                 that we have seen were concerned, w a s n Tt the situation this,
                   D             Mr. Goslin, that essentially they were there to discuss two
                                 things:  on the one side, hooliganism and h o w to assist in
                                 the community by the use of the grounds and things like that;
                                 on the other side, m e etings took place between the r e p r e s e n t a ­
                                 tives of the Clubs and the Police on the basis of which charges
                                 should be ma de ? - A. Yes, sir.       There was an element of
                                 community involvement discussed at the meetings w i t h the Police
                                 Authority and w i t h the County Councillors, as well as the
                                 charging for P ol i c e m e n at football matches.

                                 But what was b e i n g discussed at those meetings were the
                                 complaints that the clubs thought the charges -were di s ­
                                 proportionate in their v i e w ? - A. Yes, sir.

                            Q.   And that there should be a different method of charging? - A.
                                 That is right.

                            Q.   Which would be easier on their pockets? - A. Yes,          sir.

                            Q.   The meetings n e v e r a ct u al l y discussed, did they, whether or not
                                 the Police should come at all - that was not on the agenda?
                                 The agenda was, if they come, h o w much? - A. Yes, that was, not
                                 discussed.

                                 And was the reason the obvious one I have just put to you, that
                                 it was not on the agenda, it was a matter of h o w much, not of
                                 other matters? - A. It just did not .get raised at all.

                            Q.   Then you referred to the passage from Mr. Chester, wh i c h we
                                 looked at a mo ment ago, and the second sentence reads:

                   H                   "All the Secretaries present stated quite categorically

H A R P 8 A * . LTD.
S h o r th a n d W riter*                                      - 15 -
AFIELD S I 2DX
                                      that this suggestion which had bee n put forward by
                                      the F o o t b a l l League was without me r it and Mr. Chester
                                      in f a c t poi n te d out that the police were in attendance
                                      at grou n ds to maintain law and order, the stewards
                                      b e i n g there merely in an administrative role."

                                 These comments, I would suggest, are confirmation of the need
                                 for P o lice O ff icers at football grounds? - A. Yes, sir.

                            Q. And what goes u n s a i d there, but was in y our mind, was it not,
                               was that y o u wer e adopting Mr. C h e s t e r ’s categorisation of
                   B           Police f o r l a w and order, stewards for a d m inistration? - A.
                               Well, it was n o t adopting - it w a s a belief we always held.

                            Q. Y o u were p u t t i n g it forward to say,   "Well, y o u share our view,
                               that is w h a t it is all about"?

                                      MR. J U S T I C E BOREAHM:     That is what it says.

                            Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:         Then p. 117, this was y o u r Chief
                                 Constable w r i t i n g to the Home Office.  I w ill take it quickly,
                                 but it is m u c h to the same effect, b e c a u s e [ h a d
                                 written to the Home Secretary and they h a d w r i t t en to you with
                                 a copy of h is letter and so on? - A. Yes.

                            Q. The p e nu l ti m a te paragraph, you say y o u have no knowledge of th
                               specific re q u e s t s made, and you say that it has evolved over
                   D           the years, and then I need not take y o u t hrough the next page
                               because it is basically repetitious? - A. I am sorry, sir?

                            Q. It is b a s i c a l l y repeating the arguments? - A. I have lost the
                               page.                                                _

                            Q. Would y o u go to p. 119, at the top of the page y o u talk about
                               the s u g g e s t io n he h a d made that perhaps overtime was one of
                               t h e 'reasons w h y y o u were sending the numbers of Officers you
                               did, and y o u give your answer there to that allegation, which
                               you thought was offensive? - A. Yes, that there was no suggest
                               ion the operat i o na l level was decided without thought to cost
                               at that stage.

                            Q. But wh a t guide d y o u to say, "manning levels are kept to
                                what I c o ns i d er to be an operationally n ec e s s a r y level"? Is
                                that an op er a t io n al l y necessary level to enforce l a w and
                               :-order? - A. It is to fulfil all the functions for which we are
                               ;-).t a f o ot b a l l ground;  the ground regulations, to ensure the
                               s a f e t y of the spectators and to maintain l a w and order.

                                 p.nd again, y o u point out at the next p ar a g r a p h but one your
                                 meeting w i t h h i m ? - A. Yes, sir.

                            Q. Anil the last sentence, you pointed out that the clubs
                               emphasised the desire to employ P o l ic e me n to ma i nt a in law
                               and order and:

                                      "...there was a real fear that were they not there the
                                      m a t ch e s w o u l d be unable to be completed".

                   H             Then p. 120 we have looked at, 1 nee d n o t take y o u there
                                 again.  That was the start of a talk about videos, was it not?
HARPKA.M, LTD.
S h o r th a n d W riter*
FF1ELD S I 2DX
                                                                   - 16 -
it
                                          A. It was the use of closed circuit television we discussed at
                                          some of the meetin g s I had w i t h l o r          one or two of
                                          the staff at Sheffield United, tne suggesxion being were they
                     A                    to be p l ac e d strategically inside the'ground, we could remain
                                          outside and res p on d to trouble inside.

                                       Q. And out of that there then came a pr o po s a l that closed circuit
                                          t elevision should be installed, w h i c h y o u regarded as helpful
                              j           so far as p o l i c i n g was concerned? - A. Indeed, yes, sir.
                              5
                                       Q. An d h e l pf u l f o r policing the law and order aspect? - A. For
                     B                    all aspects.

                                       Q. But f o r l a w and order principally? - A. Yes,      indeed.

                                       Q„ A n d y o u wo u l d be using that, would y o u not, to video trouble,
                                          y o u could identi f y      troublemakers and so on, and for use as
                                          evidence if n e c e s s a r y ? - A. Yes, for a deterrent, because once
                      C                   people who are prepared to cause trouble appreciate that there
                                          can be a retrospective arrest b y use of the video film, it has
                                          the effect of damping down trouble i n the first place.
    '■    ( '■                i
                                       Q. There w as then a discussion as        to who was p a ying the m a i n ­
                                          tenance f or the future, and it        ends up w i t h a letter written
                                          b y y o u r successor, Mr. Watson,     wh ic h unfortunately, perhaps,
                                          put the video m a t te r to sleep,     in v i e w of legal difficulties?
                                          - A. Yes.        I have not seen the   letter before, but it is Mr.
                      D                   W a t s o n ’s signature.

                                       Q. Now, can y o u go next to p. 126, because I want to turn to the
                                          Bolton Wan de r s incident. That is a letter from the then
                                          Solicitor to the Club, written to the South Yorkshire County
                                          Council, and at the bottom of the page he states:

                                                "We have advised our client not to pay any
                     E J 1
                                                fur th e r sums to the SYCC for police charges until
                                                the n ec e s s a r y information ...”

f                                 :*
                                          - i.e.,   details of the facts of l a w      -
          [                                     "has b e e n supplied to us by the SYCC".

                     F                    Quite shortly after that, at p. 129, there is a telex.        It
                                          is not v e r y clear, but it is, in fact, f r o m Mr. Greene, the
                                          Solicitor to the Club, and the ma n uscript addition at the top
                                          of the page points out that the date should be the 20th - that
                                          emerges later.     In the second p a ra g ra p h it states:

                                                "We u n d e r s ta n d from Mr. Harris that the SYCC is
                                                aware that the Club has a home game against Bolton
                      G                         F oo tball Club on Saturday 31 D e ce m be r 1983 in which
                                                the Club does not request any Police Services".

                                          - A. Yes,   sir.

                                       Q. Now, b y this date, and indeed certainly from the time when
                                                       wrote to your Chief Constable in October, 1983,
                                          making clear that he was only a sking for, or had only asked
                     H                    for specific games? - A. Yes, he was saying he had asked.
    HA.RPMA.M, LTD.
I S h o r th a n d W riter*
                                       Qo And not f or others, and therefore was not liable for other
•FT!ELD S I 2DX                           payments in h i s vi e w? - A. Right.

V    ..                                                                 - 17 -
                               Q. Y o u k n e w from then on his attitude on "behalf of the Club was:
                                  "We are only going to ask for specific games"? - A. I had no
                                  direct contact w i t h him.    I k ne w his views were, "Unless we
                                  request we should not pay", but we had not had, until this
                                  telex, a direct, forgive the contradiction, direct non-
                                  request.

                               Q. Yes, but leaving aside whether there had been communications
                                  between y ou , fr o m the time of his letter and your discussion
                                  on the 26th, y o u k n e w that was, in fact, his a ttitude? - A.
                                  Yes.
                     B
                               Q. Here y ou say y o u have the first direct communication of a n o n ­
                                  request, and Mr. Greene goes on:

                                       "We further understand that the Officers of the
                                       SYCC have threatened, subject to the anticipated
                                       authority from the elected Members, to commence
                                       proceedings in the Sheffield Magistrates Court f o r
                                       an Order un d e r the provisions of Section 10 of the
                                       Safety of Sports Grounds Act if the Club does n o t
         (       '                     request such services."

                                  - A. Yes.

                               Q. That approach was one wh ic h stemmed from you, did it? - A. Yes.

                     D         Q. A n d your r eason for   that approach was that if there were not
                                  Police inside there      was a considerable risk, in your opinion,
                                  that a b reakdown of     l a w and order would occur? - A ^ It would be
                                  unsafe to al l o w the   fixture to go ahead withoutvPolicemen.

                               Q.ijiBecause your principal fear was a breakdown of law and order
                                 l||and for public safety? - A. That is right.

                               0. Y ou were not prepared to go there to prevent that unless y o u
                                  got a Section 15 request? - A. No, we were not pr e pared to do
                                  that.    I had discussed the possibility of using S ection 10 with
                                  Mr. Brealey at one of our meetings, and said this was ve r y much
                                  a possibility should he not request Police Officers.         Be i n g
                                  faced wi t h this situation where no request was made, I had ther.
                                  ■ various factors to consider: one was to allow the m a t c h to go
                                  Vii'ead without Police Officers, and I v e r y quickly dismissed
                                  th-at p ossibility on the grounds of safety and public order; I
                                  th«n had to consider the implications of sending Police
                                  'Officers as there had been a specific, and again forgive,the
                                  xyti, n o n-request for Police Officers, when we have always
                                  within the Police Services, not me rely South Yorkshire, a ct e d
                                   on the principle that Police Officers performing dut y inside
                                  a football club were pe r f orming special services, and therefore
                                   the club was liable for payment.    I w o u l d have gone contrary
                                   to that principle and therefore, after discussion, I reac h e d
                                   the decision that the proper course of action for me to take
                                  was via the Local Authority, and Section 10 of the Safety of
                                   Sports Grounds Act.

                                   !I don*t want to trespass on the discussions with your le g a l
                                ...advisers, but w o ul d it be correct that your .attitude was,
                      H         llllfrom the time y o u first spoke to               that (a), there

 harpham         .   ltd   .
I S h o r th a n d W r l l m                                    - 18 -
F F IE L 0 S I 2 0 X
                                 had to be Police inside the ground for public order; and (b),
                                 that y o u were not prepared to place the Police in there without
                                 a Section 15 request, because of the financial implications of
                                 so doing? - A. That is nnr-pont. sir.

                              0. That therefore yo u made clear to the Club that if no Section
                                 15 request was made, that then you would go to the Magistrates
                                 Court to apply to have the game stopped? - A. I would go to
                                 the Local A u t h or i ty for them to apply, yes.     I think not    _
                                 n ecess a ri l y to have the game stopped, but perhaps for the game
                     B           to be played b e hind closed doors, where spectators were n ot
                                 involved.       I wo u l d like to expand on that:   had'that taken plac
                                 where it was p l ayed behi nd closed doors, it would quite probabl
                                 have created extreme public order problems by spectators
                                 arriving and not being       Ao allowed into the ground, so I was in a
                                 dilenma whic h ev e r course of action I took.

                              Q. You r e c ognised if it was played behind closed doors it was
                                 not mu c h use to the Club? - A. Absolutely.

                              Q. Aga in s t the ba c kg r o un d of those questions I will n ot go into
                                 the detail of the ensuing telexes.           Then on p, 130 the Club
                                 was saying;

                                       "The Club does not admit that it is liable for Police
                                       attendances which it does not specifically request.
                     r\                However, it is the hope of the Club that the dispute
                                       concerning charges for Police Services may be resolved
                                       and the legal rights and liabilities of the Parties
                                       herein be clarified as soon as possible, amicably, and
                                       wi t h the minimum expense and inconvenience.     A c cordingly
                                       w e propose that without prejudice to the question of
                                       whether or not the Club is liable for the charges for
                                       Police Services at the Bolton game, and without the
                                       Club m a k i n g a specific request therefore, the Police
                                       attend it in such numbers and at such times as the •
                                       Chief Constable m a y direct.     The matter of liability
                                       for payment, if any, m a y then be decided by a competent
                                       Tribunal at a convenient time."

                                 So they were suggesting, "L e t ’s have it resolved but meanwhile
                                 n x r r y on". The reply at the next page:

                                        "The Chief Constable ... is prepared to provide
                                        Police Services inside the ground ... on request of
                                      ■vhe Club in accordance wit h the provisions of Section
                                      •';1c:       II
                                      .      • • •


                                      , p a r a g r a p h s on:

                                       "In the absence of a request of the club to the
                                       Chief Constable, as provided in Section 15 (1) of
                                       the Police Act, the Chief Constable considers, in
                                       v i e w of the degree of r isk to spectators, that the
                                       County Council should consider making an application
                                       u nd e r Section 10 ...."

                                 And the risk to spectators is the law and order one we are
                     H           talking about? - A. L a w and order and safety, yes.
 HARPHAM. LTD.
t S h o r th a n d W r!t*r»
TF IE L D S I 2DX                                                 - 19 -
                                 Q. And at the bottom,    the Local Authority saying:

                                         "Policing of the ground is a m a t t e r for the Chief
                    A
                                         Constable and shall be discussed w i t h h im or
                                         Assistant Chief Constable Mr. Goslin".

                                    Then the reply to that at p. 132, last paragraph, concerning
                                    the threat of the South Yorkshire County Council to commence
                                    proceedings u n d e r Section 10:

                    B                    "Our client has decided not to make a n y application
                                         to the Court tod a y ...."

                                    - and then p. 133, that application was to be to a        High Court
                                    Judge for an I nj u nction to stop you doing it? - A.     Yes, it was.

                                 Q. At p. 133, is the statement that the Council has resolved to
                                    bring Section 10 proceedings, and that this would be withdrawn
                      C             in the event of a satisfactory request b e i n g received by the
                                    Chief Constable f r o m the Club, and wo u l d it be fair to say that
                                    the County Council, the Police Authority, and the Police, were
             (    '
                                    all acting together in this approach? - A. Yes, sir, it would.

                                 Q. Then at p. 134 a suggestion from the Club:

                                         "With reference to the above, we propose that, without
                      D                  prejudice to the question of w h e t h er or not the Club
                                         is liable for the charges for Police Services at the
                                         above f o o tball match, and without the Club maki n g a
                                         specific request for Police attendance, the Police
                                         attend in such numbers and at such times as the Chief
                                         Constable m a y direct".                             ~

                                    - A. Yes,   sir.
                    E
                                 Q.'Then overleaf, p. 135, they say they have reconsidered it, and
                                    they put forward a slightly different formula, second paragraph

                                         "Without prejudice to the question of whether the
             I                           Club is liable for charges for Police Services at
                                         the above mentioned Bolton match, and w it h this
                                         request not b e i ng made under the provisions of
                    F                    Section 15 (1) of the Police A ct 1964, we hereb y
                                         request on beha lf of the Club that the Police attend
                                         the above m entioned match in such numbers and at
                                         such times as the Chief Constable m a y direct."

                                    - A. Yes,   sir.

                                 Q V A n d the last paragraph:
                      G
                                         "For the avoidance of doubt the above request is
                                         for Police Services and not ’Special Police S e r v i c e s ’".

                                    - A. Yes,   sir.

                                 Q. So you b y now, at the time of the telex, w e r e ‘apprised' of the
                                     distinction they were making? - A. Oh, yes, indeed, sir.        In
                      H              fact, during the f l o w of telexes I ha d one or two conversations
 HARPHAM, LTD.                      with
 S h o r th a n d W riter*

F T IE L O   S I 20X
                                                                 -   2 0   -

                             i
                                Q. And it is fair to say, i s n ’t it, that the Police and the Club,
                                   n o w that this n a t t e r of principle had arisen, were each
                                   conscientiously trying to find a me thod of resolving it that
                   A               would n ot prejudice either Party, and would al lo w football to
                                   continue and the public to be served? - A. Yes, sir.

                                Q. And|                     |was not in any w a y being difficult or d o m ineer­
                                   ing Y ^ ^ T r ^ H b ^ a t all, no.
                            i
                                Q. And then a r e p l y from the Council, p. 136, second paragraph:
                   B                      "There is no provision for the supply of Police
                                          Officers at the request of private individuals or
                                          concerns other than under Section 15 (1) of the
                                          Police A c t 1964.       Therefore our operational req u ir e ­
                                          ments are n o t satisfied and Police Officers will not
                                          p e r f o r m dut y inside Bramall lane Football Ground on
                                          the above date".
                   C                 - A. That was m y telex.

        (' "i                   Q. Un de r the present circumstances the Polic e wo u ld support under
                                   the Safety of Sports Grounds A ct? - A. Yes.

                                0. Then p. 137:

                                          "The agreement is that the Club wil l request Special
                   D                      Police Services from the Chief Constable un d er Section
                                          15 (1) of the Police Act 1964, for the Bolton match
                                          on 31 D ec ember and all subsequent home matches for
                                          the rest of the 1983/4 football season.

                                          This request is without prejudice to the right of
                                          the Club to challenge in the Courts whether alternative
                                          means for the provision of Police Services were av ai l ­
                   E                      able other than b y a request un d e r Section 15(1), for
                                          example un d e r the general duty of the Chief Constable
                                          to keep the Q u e e n ’s Peace and enforce the law, and
                                          without prejudice to the C l u b ’s l iability for payment
                                          for such services.
        1,     )
                                          On confirmation of this agreement the Chief Constable
                   F                      will advise the County Council that a satisfactory
                                          arrangement has been made with the Club and the Chief
                                          Executive will wi t hd r a w the application to the Sheffield
                                          Ma gistrates Court ...n

                                       and that is w hat has led to us be i n g h er e ? - A. Yes,     sir.

                                 *       then p. 138,   just to complete it:
^                  G
                                          n0n behalf of the Club we he reby agree to your terms
                                          of y o u r telex received on 22 December 1983 at 16.20
                                          hours and note the without prejudice nature of the
                                          C l u b ’s said requests u nd e r Section 1 5 . ”

                                     Now, h a v i n g gone through those telexes and asked y ou some
                                     questions about you r attitude and what y o u made pl a in to the
                   H                 Club at that time, y o u will remember y o u told us you had
                                     spoken to Mr. B realey about Section 10, and along those lines?
H A R P H A tt, LTD.
S h o r th a n d W riter*
                                     - A. Yes, sir.
F F 1 E U ) S I 2DX
                                                                  -   2 1   -
                           Q, Can you help us w i t h the approximate date for that?           His
                                letter was the 14th October, if that          helps. - A. A l e t te r f rom
                                the Chief Constable t o [ m a k e s               reference to me
                                m e e t i n g w i t h Mr. BroomheacL. it was late October, I w o ul d
                                suggest.

                                A n d at that m e e t i n g of late October,    was it made clear by y o u
                                to h i m r e a ll y the attitude that b l e w   up in the t e le x e s? - A.
                                Yes, it did.

                   B       Q.   Name l y that y o u believed the Police presence was essential?
                                - A. Yes.

                           Q.   That y o u were n o t prepared to provide it unless a Section 15
                                request was m a d e ? - A. Yes.

                           Q.   A n d that if a Section 15 request was not made you w o u l d v e r y
                                seriously consider going to the Courts and probably w o u l d n e e d
                                a Section 10 application? - A. If I could just make a comment
                                about the S e c t i o n 15 requests, I do not t h ink I was as specific
                                as that.    What I would have discussed w i t h                 is if
                                the existing agreement w h e re b y Police Officers policed, inside
                                Bramall Lane was not continued, then I would have to consider
                                a Section 10 application, or recommend to the County Council
                                they went for Section 10.        I make the distinction b e t w e e n our
                                existing arrangements as opposed to Section 15.
                   D       0. Again, just analysing that, y o u had already received his letter
                              describing the non-request situation, the letter of the 14th?
                              - A. Yes.

                           0. You k n e w that that was his attitude? - A. Yes, indeed.

                           Q. You made clear to him that unless there was an agreement to pax
                              you would have to make a Section 10 - does that f a irly
                              summarise the upshot of y our conversation? - A. Yes, and the.
                              hand written note l made on one of the letters. because I
                              wished to clarify the situation from              w h e t h e r he
                              wanted Police Officers or not, which is indicatLive of the faci
                              I was aware this situation was coming to boiling point.

                           Q.   And again I a m sure it goes without saying, to be cautious
                                perhaps I ought to just get it from you, it is quite obvious
                                that your concern was not h a v i n g permission to go in and enforc
                                the ground regulations, it was the other aspects, p a r t i c u l a r l y
                                la w and order? - A. It was a combination of safety, g r ound
                                regulations and l a w and order.

                           Q.   Y o u are not suggesting if the Club said, "We do n o t w a n t y o u
                                to enforce ground regulations except in the l a w and order
                                context - d o n ’t bothe r wit h cameras and things like t h a t ” ,
                                that y o u w o u ld still have thought y o u had b etter go f o r Sectior.
                                10? - A. If we h a d no request for Police Officers inside the
                                ground, no requ e s t at all, m y considered v i e w at that time,
                                and still is, is y o u cannot have a football ma t c h w i t h ou t
                                Police Officers inside the ground.             If they are there the y
                                quite obviously wil l have a combination of purposes:            one is
                                law and order; one is safety; one is to enforce the g r o u n d
                   H            regulations.       There is no w a y I w o u l d suggest I could divide
MARPHAM, LTD.
                                in percentage terms those responsibilities - they are p ar t of
S h o rth a n d W riter*        the whole.
FFIELO S1 20X

                                                               - 22 -
                           Q. Can I raise one other m a t t e r w ith you? It is going to be
                              evidence called by m y clients that in recent years, from about
                              1982, there has bee n no discussion week b y w eek by the Police
                              wit h the Club, as to the numbers of Officers that the Police
                              considered necessary.   What has happened is that the Police
                              Movement Order, which lists the numbers, is sent to the
                              Secretary, four or five days before the game starts? - A. I
                              have no k nowledge of that.      The contact between the Club and
                              the Police to decide numbers would be done at divisional level.

                           Q. That would be Chief Superintenaant Broomhead? - A. Or one of
                  B
                              hi s Superintendents - not me.

                           Q. Again, in pursuance of you r "law and Disorder Prevention Scheme
                              fro m time to time, as for instance a fortnight ago, the Police
                              say we m u s t open more turnstiles, open those, shut those, and
                              instruct the Club what t hey would wish to have done? - A.
                              Recent events since 1984 I have no knowledge about.

                           Q. Does that fall w i t h i n the p a t t er n y o u would unders t a nd ? - A. I
                              would expect that would be done by consultation, n ot that we
                              would demand.   I think it should be pointed out w h e n you are
                              talking about p o l i c i n g levels at the ground, the n u m b e r of
                              Police Officers in the ground would have very little effect
                              u pon the charge to the Club.          Inevitably there w ou l d be far
                              more Police Officers inside the ground, performing duties there
                              than were charged for.
                  D
                           .‘ . But the numbers are difficult, because what in fact happens is
                                  that a lot of the Police Officers who escort people to the
                                  ground come into the ground, are there as a reserve, but are
                               : actually used to take them away again? - A. Yes, those Officers
                                .vputside pre- m at c h wil l come into the ground, but even those on
                            '•;:\--.iuty exclusively inside the ground would be more in n u m b e r thar
                                 :--hcse actually charged for, by virtue of the criteria.

                           Q/.,.r am reminded of one matter, Mr. Goslin.        One of the reasons
                                     .•t yo u do no t want clumping of spectators is that that is
                                potentially a flashpoint, because very frequently the clumping
                                4i.:;t.~x#ople who are coming together with a vie w to acting as a
                                           in a disruptive sense? - A. Forgive me, a clumping is a
                                g          of spectators yes, that is one of the reasons.

                           Q. Be : .ase, (a), they f o r m a target for people to lob things
                              inlo, and (b), they m a y themselves be of a disruptive frame
                              of mind? - A. Yes, that is one of the reasons.

                                             R e -Examined by MR. B E N T L E Y :

                           Q. Mr. G-oslin, d ealing first of all with the responsibilities of
                              the Chief Constable, and y o u as his Assistant, as m y lear n e d
                              friend has rightly said, the duty of the Chief Constable is to
                              enforce the l a w w ithin his police area? - A. Yes, sir.

                           Q. But as we know, the m a n power available to a Chief Constable
                              is limited, is it n o t ? - A. Indeed so.

                                    MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   I don't think it quite defines it
                   H           does it? As I understand it, his duty is to enforce t h e ^ l a w
                               within his area in an even-handed manner.  I think that h a s
HA .R PH A H ,   LTD.
S h o rth a n d W riter*
                               to be added.
FFIELD S1 7DX
                                                              -   23 -
                 1


                                     KR. BENTLEY:       My Lord, yes.

                                     MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM:       It is a v ery important part of the
                             duty.

                        Q.          MR. BENTLEY:    What about the financial resources available
                             to t h e Chief Constable with which to discharge his duty? Are
                             they limi t e d or unlimited? - A. They are limited.

                        QL   Until this dispute arose wit h Sheffield United, as we have
                             heard, a contribution was made to the cost of p o l icing Sheffielc
                 B           United home games by the Club itself? - A. Yes, it was.

                             If n o t h i n g is paid by the Club for the po l icing of its matches,
                             and yet p o l i c i n g is provided, on w h o m will that cost n o w fall?.
                             - a . Ultimately, the ratepayer.         It would have to come from the
                             County Council budget.

                             A n d w h a t effect will it have on the financial resources a v a i l ­
                             able to the Chief Constable?- A. Well, it would, if his budget
                             were n o t in c r e a s e d to compensate for that loss of income, it
                             wo ul d c o n s e qu e nt l y reduce his budget b y that amount.

                        Qr        MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM: Well, that is if             he still provided
                             the same re sources to the football ground? -                A. Yes, m y Lord.

                             He w o u l d either have to trim those resources,            or trim other
                 D           resources, to pay ? - A. Yes, my Lord.

                        Q.' In order to me e t the cost? - A. Yes,              indeed.

                                  MR. JUS TI C E BOREEAM: Do I need-this.      A r e n ’t I allowed
                             to take judicial knowledge - I k no w ro ug h ly h o w the Police are
                             funded.

                                  MR. BENTLEY:           M y Lord,     I do not take that m a t t er any
                             further:

                        Q. In that event, Mr. G-oslin, m a y I turn from that

                                  MR. J U S TI C E BOREHAM:           If you are going to turn, may I
                             complete m y interruption:

                        Q. Supposing the Club says to you, u nl ikely of course but suppos­
                           ing t h e y do, "We d o n ’t want you. Y o u can stay away, you a n d ai:
                           your Officers", do you understand? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. I a m n ot suggesting it has been said here.       I accept that the
                           relationships b e t we e n you are and always have been, good, and
                           long m a y it continue, but supposing they did say, "We d o n ’t
                           want you, get away", of course you could patrol the streets
                           and l o o k a f t e r the crowds there, but not in the ground.  Have
                           you got an y r i g ht to go in? - A. To enforce the law, yes, we
                           have a right to go in.

                        Q. You wo u l d have the right.     Would you have to w a i t until^there
                           was a b r e a c h ? — A. We would have to wait until we anticipated
                           a b r e a ch of the peace, we would need something other than a
                  H        gathering of spectators.
 harpham     ,   ltd.

IShorthandWriter*                                                 -   24 -
I5 F IE L 0 S I 20X
                              Q. But I w ou l d h a v e thought that you would need a situation which
                                 suggested to you, as a sensible and experienced Police Officer,
                                 that da nger was on the horizon, or imminent? - A. Yes, m y lord.

                              Q. Then y o u could go in? - A. Yes indeed, and would, under those
                                 circumstances.

                              Q. Of course.

                              Q.        MR. BENTLEY:      Mr. G-oslin, again, perhaps just arising out
                                   of that, the Officers who presently do attend to polic e matches
                    B
                                   are, as one can see, specially assembled.           These' Operational
                                   Orders specify w h i c h Officers shall p e r f o rm this particular duty
                                   - A. That is right, sir.

                              Q. And I th in k y o u told us yesterday, these are Officers who in
                                 the m ai n w i l l be asked to work overtime, or are b r o u g h t in on
                                 rest days? - A. That is right.

                              Q. Now, suppose t hat the situation w h ic h prev ai l e d w er e this,
                                 that the Club h a d made no request f or Officers to attend, a n d
                                 indeed h a d said, "We don*t want Officers at the ground at all,
                                 what Police reso u rc e s w o u l d you have available to respond to
                                 any call for h e l p f rom the Club? - A. Without special a r r a n g e ­
                                 ments we w o u l d have purely and simply the n o r m a l day b y day
                                 p olicing resources.
                    D         Q.        MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM: So they would come off the streets
                                   if they went into the ground? - A. Yes indeed, m y Lord.

                              Q.         MR. BENTLEY:         Would you, in those circumstances, always
                                   be able to r e s p o n d to a call? - A. We would mak e a response to
                                   a call depe n d an t u p o n the size of the incident.   There are so
                                   m any v a riables on this, depending on what is go i ng on in other
                                   parts of the C o u n t y would depend u p o n the response to the
                                   incident at the football ground.

                              Q.         MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM:  Does that m e a n y o u w o u l d make a
                                   response but w h e t h e r or not it was adequate w o u l d depend u p o n
                                   the gravity of the incident itself, and the gra v it y a n d n u m be r
                                   of any other incidents in your area? - A. That is correct, m y
                                   Lord.

                              Q.           MR. BENTLEY:       Just dealing wi t h safety, and I do not want
                                    to deal w i t h this at length, Mr. G-oslin, b u t 1 suppose it is
                                    a .commonplace that one of the things that m a y happen, if there
                                    is a crushing in a crowd, is that the w e a k e r m a y go down a nd be
                                   .a o' risk of b e i n g trampled? - A. Yes.    Children quite obviously
                                    are ver y vulnerable; women are ver y vulnerable.        If y o u get a
                                   ^>ii€ficiently s t rong crush then personal strength r e a l l y becomes
                                    immaterial and y o u will be affected by it.

                                        MR. J U S T I C E BORESAM: I doubt, if I m a y dare to say so,
                                   it is in a n y event just a matter of strength - it is a m a t te r
                                   of strength a n d agility? - A. A g i l i t y w o u l d p r ob a b l y p lay an
                                   equal part, m y Lord.

                              Q.       ' MR. BENTLEY:           Kr.G-oslin, as m y learned f ri e nd says, y o u
                     H             can, of course, get crushing deliberately engineered by people
                                   who are p u s h i n g f r o m the back with evil i ntent? - A. Yes, sir.
 H ARPHAM ,        CTO.
I S h o r th a n d W riter*
F F I E L O s i 2DJC
                                                                   -   25 -
Is it also yo u r experience that sometimes a mere an x i et y to get
out or get in through an entrance quickly can cause the same
kind of problems - people pushing to get in?

     MR. JUS TI C E BOREHAM:    Mr. Bentley, I will tell y ou, we
have n o t got a Jury.   A m I not allowed to take judicial k n o w ­
ledge?

     MR. BENTLEY:     My Lord, yes,    you are:

 If yo u r Officers are confronted within the ground b y a
scene of that kind, where there is crushing and p e o p l e going
down, who will deal w it h it? - A. The Police.

And is that, in y our view, an important or un important reason
for being at grounds? - A. It is a very important r e ason for
being at grounds.

If there are n o t Police there to deal w ith that incident w ho
will have to? - A. The stewards would then have to be r e s p o n s ­
ible.

Would y o u expect them to be able to cope as w ell as Police
Officers? - A. No, I would not.

Tell his Lords h ip why. - A. Yes, sir. One of the basic reasons
is that the Police Officer is identifiable.   The stewards
would have an armband or a coloured jacket to identify them.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:       Are the stewards at Sheffield what
I call a permanent band or body? - A. My Lora, yes.         There are
changes but basi c a ll y they are a permanent band, yes, my Lord.
The Police Officers, generally speaking, are younger and
fitter than stewards.      They are better trained to act in
concert, w h i c h is the sort of action one needs w h e n dealing
with a serious crushing problem, and they are also all trained
in first aid, w h i c h is a valuable attribute w he n dealing w i t h
this sort of situation.

     MR. BENTLEY:        Could I go bac k to look at these operations
documents, w h i c h y ou have been taken through.   If we go to the
standard Operation Order, p. 17 of bundle 3, at 2.1, where the
general objectives to be attained are set out:

     "It is the intention of the police to a l l o w this
     match to take place and to ensure public order and
     safety ...."

^•here is a reference there, clearly, to safety? - A. Yes,
indeed.
        f'
And if we f o l l o w through the document in a little more detail,
if we go to p. 22, these are the v e r y matters that the Officers
who attend are to be instructed about at the general b r i e f i n g ?
A. Yes, sir.

A t (11), "Remind officers as to appropriate legislation", and
then the relevant public order legislation is r ef erred to,
but finally, the rules of the particular ground? - A. Yes, sir.

So there is the Operational Order saying tell the m e n ? - A. Oh,
yes, and a copy of those ground regulations w o u l d n o r m a l l y be
affixed to the Operational Order.
                         - 26 -
      '■   ■   s




                            Q. A n d then turning to the individual brief i ng that appears at
                               p. 2 3 1 ari(i her e individual Officers who are being deployed in
                               various parts of the groundj are n o w being told what f unctions
                               they mus t p e r f o r m ? - A. Yes, sir.

                            Q. We have dealt a l r ea d y w i t h (i), preventing spectators si t ti n g
                               or standing on bo u nd a r y walls, and wi t h (ii), gates or openings
                               and then (iii), "No unauthorised person must be permitted to
                               encroach on the pi t ch ...".        I d o n ’t think we dealt wit h (iv),
                               and that is:
                     B                 "Spectators will not be allowed to remain i n p a s s ag e ­
                                      ways adjacent to entrances and exits, or to be in
                                       terrace or stand gangways.  Persons seen to be so remain-
                                     • ing will be directed to move."

                                 - A. Yes,   sir.

                            Q. A n d that is f o r the reasons y o u have explained already? - A.
                               V er y m u c h for safety.

                            Q. The Officers at the turnstile, at the foot of the page, a n d
                               one appreciates this is outside the ground, but maintain order,
                               ensure o rderly queues form ...

                            Q.        MR. JUS TI C E BOREHAM:        Is it outside the ground? - A. Yes,
                                 sir, it would be.
                     D
                            Q. There are two sides to a turnstile, one is in and one is out?
                               - A. This, my Lord, is outside the ground.

                            Q.        MR. BEETLE!    A lt h o ug h some of the entrances to parts of
                                 the ground are within the club curtilages? - A. Yes, but the
                                 only stationing of Policemen at the turnstiles would be outside

                            Q. A n d then an instruction to give attention to the safety of
                               money at turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

                            Q. I suppose a lot of people on m a t c h days may be at risk of being
                               relieved of m o n e y by persons attending the match? - A. Yes.

                            Q. But here is a specific direction for the benefit of the cl u b ?
                               - A. To look af t er the m o ne y taken over the turnstile.

                            Q. Then we have dealt wit h b r i ng i ng into the ground prohibited
                               items.  Then (iv) on that page;

                                      "Prevent unauthorised entry into the ground by
                                      persons climbing walls and fences or b y climbing
                                      over turnstiles."

                                 - to stop people trying to get in without paying? - A. Tha t is
                                 on behalf of the Club, to make sure of people paying the fees.

                            Q. And (v), "Prevent anyone climbing from one section of the
                               ground to another", and that can involve from standing sections
                               to sitting? - A. A n element of public order and an element of
                               looking after the C l u b ’s interests, to make sure they do n o t
                     H         go into a more expensive part of the ground.
:,a r ph a m ,      ltd.
                   W rltm
                                                                -   27 -
-, £LO S I 20X
                              Q. (vi):
                                          "Persons removed from the ground t h r o u g h illness
                                          or i n j u r y m a y be treated on the tr ac k b y ambulance­
                                          m e n . 11

                                    If someone is taken ill or injured on the terraces, how, in
                                    your experience, is the injured or ill p e r s on got f rom the
                                    terrace down to the perimeter track? - A. If it is a well
                                    attended game, and if I m a y hark back to Man c h es t er United,
                                    w hich is g e ne r al l y full, the injured p e r s o n w ill be passed
                   B                above the crowd.         The crowd will pass the injured person down.
                                    If it is less w el l attended, Police Officers, stewards, or
                                    ambulancemen, w ou l d go in and attend the p erson or assist h i m
                                    to the track.

                              Q.     And    after fi rs t aid treatement    they will either be returned
                                    the crowd, accom p an y the first aid man, o r leave the ground:

                                          "If the pe rson is not returned into the crowd, the
                                          n e a r e s t officer will accompany such p er s o n an d obtain
                                          full particulars in order that, if necessary, his
                                          n ex t of k i n ma y be informed."

                                    Is that a function you wou l d expect of y ou r Officers? - A. One
                                    would expect that wherever y o u had an injured person who we n t
                                    to hospital y o u would inform next of kin.
                    D
                              Q.     And then (vii), another direction, that gangways are to be kept
                                    clear.     Mr. G-oslir., turning xo another aspect of the case if 1
                                    may, w h e n y o u took over the responsibility for p ol i c in g of
                                    football grounds in South Yorkshire, was it the practice at
                                    that time for a ny clubs to make specific requests for policing"
                                    - A. Ro, sir.

                              Q. But po l i c i n g was paid for b y all of the clubs? - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q.     They were invoiced and paid the invoices? - A. Yes,          sir.

                              Q.    Until the dispute that we see in the exchange of telexes
                                    occurred, un t i l then, what h ad your attitude b een to the p r o ­
                                    vision of Poli c e Services at football .grounds? Was it that it
                                    was to be p ai d for or that it was to be fr e e? - A. That it was
                              v     to be paid*for, sir.

                                  ;£:’-??ow, the m a t t e r was discussed by y o u w i t h              you
                                              in late 1983? - A. Yes, sir.

                              'v / ^ & wade clear "his unhappiness about the matt e r? - A. Yes.

                              Q. Vr ? I did y o u tell hi m your v i e w was about payme nt ? - A. Well,
                                 I pointed out that as a football club was a commercial concern,
                                 a private n o t a public concern, in common with cricket matches,
                                 race courses, etc., if Police Officers were to perform duty
                                 inside the ground, then that would have to fall w i t h i n the
                                 description as I understood it of Special Police Services,' and
                                 therefore w o u l d have to be paid for b y the football club.

                     H         Q. You have told m y lord that the Operational Orders, of w hi c h we
                                  have seen specimens, would be sent by the Club each we ek ? - A.
 HARPHAM. LTD.
                                  Sent to the Club.
t S h o r th a n d W riters

FF1ELO S I SDX
                                                                      - 28 -
                           Q. For each game that was in the offing.       D u r i n g your time in
                              office w e r e y o u ever aware of Sheffield United, saying, in
                              response to one of those Orders, "Don't come, we don*t want y o u
■              a       j      - A. No, sir.

                           Q. A n d as f a r as y o u were concerned, w h e n w a s it, do y o u say, that
                              it "was fi r s t made clear to y o u b y Sheffield U n i t e d that the
                              Police w ere n o t wanted? - A. I w o u l d Jiot p u t it as strongly as
                              that the Police were not wanted.

                           Q.            MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM:     I do not th i n k they have ever     said
               B                 they did n o t w an t them.         They did n o t w a n t them ’on particular
                                 terms? - A. Yes.             I became aware that there was a non-request
                                 for S p e c ia l Poli c e Services with the exchange of telexes.            I
                                 was aware, quite obviously, with m y m e e t i n g w i t h
                                 w hi c h a g a i n I w o u l d stress were always conducted very civilly,
                                 ver y properly, but that he was concerned at the level of Police
                                 charges, that we were one of the h ighest charging Councils in
               C                 the County, a n d he was seeking alternatives to Police Officers
                                 inside the ground.             He recognised he h a d n o control outside the
                                 ground, and that the suggestion r egarding closed circuit
                                television was one means of achieving that end.                   I pointed out
                                 that was ve r y m u c h a n impractical suggestion, because the w a y
                                 in w h i c h disorder escalates inside the grounds, we n ee d to be
                                 there as quickly as possible, and to see it on a television
                                 screen and to react would be operationally suicidal.
               D                       MR. BENTLEY:        M y Lord, I have no fur t he r questions.

                                      MR. G R I F F I T H S : M y Lord, m a y I, a r i si n g out of what y our
                                 Lordship asked, w h i c h was a hypothesis I did not see ....

                                       MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:           You want to a s k a question?

               E                       MR. GRIFFITHS:         Yes.

                                       MR. JUST I CE BOREHAM:         Yes.

                                       F u r t h e r Cross-Examined by Mr. G R I F F I T H S :

                           Q. Mr. Goslin, y o u remember his Lordship said supposing the
                              u nl i k e l y happened, and the Club said, "You are, un d er no
               F              circumstances, to come in", you pointed out to m y Lord you
                              would have a IPoliee duty to keep l a w and order.            Y o u p ointed
                              out to m y L ord if y o u anticipated a real p o ssibility of
                              trouble inside y o u wo u ld have a legal right to go in, and then
                              y ou turned to the question of plans y ou might, or might not,
                              have to make.              Can I explore that aspect of it against m y
                              L o r d fs h y p o t h e s i s ? Would it be right, if that came up you,
                              or y o u r successor, would have to assess the situation as to
               G              the degree of risk and the degree of Police reserve n eeded to
                              counter that risk? - A. Yes, indeed we would.

                           Q. Is that a task which, in one way or another, Officers in y o u r
                              posit io n are doing day in day out, in a var i et y of different
                              ways? - A. Yes indeed.

                           Q. Strikes are one example?
■              H
                                      MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM: ' Mr. Griffiths, I repeat, I a m not
HARPHAM, LTD,
S h o rthand Writer*
                                 without judicial knowledge.  I u n de rstand all this. I do n o t
FFIELD S I 2DX

                                                                  -   29 -
                                   want to stop y o u from making a point, but y o u do not need to
                                   make that sort of point to a Police Officer.

                                        MR. GRIFFITHS:   M y Lord, I am obliged.       I did not want
                                   it to be on record unchallenged.

                                        MR. BENTLEY:   Unless your Lordship has any questions?
                                   Thank you, Mr. Goslin.

                                        Ch. Insp.   GORDON ERIC PAYNE Called (S w o r n )
                   B                             Examined b y MR. P H I L L I P S :

                              Q.   Your full name, please? - A. Gordon Eric Payne.

                              Q.   Are y o u a Chief Inspector with the South Yorkshire Police,
                                   stationed at Woodseats? - A. I am.

                              Q.   Have y o u been, in fact, a Chief Inspector since 1979? - A.
                                   That is correct.

                              Q. And y o u have been at Woodseats Police Station since August,
                                 1981? - A. Yes.

                              Q. And does Sheffield United Football Ground come within the
                                 dsitricx of Woodseats Police Station?  - A. It did at that time,

                    D         Q.   It is only a year or two since it was put into the West Bar
                                   district? - A. In September, 1983.

                              Q.   So during the period we are concerned with, that is to say the
                                   football season 1982/83, it came withirr your jurisdiction? - A.
                                   Yes.

                              Q. At Woodseats Police Station what is the rank of the Officer in
                                 overall charge? - A. S up e r intendant.

                              Q. Is that Superintendent Furness? - A. That is correct.

                              Q. He is in hospital at the moment? - A. He is out of hospital but
                                 off sick.

                              Q. And yo u r rank is one below that of Mr. Furness? - A. Yes.

                              Q. And are y ou his deputy? - A. I am.

                              Q. So when-Mr. Furness is available he is in control of the Police
                                 Station, otherwise you are? - A. Yes.

                              Q. And so far as the policing of football grounds is concerned,
                                 until the time you mentioned was that dealt w i t h on a practical
                                 and operational basis from your Police Station? - A. It was.

                              Q. The A ssistant Chief Constable had a directive kind of control
                                 over it, as he has described? - A. Yes.

                              Q. But y o u were dealing with it on a day to day b as i s? - A. That
                                 is correct.
                     H
 H&RPH&M, LTD.
                              Q. Did y o u therefore have to assess what sort of forces to deploy
: S h o r th a n d W riter*      to the football ground in relation to any one ma tch? - A„ Yes.
FFIELD S i 2DX
                                                                 - 30 -
                                     Q.     Was that a job which you did personally, or is it something you
                                           delegated? - A. A t the beginning of the season we looked at
                                           the matches that were coming up.   We received a list from the
                                           Secretary of the Football Club, and then we categorised the
                                           matches according to the manpower requirements we anticipated
                                           would be required to police the match.

                                     Q. When you say ”w e n , who did that categorisation? - A. The
                                        senior Officers in the sub-division, w h ic h included myself.

                                     Q. Did you go to the Ground before the season started? - A. We
                     B                  went to the Ground with the Fire Services, and various other
                                         organisations, I believe structural engineers, to look at the
                                        premises.

                                     Q.    Were the Club officials present? - A. Yes.

                                     Q.    H o w often did this take place during the season? - A. I believe
                                           it was twice a year.

                                     Q. A n d w hen y o u h ad the list of forthcoming fixtures for the
                                        season, h o w did you k n o w w h i c h category to put a m a t c h into?
                                        - A. It was based on the anticipated size of the crowd, plus
                                        the possible problems we experienced in previous years w ith
                                        visiting supporters, and the home supporters.

                                     Q. H o w would you k n o w the anticipated size of the crowd? - A. We
                     D                  would get that from the Club itself, if they could help us,
                                         also if it was a local derby we would anticipate the greater
                                         crowd, and ix would v ary through the season.     If the team was
                                         doing well we might change the category.

                                     Q.         MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   I was going to ask this:          things
                                           are never entirely predictable? - A. No.

                                     Q. A run of luck and they flock in, bad luck and they flock out?
                                        - A. Yes.

                                     Q. Or may do?

                               v Q.             MR. PHILLIPS:   Lid you get, then, liaison and assistance
                                           from the Club in assessing these matters? - A. Yes.  We would
                                           ask the Club to give us information about supporters travelling.
                                   '.<V1
                               !     Q* Did the Club know, the person you spoke to at the Club, k n o w
                                     . „. why you needed this information? - A. Yes.

                                     Q,. And wh y was it? - A. So we could anticipate the number of
                                       ' Policemen we required.

                                     Q a In fact, as we have heard, the Club was not charged on a m a n
                                        .by man basis, but according to the attendance? - A. That is
                                        'correct.

                                      Q. So did y o u feel the need ever to go so far as to ask the Club
                                         h o w man y Officers they required to attend? - A. No.

                                      Q. That was dealt w ith in your Police Station? - A. Yes.
                      H
 M A R P H A * . LTD.
: S h o r t h a n d W riter*
                                                                       -   31 -
"F IE L D S I 2DX
                            Q. Did you, in fact, make arrangements for men to attend when
                               matches were played?- A. They were dealt with at the sub-
                               di-£sion, yes.

                            Q. That is to say, your Police Station? - A. Yes.

                            Q. And were the Operational Orders such as we have seen, drawn up
                               at your Police Station? - A. They were.

                            Q. Is there a -bundle of documents in front of you? Could you
                 B             turn to document 78. That is a specimen of an Operations
                               Order and it is headed,in fact, Woodseats Police ’Station? - A.
                               Yes.

                            0. And we see from this, in fact, on this occasion it was
                               Superintendent Furness who would be in overall command? - A.
                               Yes.

                            Q. And are various other people mentioned? - A. Yes.

                            Q.    We see later on the names given of the various Officers who
                                 were to be concerned with it - for example, we have the names
                                 of those attending? - A. That is correct.

                            Q.    And this would all be done on a week by week basis? - A. Yes.

                            Q. And what happened to this document when it was completed? - A.
                  D            It was circulated to the Police Porce and to the club. Variou
                               persons in the Police Service received it.

                            Q. How would you get the men to come on this kind of duty? - A.
                               It )uld consist of men we raised who were on leave, and men
                                      other -divis ions. At one time it was the responsibility
                                  ■"h e sub-division to raise the manpower, then it passed over
                               :> .ie Pootball Liaison Department.

                            t ,;.v.   ;;;:e at p.84, in the centre column, various figures. These
                                       different divsions, different Police Stations, and I see
                                      Jvpntioned - that is Road Traffic? - A. Yes.

                            c;   '•••'.you collected them from different parts of the city? - A.


                            Q. And these were men on leave? - A. Some of them, yes.

                            Q. Would they be men on normal duties within their own divisions,
                               taken off for this purpose? - A. If they were on weekly leave
                               they would be normally on a day off, and we would bring them
                               in to police a match. The other people would be people where
                               we had adjusted the shifts.
                            n « These were the names and numbers which you had prepared - by
                                 what time in the week, how far in advance of the match? - A.
                                 I would say at the beginning of the week.

                            Q.   And a copy was sent to the Ground? - A. Yes.

                   H        Q.   Did you get on any occasion, any response to that, saying:
                                 "We don't want these Policemen11?  Or "We don't want as many
KARPHAM. LTD.                    Policemen"? - A. No.
S h o r th a n d W rti*r»
FFIELD S I 2DX
                                                            -   32 -
                                        MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM!      It has never be e n suggested that
                                   has "been the response.

                                         MR. PHILLIPS:       No, that is right.

                                        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:           Let us not go for unnecessary
                                   points.

                              Q.        MR. PHILLIPS:    On the weekend itself, would you be presen'
                                   at the Ground? - A. Yes, if it was my weekend at work.
                    B
                              Q.    Dc you - perhaps you can deal with this one matter - do you
                                   recall a match which took -olace on 15th August, 1983? - A. Yes,
                                   I do.

                              Q. "What sort of match was that? - A. It was a friendly match
                                 between Sheffield United and Motherwell.

                              Q. What happened? - A. No Policemen were present at the Ground at
                                 the start of the match. The Club, I understand, informed the
                                 Police that there were to be no away supporters visiting the
                                 Ground, but one stand was to be opened, and they believed, or
                                 felt, they were able to cope with the policing of the Ground
                                 themselves.

                              Q.         MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM: " There were going to be no visiting
                                    supporters?' - A. That is correct.
                     D
                              Q. And only one stand being opened? - A. Yes.

                              Q.         MR. PHILLIPS:       And the Police accepted that? - A. Yes.

                              Q. 15th August would be before the season proper starts? - A. Yes.

                              Q. And what happened then? - A. I received a call at home to say
                                 there were some problems at the Ground.

                              Q. What did you do? - A. I turned out from home and arranged for
                                 about 30 Police Officers to attend.

                              Q. Were you able to find 30 Police Officers readily? - A. We had
                                 to get help from different sub-divisions.

                              Q. And were you able to deal with the trouble? - A. Yes.

                              Q. What sort of crowd was there at the time? - A. I'cannot recall
                                 the numbers of the crowd.

                              Q.          MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:    It sounds like a very small crowd?
                                     -   A. Yes, it was.   I think there were about two or three coach
                                   ..;Loads of Motherwell supporters.

                              Q. So there were some visitors? - A. Yes.

                              Q.         MR. PHILLIPS:   Do you think, in your division, you would
                                    be able to muster enough men together? - A. No, we would not.

                              Q. So now, when you have assessed what you require for these
                     H           purposes, you then turn up with the men, sometimes yourself,
 KARPMAN, LTD.
                                 sometimes some other senior Officer at the Ground? - A. Yes.
• S h o r th a n d W riters
FFIELD S I 2DX                                                       - 33 -
A n d you take part in the br i ef i n g of the m e n ? - A. Yes.

And y o u take part in the supervision of t hem while they are
there, inside the Ground? - A. Yes, bot h inside and outside.

And h o w do y o u see your role inside the ground? - A. The role
is two-fold, dual purpose, to m a in t a i n public order and also
to ensure that       the ground   regulations are complied with, and
to thus ensure       the safety   of the public and the players.

In addition to   the uniformed Officers in the Ground, are there
any other Officers   there?    - A. No.

W hen y o u are in the Ground y o u say y o u have a dual function? -
A. Yes.

Y o u obviously do not want trouble to occur,       do you? - A. No.

But if it does occur, y ou feel able to cope wit h it, with the
number of m e n y o u have? - A. That is correct.

Men ti o n has be e n made of stewards? - A. Yes.

What is your experience of the capability of the stewards
there? - A. I would say that they would n ot be capable of
dealing with problems within the Ground.   They are generally,
perhaps, elderly members who go along there to earn a little bi
of pin money, if that is the correct expression.

They are not fulltime employees? - A. No„

And h o w many of these stewards are there,       do you say? - A.
I could not give y o u a figure.

What do the stewards actually do? - A. They are scattered round,
the g r o u n d , •h a ving certain responsibilities for monitoring the
crowd, working on the turnstiles.

You mean collecting the m on e y? - A. Yes.

fhey w ork in isolation from the Police? - A. They have a
specific role, certainly at the turnstile, but there is a
Police Officer present as well.

'And I d o n ’t think it is nece s sa r y to go through all the
■details of the Operation Order that is drawn up; that has b e e n
 done already.     So far as the w o r k you do in the ground, you
 mentioned the regulations and y o u menti o n ed the public order
 aspect of it.     Do the Officers, or do you, encourage the
 Officers under your command to draw any distinctions at all
 whe n they are inside the Ground? - A. No,        none whatsoever.

Is it possible to apportion what time is spent on public
order and what time is spent on regulations? - A. No, it is
not.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     Surely it w il l depend on c i r c u m ­
stances.  If y o u have some dreadful occasion, such as h a p p e n e d
at Bradford City, law and order goes b y the board, and public
safety is .absolutely predominant? - A. Yes.
An d y o u get those other awful occasions where there is
violence.     Safety has'to take second place and public order
has got to be f ir s t? - A. The success of the Ground is when
nobody is arrested.

     MR. PHILLIPS:         We have been looking at the Operation
Order in r el a t i o n to the Portsmouth match.  W o ul d y o u look at
p. 203? That is a summary of various figures concerning the
matches during the perio d in question? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

A n d if we look to the 15th January, 1983, and the first column
which is about threeauarters of the way down, we see the ma t c h
against Portsmouth, which is the subject of this Order? - A.
Yes.

A n d we find there is an attendance, 12,907, and there is then
a figure for the n u m b e r of Officers on overtime, or days off,
who attended? - A. Yes.

A nd then the cost is worke d out?

     MR. JU ST I C E BOREHAM: I suppose those on overtime, that
means extended shift, does it?- A. Yes.

And day off? - A. They will be on a normal w ee k l y leave day.

They still get overtime? - A. Yes.

     MR. PHILLIPS:    And the n we see the n u m b e r of Officers
actually on their ordinary duty time? - A. Yes.

So there were 47 P . C . ’s, for example, on overtime, and only
30 on ordinary duty time? - A. Yes, that is correct.

And. then we see that the n u mber of Officers there in all
categories, in relat i on to this particular match, and we find
that is to say 77 Constables, 10 Sergeants, and a smaller
number of Inspectors and above? - A. Yes.

But then these deployed inside the ground, one Superintendant,
one Chief Inspector, 'one Inspector, seven Sergeants, and 51
Constables? - A. Yes.

And the charge has     b e e n made for one   Inspector, four Sergeants
and 36 Constables?         - A. Yes.

And that appears, in fact, to be a smaller charge that is made
or a charge that is made in relation to the gate? - A. That is
correct.

Rather than to the n umber attended? - A. Yes,         as opposed to
the number of Police Officers.

     MR. JUS T IC E BOREHAM:   To the gate r a t h e r than the n u m b e r
of people attending.     What is the difference?       I thought that
was the gate.

     MR. PHILLIPS:   I am.sorry, I meant the number of
Officers attending, not spectators:
                              Q. And y o u have, i n fact, Inspector, had the opportunity of
                                 checking those against the Operation Order which we have looked
                                 at earlier on? - A. Yes.

                              Q. A nd does that tally wit h those figures? - A. It does.

                                            Cross-Examined fry MR. G RI F F I T H S :

                              Q. Of the Officers who are in the Ground, some are solely on
                                 crime prevention, are they n ot? - A. No.

                  B           Q. What about the spotters w i t h their binoculars? — A. They wil l
                                 be, yes, for b o t h purposes, for crime prevention and also if
                                 we see in a particular part of the crowd where a crowd is
                                 getting too compacted together, we would use the spotter to
                                 tell the Officers on the Ground to move people along.

                              Q. I suggest that is not what they are hab it u al l y used for,
                                 Officer, that y o u can see what is going on on the Ground f r o m
                                 the control b o x where a senior Officer is placed, because it is
                                 right up i n the top of the stand, with a v i e w of the w ho l e of
                                 the Ground? - A. That is so, yes.

                              Q. And the spotters are outside and away f r o m that control box ?
                                 - A. The spotter is on a level above the actual place where I
                                 or the Superintendent would sit.  He is, in fact, on the south
                                 stand in the gods, above the actual seating area.
                   D
                              Q. Immediately outside that is the Police control room, in w h ic h
                                 there is the gentleman who has access to the tannoy and to the
                                 Police communications? - A. It m ay be now. It w a s n ’t then.

                              Q. When are you referring to the change h a ving taken p l a c e ? -
                                 A. Well, since the Ground was no longer our responsibility,
                                 which was September, 1983.

                                       MR. J USTICE BOREHAM:           Is that a convenient m o m e n t ?

                                       MR. GRIFFITHS:         If y o u r Lordship leases.

                                                    (Luncheon A d j o u r n m e n t )

                              Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:        Chief Inspector, y o u ment i on e d in your
               :*F                 evidence that in y our     v i e w one of the roles of the Police is
                                   to prevent crushes in      the crowd,     and thus injuries to people,
                              •    is that correct? - A.      Yes, that is correct.

                              Q. The Ground at Sheffield has a capacity of some 44,000, 45 , 0 00 ?
                                 - A. I would think that wo u ld be about the figure.

                              0.:.,.;The last time that there was anything like that amount of
                                     spectators in the Ground was w ay back in 80/81, was it not?
                                     -'a , I do not k n o w that, b u t I would not disagree.

                              Q. A nd over the last three or four years the m a x i m u m order of
                                 gate has been of the order of just above 20,000, a f e w above
                                 that? - A. Yes.

                     H        Q. With that quantity in the Ground there is no risk: of the
                                 crushing of the type y o u m a y have seen in earlier days, or
 karpham .         ltd   .
t S h o r th a n d W rltvrv

:FFIELD S I SO*
                                                                   -   36 -
                                     may not, I d o n ’t know, is there? - A. That is incorrect, there
                                     is a chance, because the Ground is split into sections, and
                                     people wil l congregate in certain areas, and particularly n e a r
                                     the entrances, where they come from the b ac k of the stand to
                                     the standing areas, and therefore it is necessary to move them
                                     away f r o m the entrance to prevent crushing taking place,
                                     because if we do not do that, as people come up they will pus h
                                     peopl forward towards the barriers.

                                Q.   So what y o u are doing is protecting the innocent spectators
                                     against b od i l y injury? - A. Yes.
                       B
                                     Now, so far as enforcing ground regulations is concerned, would
                                     you agree with me that many of the ground regulations are
                                     especially designed to assist the Police in their law e n f or c e­
                                     ment? - A. No, I would not agree with that.

                                Q.   Did y ou k n o w that one of the regulations had been brought in at
                                     the re q u es t of the Police? - A. No.

                                     You see, we h a d evidence f rom Mr. Goslin about that yesterday,
                                     that at his request the Club brought in a regulation to a l l o w
                                     the Police to prevent entry of people, as opposed to m e rely
                                     having po w er under the regulations to eject them? - A. I w a s
                                     not aware of that.

                                Q. To take one example, fireworks, smoke canisters, bottles, glass
                        D          cans, flags, banners, poles, and other smaller articles,
                                   including anything which might be used as a weapon, are not
                                   permitted within the Ground - that is r eally aimed at the Polic-
                                   law enforcement? - A. Those items you have mentioned are not
                                   offensive weapons as such, and therefore could be lawfully
                                   carried.  They only become offensive weapons if they are used.

                                Q. Exactly, and the reason that is to help the Police is sc that
                        E          you have power to prevent people bringing them in, right? - A.
                                   Yes.

                                Q. If they bri n g in banners it is likely to be what Mr. Goslin
                                   described as a flashpoint, if the opposing spectators start
                                   waving their banners? - A. Certainly if they started us i ng them
                                   to hit people with.

                                Q. "When they start one of the difficulties is that ill-disposed
                                   spectators try and goad the opposition, d o n ’t they? - A. Yes.

                                Q. And by u s i n g things like I have      just read out? - A. Yes, it is
                                   possible.

                                Q. And if they do you have then got a volatile flash situation,
                        G          whexe trouble can burst out in moments? - A. There is that
                                   possibility.

                                Q. I do not propose, with my L o r d s h i p ’s p e rm ission to go over
                                   the ground I covered with the last witness.

                                          MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:       Well, I have told you you must
                                     take y o u r own course.
                       H
                                          MR. GRiPFiTHS:   I do not want to waste your L o r d s h i p ’s
    MARPHAW, LTD.
i   S h o r th a n d W riters
                                     time going through all that again.
    FFIELD 51 SOX
                                                                 -   37 -
                    ■ KR. BENTLEY:     My Lord, I have no re-examination.     Thank
                you, Inspector.     The only other matt er we would wish to put
                in by w a y of evidence, is a report w h i c h we put in as a
                publ is h ed document.  It appears at p. 145 of the Defendant's
                bundle, the third bundle.

                     KR. JUSTICE 30REEAM:        Is this the Departmental Committee
                on Crowds?

                     MR. BENTLEY:    My Lord, yes.      It is commonly referred to
                as the Short Report.
          B
                     MR. JUSTICE 30REEAK:        It looks far from short.

                        MR. BENTLEY:       That is right.  It was chaired by Mr.
                Edward Short a n d has been ever since referr e d to as the Short
                Report.        It is a matter which we had not noticed, at p. 147,
                one sees the Warrant of Appointment set out, and the Committee
                a p p oi n t ed b y the Heme Secretary to enquire into the arrangemenl
                made to deal w i t h abnormally large attendances on special
                occasions, especially attendances at athletic grounds, and to
                consider, in v i e w of the increased fa c il i t y and rapidity of
                transport, what further steps, if any, should be taken to
                ensure the safety of the public, and y o u r Lordship will see
                that       the Warrant was dated 11th June, 1923, and the Committee,
                in fact, reported the following year, 1924.

          D          M y Lord, there are only a f e w passages we would seek to
                refer your Lordship to, and we refer your Lordship to them
                simply as evidence as to the prevailing practice at the time
                of the Report.   We would first of all invite your L o r d s h i p ’s
                attention tc p. 13 of the Report, that is, p. 157 in the
                bundle, at para. 2C, heading, "Provision of Police for Duty
                inside Grounds":

                     "The definition of the responsibilities of the
                     Police inside a ground is not so easy, and it will
                     be convenient first to consider the arrangements under
                     wh ic h their services are made available.   At present
                     the number of police to be pr o vided on any particular
                     occasion is settled by consultation betw e e n the ground
                     authorities and the Chief Officer of Police, and the
                     former are charged for the services of the >police at
                     rates fixed by the police authority."

                A n d m y Lord, the paragraph continues, but it m a y be that the
                r emaining passages in the p a r a gr a ph add little. Para. 21,
                at the foot of the page:

                     "As regards the charges made for the services of the
                     police at football grounds or similar places, we
                     understand that they are fixed according to the rank
                     of the individuals employed and the time for which
                     their services are required, the rates being calculated
                     to recoup the police a u th o ri t y for the full cost
                     involved, and that as a result of the increase in the
                     p a y and allowances received b y the police during the
                     last f e w years the charges have been considerably
         H           advanced.    We have had no evidence that the enhanced
                     rates n o w payable have led to any undue economy in the
r.rz.   ltd .        number of police employed at sports grounds; indeed
                     Mr. Chapman expressed the opinion that no ground

                                            -   38 -
     a uthority wo u l d risk "being made liable to a large
     fine by the football association as a result of
     disturbance arising f rom the provision of an
     inadequate number of police in order to secure some
     small saving in the amount of the charges payable.
     At the same time      we w o u l d regard it as i mportant
     that ground authorities should be encouraged to
     utilise the services of a reasonable n u m b e r of men,
     provided they can be made available, since the
     presence of the police at a largely a tt ended football
     match or similar event is in itself desirable as the
     most effective means of preventing d is o r d e r - a n d of
     dealing w i t h it promptly should it arise.        Their
     employment is, in fact, not solely for private
     advantage, but serves also          a useful public purpose;
     and we think that this mignt properly be r e co gnised
     by fixi ng the rates to be charged on such occasions
     at something less than the full cost of the m e n con­
     cerned and that the m a t t er should receive the c o n s i d e r ­
     ation of the Home Office."

     -      and my lord, finally, at p. 159, para. 24, the
Committee deals with the duties which Police Officers who
attend inside football grounds were, at that time, commonly
performing:

     "As indicated above, the ordinary, and, as we believe,
     universal arrangement at present is that the police
     provided within the ground are paid for by the ground
     authority according to the scale prescribed b y the
     police authority.         Such a system does not, in our
     judgment, affect the question of what duties the police
     may prope r ly be called on to perform, and as a general
     rule we consider that the police should not be expected
     to p e r f o rm w i thin a ground any duties w hi c h they would
     not have to perform in a public place outside.              The
     police should act in every respect as if the y wer e on
     ordinary duty under the control of their officers and,
     while we do not consider that the latter shcu Id be
     placed in the position of having to take orders from
     any officials of the ground, we think that on r e c e i v i n g
     a request from any such official they should take the
     nece ss a ry steps to comply with it in so far as it m a y
     not be inconsistent wi t h their duties as police officers
     and the purposes for w h i c h they are engaged.        A p a r t f ro m
     the objections of principle to the Performance b y the
     police for private persons of other than po lice duties,
     if they are employed on any such duties it will "be
     obvious that there is a risk of their n ot b e i n g able
     to p a y proper attention to their primary duties of
     p re s erving order and preventing offences against the
     law.     We should not, however, see any objection to
     their performing duties which m a y not strictly fall
     with in the definition of police duty p r ov i de d that the
     foregoing principle is not infringed."

and, m y lord, the following paragraph, which it m a y n o t be
necessary to read, touches on the question of the duties of
stewards, and indeed that ma tter is taken u p s p e c if i c al l y at
para. 27 of the Report, but it is really the par a gr a p hs to
which I have invited your lordship's attention w h i c h we
                              primarily rely on as evidence of what the practice was at the
                              date of the Report, and before.

                                    KR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     Yes, and the conclusion they come
                               to is that the Police might ver y well, wit h the C o m m i t t e e ’s
                               approval, assist the stewards in their duties, provided it
                               does not interfere w it h the proper discharge of the ordinary
                               duties of the Police.

                                    KR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, yes.             M y Lord,   that is the
                               evidence for the Plaintiffs.
                    B
                                        DR. W I L F R E D B ASTWOOL Called    (Sworn)

                                             Examined by MR. G R I F F I T H S :

                            Q. Dr. Eastwood, wha t is your full name? - A. Wilfred Eastwood.

                            Q. And your address? - A. My business address,               23 Kingfield Road,
                               Sheffield, 11.

                                    MR. GRIFFITHS:   M y Lord, we have prepared a short CY,              if
                               it is of any assistance:

                            0. What is your profess ion? - A. I am a consulting engineer.

                            Q. And your qualifications are these, are they not, that you
                    D          served on the staff of the Universities of Manchester and
                               Aberdeen, becane Professor of Civil and Structural Engineering
                               at the University in this city in 1972, retired from academic
                               practice to found, or to join a practice of consulting
                               engineers, subsequently starting the firm whose letterhead m y
                               Lord has? - A. Resigned rather than retired, sir.

                            Q. And I see your qualifications are a Fellow of Engineering -
                               what is that? - A. This is a body which was set up at the
                               instigation of the Duke of Edinburgh, who acquired a Royal
                               Charter for it - he is a Senior Fellow - and it was meant to
                               be a balance to the Royal Society, but for engineers rather
                               than scientists.

                            Q. And I think y ou are the only consulting engineer outside
                               London in England who has h ad the honour of being elected?
                               - A. I think that is so.

                            Q. Have you, as p ar t of your professional experience, had the
                               conduct of safety procedures at a number of football grounds?
                               - A. That is so.

                            Q. Since when? - A. The boundary of it, between safety procedures
                               and being responsible for structures, is a vague one, but I
                               have been concerned with this particular ground since 1962.

                            Q. Can you list other grounds y ou have been concerned with safety
                               at? - A. Yes, Sheffield Wednesday, Rotherham United, Nottin gham
                               Forest, Southampton, Swindon Town, Torquay United and Newcastle
                               United.

                   H        Q. Have you prepared, and do you have, a number of plans setting
                               out details of the Ground, (a), as it n o w is, and (b), as it
HA RPH A*.       LTD.
S h o r th a n d W riter*
                               was at the time in 1982 we are concerned with? - A. Not
-FIELD S I 2DX

                                                              - 40 -
                               specially prepared, but I do have a numb er of drawings, yes.

                            Q. Before we open the plans, can y ou just deal with one matter
                    A          which m y learned friend re ferred to in opening. He mentioned
                               the disaster at Ibrox Stadium, in the context of crowd crushing
                               Are y ou familiar with the details of that incident? - A. Yes.

                            Q. H o w did y o u become familiar? - A. Well, I became familiar, of
                               course, as everyone else did at that time, through the press,
                               but because of m y professional interest I gained much more
                               knowledge of_it, and of course, because of my professional
                    B          commitments I became involved at some six grounds, in desi gning
                               safety measures, as a direct result of Ibrox, one of which
                               grounds was the Bramall Lane Ground.

                            Q. What was, in the short term, the nature of the Ibrox disaster?
                               - A. The crowd, at the end of the match, had to go up to the
                               top of the embankment on wh i c h they h ad been standing, and
                               then down steps at the other side, and the steps at the other
                               side h a d handrails. A great m a n y people went over the top,
                               became very crowded together.     The handrails, as far as one can
                               tell, were diverted sideways and fell over.      People fell wit h
                               them and the crowd coming over the top surged and the bodies
                               piled up and people were suffocated.

                            Q. Following that, did you carry out certain works at Sheffield
                               United Ground? - A. Yes.
                    D
                            0. when was t-hax? - A. In 1971, as I recall. I think that Ibrox
                               was 1st January, 1971, and it was in the following months of
                               that year.

                            Q. ±n your opinion, is there, following the changes made to the
                               layout at Sheffield United in 1971, any danger of an incident
                               such as the _Lbrcx incident? - A. So. Can I just explain - on
                               the first drawing

                            Q. Would you look at the first drawing,to explain.       What is that
                               a drawing of? - A. This is a pla n of the whole ground, w h i c h
                               shows in the middle of the plan, of course, the playing field
                               laid out, and then the four buildings round the ground, and
                               near the top right-hand corner, that is the ar e a where it m a y
                               have been possible for an Ibrox type disaster to occur, because
                               exactly as at Ibrox, a great n u m b e r of people standing on the
                               ’Eon* area at that end have to go up to the top, and then down
                               a slope at the other side, and those steps, staircases, that
                               you see drawn at that top right-ha nd corner, were, in fact,
                               completely remodelled after Ibrox.       You see, for example,
                               where the four steps at the top edge are, and the middle lot
                                   example, y ou have to go forward, turn right, and then go
                               down again, that was completely remodelled after Ibrox and
                               handrailings put in - a v er y considerable amount of money
                               spent, and in m y view ix created safer conditions.

                            Q. Gan we turn next to look at drawing no. 2.     Is that an enlarge*
                               ment showing the situation in the area you have just been
                               referring to? - A. That is so.     It shows what is called the
                               ’E o p ’, and then those staircases and exits wh i c h I have just
                   H           been o u t l i n i n g „

HARPHAM, LTD
S h o r th a n d W riter*                                - 41 -
afield si 7or
                    0. Now, in the large area of the ’Kop' there are a lot of straigh"
                       lines w i t h numbers on them - what are th ey? - A. Those are the
                       crush barriers, to prevent spectators s u r g i n g forward, and eaci
                       line represents, to scale, the pos ition of one of the crush
                       barriers, and that is the arrangement of crush barriers - as
                       y ou wi l l see, the date at the bottom r ig h t - h a n d corner of this
                       drawing was July, 1980.

                    Q. A nd unt il further improvements were made recently, is that h o w
                       it was? - A. That is h ow it was.
             B      Q. Can y o u tell us, please, are there various dangers, or
                       potential dangers, in regard to the crush barriers, h ow are
                       they guard ed against, and is there a d anger here arising f r o m
                       the configuration of the ground, taken w i t h the location of
                       the crush barriers? - A. The crush barriers, first of all, mus
                       be strong enough to resist the m a x i m u m force that can "be
                       reasonab ly expected to be applied to t h e m b y a dense crowd of
                       spectators, a nd these particular barrie rs have been tested and
                       satisfy the criteria of the Green Book.

                    Qc, A nd the Green B ook is   ...? - A. It is a Hom e Office do'cument
                        p u blished in 1976.  I   do have a copy here i f m y lord w ished to
                        look at it.    It gives   guidance on the construction of such
                        things as staircases,     crush barriers, emergency lighting, etc.
                        in football grounds.

             D      0. Did that Green Book follow on from an expert Committee that
                       considered these matters? - A. It did indeed.

                    Q. Chaired by? - A. lord Wheatley.

                    Q. The Judge in Scotland? - A. Yes.

                    0. And wit h representations of the p r o v i s i o n s ? - A.The p ro­
                       visions the Home Office follows and so on.

                    Q. Did you you rself give evidence to that Committ ee? - A.  Evidenc
                       is the w r o n g word. Three members of the Committee came f or a
                       day and spent a day with me in Sheffield discussing safety in
                       football grounds.

                    Q. What is the test that is done to these barriers, and h o w
                        frequently, and what is your opinion as to their stability?
                    . ; - A. The test load which is applied, and I will transpose the
                        metric units, m y lord, to ones which m a y be more clearly
                       .understood, the test load which is applied to the barrier is
                    " 400 pounds force for every foot of its length, applied to the
                        rail of the barrier by jacking it forward, 400 pounds for
                        every foot of its length.

                    Q. And h a s that test been applied to these? - A. That test had
                       been applied to these barriers, yes.

                    Q. A nd w i t h what result? - A. These barriers,      at the time of the
                       test, h a d withstood that load.

                    Q. Did a n y of them fail? - A. Some had f a i led and were brought up
             H         to standard post Ibrox, although I should say of the six
                       grounds I visited post Ibrox, this was e a s i l y the best, but
MARPHAM. LTD.
                       there were still some barriers which did not stand up to the
Shorthand Writer*
FT! ELD S1 7DX
                       requirements of the Green Guide, and the y were brought up to
                       s trength at that time.
                                                      -   42 -
                            Q. When was this? - A .   About 1972

                            Q. Have they, in more recent years, been tested? - A. Yes, most
                               recently, everyone of these barriers, except that I should say
                               that some of t h e m have been taken out and a n e w pat tern of
                               barriers installed in 1984 and 1985, but three months ago every
                               barrier on this ground was tested and withstands the Green
                               Guide load.

                            0. Is there significance in the eccentric po sitioning of them
                               that we see on the plan? - A. This was the traditional
                  B            pattern prior to the Green Guide, with the h i t and miss
                               pattern, with the hits in the next r o w coinciding wi t h the
                               misses, and this was chosen by Clubs because it gave greater
                               freedom for spectators to be able to migrate to a position
                               where they h ad a good view.

                            Q. What is the p o s i t i o n in distances, let us say between 99 and
                               72? - A. That is of the order of about 6 metres -           yards.

                            Q. About 20 feet? - A. 20 feet, yes.

                            0. And h o w ma n y people do you get within that distance? - A. The
                               Green Guide says the crowd should not be at a density greater
                               than 5.4 people per square metre.      If y o u apply that ruling,
                               and of course the entry to this Ground is controlled at that
                               figure, if y ou apply that ruling it will be something like
                  D            about six or seven people for every foot length of the barrier.

                            Q. I am not quite clear.    If they are standing w atcning the game
                               and yo u have got them into the maximum that you will permit
                               within that-area, h o w many people are you saying would be
                               between the barriers in rows, as ix were? - A. ror every metre
                               wide, which is more than a yard wide, there will be something
                               like a pproaching 30 people right up the ba n k behind, for each
                               metre of width.   It works out at about eight people per foot.

                            0. Now, taking that as a possible loading, if that is the right
                               word, can y ou give us your opinion as to whether there is any
                               danger to mem bers of the public from crowd pressure, sway,
                               pushing or anyt h i n g else? - A. There is certainly, in m y view,
                               no danger wha te v e r of one of these barriers being pushed over
                               or broken, or even grossly deformed.      I say t h a t because one
                               first division ground which I tested post Ibrox, every b a r rier
                               in the ground failed at not more than 150 pounds per foot lengi
                               These barriers, and none of them had ever been pushed over,
                               these barriers will withstand a test load of two-and-two-
                               thirds times that load.

                            Q. I.e., 400 pounds ? - A. 400 pounds.

                            Q. So there is no danger of that.     What about the danger of
                               r-eople, as it were, swaying forwards and crushing the chap
                               at the front? - A. The danger is obviously very limited.     The
                               closer the barriers are together the less and less ris k that
                               has, but w i t h the concentration that there was here, in the
                               vears from j.orox up to 1984, J- was nappy enough uhao this was
                               a reasonable spacing of barriers, and that the amount of sway
                   H           you could get of a crowd would be very limited.
HARPHAM. LTD.
S h o r th a n d W riter*
                             Q. And would the amount you could get be one likely to cause
FFIELD S1 2DX
                                danger in y o u r own view, or not? - A. In m y view, n o c I have

                                                            - 43 -
                                been a regular attender at this Ground for something a p p r o a c h ­
                                ing 30 years, a nd have good experience of h o w crowds "behave, an
                                where danger arises, and have not seen for na n y years n o w a n y ­
                                thing approac hing a dangerous sway within the crowd.    In this
                                ground p re-Ib rox was the last time I saw a dangerous sway.

                           Q. And pre-Ibrox was pre the alterations y o u made to the "barriers?
                              - A. Yes.  There were not as many barriers pre-Ibrox as there
                              were in 1930, as shown b y this drawing.


                  B
                           Q.   Wa  the design specifically to obviate the danger y ou have
                                mentions        iss.

                           Q. And talking generally, h o w does this Ground compare in terms
                              of safetj^, from that point of view, with the other first,
                              second, third, fourth division grounds you have visited and seen
                              in the course of yo u r professional duty? - A. At the time of
                              Ibrox?

                           Q. In 1980? - A. 1980.     A n u mber of the other grounds wit h w h i c h
                              I deal had b ee n designated by 1980 and had therefore to fully
                              comply w i t h the Green Guide, which is more stringent and w o u l d
                              require more barr iers than there are here, but of the grounds
                              that were not designated in 1980, I think this is the safest I
                              know.

                           Q.   iou sen ;ionea y o u are a regular viewer.      Do you have seats or
                   D            \\rSlzz. —
                                         v O “_ i-*«
                                                 A
                                            T H e IV 6' ~uWO seats but I occasionally stand out of
                                            _L
                                 roiessional interest,

                                Do you have            any qualms about that? - A. In:

                           Q.   Nov,’, assuming y o u h ad got a sway in the crowd, what precautions
                                can be taken to avoid any injury or problem? - A. The on ly
                                precaution is to have adequate crush barriers.                  A sway in the
                                crowd is u s u a l l y not foreseen in any way.           It inevitably
                                happens when there is a large crowd, and therefore dense packir.
                                because if the spectators are well separated the conditions
                                which cause a sway do not applj". A sway generally occurs -
                                looking, for example,        at this drawing no.            2 - the goal is
                                roughly where it says         ’pea k v i e w i n g ’, the   goal mouth, and if
                                an exciting incident takes place in the goal mouth, all the
                                spectators, because it is right in front of them, stand on
                                tiptoe to look over the m a n in front.               If there is not a m a n
                                in front thej^ do n ot have to stand on tiptoe, if there is
                                they stand on tiptoe, forward they go, and in no time they
                                are' moving down the steps in an uncontrolled way.                 If there is
                                a crush b a r rier there to stop the people going forward, and
                                because there is a dense packing of spectators, people can
                                halt before they fall         over.   If there are          not crush barriers
                                it can become an exaggerated sway and people can fall and be
                                dragged.

                           Qc With this spacing of 20 feet, is there a danger of the type
                              you have m e n t ioned? - A. it is very slight indeed. One
                              cannot say there is no danger whatever, but it is v e r y slight
                              indeed, and it has to be kept in mind the 20 feet is an
                              extreme case and I should point out, my Lord, that the
                   H          boundary fence along the front, which is not the dotted line
                              and is not numbered, that boundary fence is one of those h i g h
HARPHAM. LTD.
S h o r th a n d Writer*
FFIELD S1 2 0 X                                                     - 44 -
fences w h i c h y o u will have seen on television to stop spectato
climbing over, but it is also designed to take the 400 pounds
per foot pressure, so the fence is a barrier.         Half the barrie
are w i t h i n about two-and-a-half metres of it, and again the
ones n e a r gangways are very much smaller spacing, so you chose
the worst case, but it was not such as to concern me.

If an incident of craning and running a w a y wi t h yourself does
take place what, if anything, can the stewards or Police do
from that time? - A. In my experience, nothing.       I have never
seen one of these lead to any kind of injury,       so I have not
seen one of the worst ones.  In m y experience, i-f there is one
it occurs once only in the match, and there is nothing which
can be done about it.  In the excitement of the match, the
crowd is there, it is fairly dense - it has to be a b ig game
obviously - and if there was excitement it might h appen again,
but there does not appear to be any real danger in it in the
context of this barrier spacing and this strength of barrier.

In all the time you have been looking afte r Sheffield United,
have there b e e n any injuries from that cause, to your knowledg
- A. None w h a t e v e r that I k n o w of.

And that is since 1962? - A. 1962, yes.

You m e nti oned on your first drawing that the outside capacity
of the G-round was 44,230 now? - A . Yes.

And you me nt i o n e d when talking about the surge danger,    if I
may call it that, you need der.se p acking? - A. Yes.

To have danger, or potential danger, can y o u tell us, in
relation to the crowd of 4-4,000, assuming it to be reasonably
evenly distributed, what is the lower threshold, below which
y r i can say there is not a danger anyway? - A. If I might be
   --jtorical about this, this was shown on drawing 2, the *Eop*
   oa has rema i n e d unchanged in plan area, at least since 1947,
    ,;n I first attended a game on Boxing Day, and on that
     :'i:icular day ± think 68,000 were in the ground, and the
           p erm i t t e d on that *Eop* area was 25,000 in those days -
   • i^brox I negotiated with the Police a reduced number of


     . v"R. J U S T I C E BOREHAM: Dr. Eastwood, I think we are
g e v M -g a lon g w ay from the question. - A . No, sir, I am
trying to s h o w we have n o w come down to, and I know that
num^e :- of people used to go on that area, n o w you will see
the capacity permitted is 18,800, sir.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Dr. Eastwood, can y o u help us? You say
the number, the total capacity permitted, is 18^000? - A.
Threequarters of what it used to be.

Yes.  Out of that 18,000, what capacity w o u l d you except to
need before people were at all densely p a c k e d enough for there
to be any ri sk? - A. Getting close to~that.      Pr obably in the
region of 15,000 upwards, but still not n e a r l y so much risk
as in the days when 25,000, with fewer barriers ....

     MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM: That really ... I think you wi l l
help Mr. Griffiths more if y o u answer his questions.    He is
                                  being v e r y frustrated at the nosent. He wants to know what
                                  sort of t ightness of packing will "begin to produce this danger.

                             Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:   And I think your a nswer was about 15,000.
                                  44,000 is the ground capacity.  In y e s teryear were crowds of
                                  this sort of size not unusual? - A. It was quite commonplace
                                  20 years ago.

                             Q. A nd whe n is the last time that there has b e e n a crowd anything
                                approaching that? - A. I think the 80/81 season, when both
                                United and Wedn esday were in the Third Division, and there was
                    B
                                a crowd of, I think, 44,000.

                             Q. And since then, for the 82/83 season what crowds have there
                                been? - A. 20,000 would have been considered a large one.       The
                                average was prob a b l y - and the Club Secretary can give more
                                precise figures - but I think probably 15,000 to 17,000.

                             Q. If we lo o k at p. 203, which helpfully sets out the figures,
                                as I scan it it appears that the largest is 25,000 against
                                Barnsley? - A. 25,000 against Stoke.

                             Q. And the m a j o r i t y of the others under 16,000. With that sort of
                                attendance at the Ground, any risk, in y ou r view, of crowd
                                trouble f ro m swaying or the like? - A. Miniscule.

                             Q. Then in drawing no. 3, which I am not going to ask you
                    D             questions about, does it show alterations made to this area in
                                  the 84/85 period? - A. It does.


                                  no. 3? - A.    extension, sir. Two extensions - each fits
                                  together to give bhe full nicture.

                             Q. And then we can move on to drawing 5.  Is that the equivalent
                                of drawing 2, i.e., showing the location of the crush barriers
                                in the Bramall Lane end of the Ground in season 1982?- A. Yes.

                             Q. Can you, in an omnibus form give us you r v i e w as to the
                                potential, if any, for crowd danger from swaying in that
                                area, b e a r i n g in mind the presence and lo cation of barriers
                                and so on? - A. It was very small indeed.         It is common
                                experience that where the height of the b a n k is smaller the
                                dangers of swaying are very much reduced.         It is the very h i g h
                                bank w i t h large numbers on where there is the mai n danger.       It
                                will be seen this is quite a n a rr ow strip, only about half the
                                width of the one at the other end.        The danger is therefore
                                reduced and in addition it h a d quite a good arrangement of
                                barriers.

                             Q. Have y o u ever seen any swaying in that ar e a yourself? - A.
                                None ever, no.

                             Q. Then no. 6 is the up-to-date of that area,        or rather,   in
                                July, 1984, is it not? - A. Yes.

                             Q. .And then no. 7, again is that a plan made in 1980, showing the
                                 location of the crush barriers and relates to the season we
                  '..-••'I       are concerned with, 82/83? - A. It is.
MARPHA        . vTO.
 S h o rth u .*
                                                             -   46 -
F rlE L D
                      Q. Again, what is your comment about that? - A. Again, it is a
                         na r r o w strip.  M y Lord, it is only tine area where there are
                         lines with numbers against them wh i c h is standing accomm o­
              A          dation.      Behind that is all seating.    The standing a c c ommo­
                         dation is quite n a r r o w and there is quite a good sprinkling of
                         safety barriers and, of course, the fence in front,again
                         designed as a barrier.

                      Q. And then no. 8 is the up-to-date of that plan'    in 1985? - A.
                         That is so, with n o w just one line of barriers.

              b   |   Q. Yes, in place of the three there we re? - A. Yes/

                  !   Q. I would like next to ask y o u about the question of gangways
                         in these various areas we have been talking about? - A. Yes.

                      Q. Can y ou help us wit h how, at the material time, they were
                         located, b y which I do not mean where on the Ground, but
              c          their depth and so on? - A. My Lord, the w a y in wh i c h we
                         try to prevent people standing within gangways is to set the
                         level of the gangway well b e l o w that of the space either a l o n g ­
     {■   .
                         side it or in front of it.

                      Q. With the effect ...? - A. That certainly for the lateral
                         gangway, and by a lateral one I m e a n one parallel to the edge
                         of the pitch, in other words at the same level all the w a y
                         along, setting that about eight inches below the closed side,
              D          pitch side, means that only an extremely tall man would be
                         able to see from there, and this has the effect of p r e ve nting
                         people blocking that gangway, and in m y experience is com­
                         pletely effective.

                      Q. What about the gangways pointing towards the pitch? - A.
                         Gangways which we call radial gangways, again they are set
                         approximately the same distance b e l o w the steps either side.
              E          This does not make it quite so difficult to see the pitch,
                         particularly if the particular gangway is, say, almost in
                         line with tine goal, because you can then see a fair amount of
                         the action part of the pitch.

                      Q.: Are these gangways also at a lower level than the stand? - A.
                          Yes.
              F
                              MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:    But he says it is not quite so
                         effective for obvious reasons? - A. Yes, sir.    The ones ne a r
                         to edges, of course,   it is quite effective, but near the
                         centre of the pitch ....

                      Q. ..And in terms of safety, is it' the lateral, the first sort y o u
                          describe, or the others that are more important, or is there
              G           no distinction? - A. I do not think safety really comes into
                          it.   Obviously it is a nuisance in that it stops spectators
                          getting in.   In case of emergency it does not matter becau se
                          the whole object of    the gangways is that they be full of
                          people getting out,    but in terms of people getting in it is
                          obviously a nuisance, and fortunately, In m y experience, w i t h
                          this kind of depression that we have, it is a very rare event
                          to have them obstructed, and it only begins to arise w h e n the
              H           Ground is getting full, so that it is difficult to get onto
                          the steps, so the last f e w spectators in are the ones more
HARPHAM. LTD.
Shorthand Writer*
                          likely to settle for standing in a gangway.
-FIELD S I 2DX


                                                         47 -
                             Q. .     KR. GRIFFITHS:    And, of course, it is not relevant to th
                                seating areas? - A. N o t at all to the seated areas, where the
                                n umber of people is controlled by each ticket having a
                                numb ered seat.

                             Q. Are y o u familiar wi t h the arrangements as to stewarding,       in
                                general terms? - A. Only in general terms.

                             Q. You have attended yourself in seats? - A. And been stevarded,
                                yes.
                    B
                             Q. And y o u have attended the standing areas? - A. Yes.

                             Q. Was that to take Americans there? - A. To see h o w different
                                it was from Am eri c a n football, where n o bod y stands except to
                                cheer.  Everybody has a seat.

                             Q. What can y ou h e l p m y lord about in relation to stewarding?
                                - A. The stewarding is efficient and I should say that these
                                are n ot generally elderly,incapacitated gentlemen.      The
                                ma jority of the ones who are stewarding, as distinct from
                                being on the turnstile, seem to be reasonably young, agile,
                                physical ly fit people.

                             Q.   So far as your job has b een concerned, the improvement of
                                  ground safety and amenities over the last period of years, can
                                  you he l p my lor d with what amounts have been spent b y the Club
                    D             on the improvement of safety? - A. Depending on the definition
                                  of safety, not less than £400,000, and approaching half-a-
                                  miixion since 1 Q 7 0

                             Q. In yo u r arrangements and advice about safety, have there been
                                any particular considerations given tc that of children? - A.
                                Yes.    The Club set aside a family area at the northern end of
                                the 'Eop*, that is the b ig stand, and the Club also has
                                family tickets for people ‘to occupy seats at reduced prices
                                for families.

                             Q.    The suggestion was made children might be in a crush and so on
                                  What is the position wi t h regard        to that? - A. The children di
                                  not like using the c h i l d r e n ’s area on their own, and, in fact,
                                  the great majo r i t y go w i t h father.

                                             Cross-Bxamlned b y MR. B E N T I E Y :

                             Q. Only a few questions, Dr. Eastwood.    First of all, about the
                                stewards - let us be clear about these stewards, they are on
                                duty in the stands, that is right, i s n ’t it? - A. Yes.

                             Q.    And the fun ction they perform on the stands is to tell any
                                  spectator who does not k n o w where his seat is, to direct h i m
                                  to his seat? - A. One of the duties.

                             Q.    What else do they    do? - A. I think I have seen stewards speak
                                  to people who are behaving in an unruly way.

                             Q.   Anything more ? - A. I cannot think of anything more.

                    H        Q.   No.   let us go to    the  Ground, the terraces.  Now, what doyou
 HARPHAM, LTD.
                                  say the stewards do, if anything.on the terraces? - A. There
I S h o n h v n d W riter*
-.FFtELO S I 2DX
                                                                -   48 -
                             are some stewards, generally, on the terraces, and there are
                             no Police on the terraces.
               A
                        Q. Would y o u deal w i t h m y question?

                        Q.          MR.       J U S T ICE BOREHAM: Dr. Eastwood, could I say this?
                             I   do n o t w a n t y o u to spoil your evidence.       Y o u are here as an
                             expert, not to argue a case.             Do y ou under stand?     It would
                             help m u c h more if y ou would answer the question.                Try again.
               B        Q.         MR.    BENTLEY: What do the stewards do on the terracing?
                             - A. One category of steward is in charge of the gates, from
                             one compartment of the terracing to another, or from the
                             seating areas into the standing area in front, and they have
                             duties to p e r f o r m in the event of an emergency, for opening
                             the gates and so on. I do not kn o w of a ny other specific ones.

                        Q. The fK o p f - does one ever see-.a steward on the fSpion E o p 1?
               C           - A. I have seen them at the hack.

                        Q. Doing w h a t ? - A. Generally "being stewards, and with the role
                           of a sking people to move on.

                        Q. Anyth ing m o r e ? - A. I have not seen them doing anything more.

                        0. Are these trained men? - A. Yes, but the training is obviously
                D          such as can be done by getting them alon g for a few half days.

                        0. Trained to do what? - A. To steward.

                        Q. What does that mean? - A-. It depends on the duties. If the
                           man is guarding a gate he is well trained as to what he does,
                           and when, w i t h regard to that gate.
               E         0. Could y o u help me n o w by looking at the bundle of documents we
                            have got. I want to have your help about a couple of
                            instructions that seem to appear in the Operational Order.        If
                            you could find p. 87.       This Operation Order was a specimen
                            Operation Order which the Police issued for a particular match
     (                      In this     case it is the Order that was issued for a match
                            against    Portsmouth and we see the instructions which the Order
                F           says shall be given to the Officers in the Bramall Lane
                            enclosure, this small standing area beneath the Bramall Lane
                            Stand -     do y o u see - if we go through this, at the end of the
                            match this is what       Officers are being told to do: "Encourage
                            an orderly exit and prevent p u s h i n g 11 - is that a sensible
                        ,f. instruction to give to Police Officers? - A. Very.

                        0.-Because I suppose if there is pushing at the end of the mat ch
                G ' %      somebody m a y end up getting pushed to the ground? - A. Yes.

                        Q. And if that happens it can be very dangerous? - A. Yes.

                        Q. Again, if we go to p. 88, we are moving n o w to the fSpion Kop*
                           the largest area of terracing in the whole ground, where I
                           think y o u can confirm this is where most of the standing
                           supporters go? - A. The home supporters, and that is usually
                H          most.
 HARPHAM, LTD.
AShorth»nd   Writcrm
                        Q. Oh, yes, of all the people who stand within the confines of
EFFIELO S i 20X            of the Bramall Lane Ground, y ou will have the vast majority

                                                             -   49 -
   found on the 'Spion Kop'? - A. About a half.         There are two
   other sites, y o u see.

Q. I k n o w the Ground as well as y o u do. Now, p. 88, the
   instruction to the Officers on duty on       the 'Kop1. Y ou can see
   para. 2, "to k e e p the gangways clear".     Is that a sensible in
   i nstru ction to give to the Officers on du t y in the ’Xop'?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Because i f y o u do not there may be pushing and shoving of
   people w a n t i n g to get lower down for a b e tter view, wanting
   to get out quickly, beginning to push and shove - that is a
   problem if the gangways are not kept clear? - A. It would be.

Q. A n d if there is not someone to stop that y o u might have someone
   going to the ground in the push? - A. Yes.

Q. A n d turning to p. 90, to the John Street Terrace - again quite
   a small area of standing accommodation in front of a stand.
   The Officers are being told, Serials 4         and 5, the Officers in
   those serials        will take up position on the John Street
   Terrace b e t w e e n Bramall Lane and the Players' Tunnel? - A.
   Yes.

Q. "Keep the entrances to the Terrace clear and assist in packing
  the crowd" - is that a sensible instruction to give Officers?'
   - A. Yes.

Q. Because if the crowd is badly packed there m a y be danger? - A.
   Yes.

Q. A nd again, k e e ping the entrances to the Terrace clear - if the
   entrance is blo cked people who are anxious to get in,
   p a rticula rly as kick-off time approaches, m a y start pushing
   and shoving to make sure they are on the terraces when the
   whistle blows and the game starts? - A. Yes.

Q. A n d again,   if that happened, someone m ay go down,and then the
   Inspector,     just a little lower down.

        MR. J U S T I C E BOREEAM:   H o w many people in each Serial,
   I forget no w ?

         MR. BENTLEY:       Ten, m y Lord.

         MR. J U S TICE BOREHAM:     So that means 20 people here?

         MR. BENTLEY:       M y Lord, yes:

Q. And the I nspector will ensure that Gate E is opened at the
   end of the match, to allow spectators to leave - again,
   obviously a v er y sensible and essential instruction? - A.
   Not essential in the case of Gate E.      It could just as well
   be handled b y one of the stewards, as the gate near to it,
   wh i c h divides two pens.  It is not a v e r y critical job. All
   the m a i n doors within the Ground, Mr. Bentley, are controlled
   b y stewards, the big doors which let people out, and that
   could be E - E could just as wel l be operated b y a steward.
   It is n ot onto the pitch.
                                  IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                      A
                              i   QUEEN'S BENCH RTVTfiTnw


                                                                               The Court House,
                                                                               Castle Street,
                                                                               Sheffield.
                      B
                                                                               3rd February, 1986


                                                               Before

                                              THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM




                                                      JOHN CHARLES HARRIS
                                      (On Behalf of the South Yorkshire Police Authority)
                                                          (Plaintiff)
                      D
                                                                 -V-



                                            SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED
                                                          (Defendant)




                                                            APPEARANCES:
                                     For the Plaintiff!                    MR. D. BENTLEY Q.C. and
                                                                           MR. W. B. PHILLIPS
                                                                           (Instructed by J.C.
                                                                            Harris, Solicitors,
                                                                            Barnsley)
                                     For the Defendant:                    MR. J. GRIFFITHS Q.C.
                                                                           and MR. M. CHAPPLE
                                                                           (Instructed by Clegg &
                                                                            Son, Solicitors,
                                                                            Sheffield)


                     H|
 HARPHAN,          LTD        J             From the Notes of J.L. Harpham Ltd.,
: Shcn’1h*r>d W r i t e r *                       Official Court Reporters,
:«tielo     si aox                           55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                      I N D E X TO T R A N S C R I P T


                                                                         P a se


                      EDWIN MARSHALL Sworn
             B
                        Examined by MR.   BENTLEY                           1.

                        Cross-Examined by MR. GRIFFITHS

                        Re-Examined by MR.    BENTLEY                       6.

                      HARRY SHILLITO Sworn

                        Examined by MR.   BENTLEY                           9.

                        Cross-Examined by MR. GRIFFITHS                   11,

                        Re-Examined by MR.    BENTLEY                     12,

                      DOMINIC PAUL APPLEYARD Sworn
              D         Examined by MR.   BENTLEY                          13,

                      ROBERT JAMES GOSLIN Sworn

                        Examined by MR.   BENTLEY                          U,

                        Cross-Examined by MR. GRIFFITHS                   40,
              E!




              F




              G




               H;
             ltd

S-'tvlHBnd W riter*
••.ELD S1 2DX
                                                EDWIN MARSHALL Svorn

                 A                            Examined by MR.         BENTLEY:

                                Your full name and address please? - A. Edwin Marshall.
                                I reside at

                           Q.   You are a retired Police Officer? - A. Yes.

                           Q,   You joined the ole Sheffield City Police Force in
                 B.             1931? - A. Yes.

                                And retired from police service on the 17tn of April,
                                1970 with the rank of Chief Superintendent? - A. That
                                is correct.

                                I think during your career with the Sheffield Police there
                                were two periods when you had responsibility for the
                                policing of the Bramall Lane ground of the Defendant
                                club? - A. Yes.

                           Q.   I think the first of those periods was between 195*1 and
                                1957? - A. Yes.

                           Q.   Then again you undertook that duty between 1965 and 1970?
                                - A. 1963.
                  D
                           Q,   I think at that latter period you were by then Chief
                                Superintendent? - A. Correct.

                                During those two periods was.it your responsibility to
                                liaise with the Sheffield United Club about the policing
                                of their matches?  - A. That is correct.

                                Could I perhaps deal with the matter in this way:  before
                                the beginning of the new football season in August would
                                you have contact with the club? - A. Oh, yes.

                                Tell his Lordship what would happen before the beginning
                                of the season? - A. Prior to the season commencing we
                                always went down to the ground and made a thorough
                                inspection of all fixtures and fittings, that is,
                                seating, crash barriers and railings round the ground
                                and exits and everything like that.   We made a thorough
                                inspection.

                                When you say ’’we", who would make this inspection apart
                                from yourself? - A. Another Officer and very often
                                was with u s , who was the then Secretary of the Sheffield
                                United ground.

                           Q.   Would there be discussion with            or other club
                                officials about the forthcoming season? - A. Yes.

                           Q.   What would be discussed? - A. It was a question of deciding
                                first and foremost who the opponents were going to be.   Say
                                for the first match if it was one of the regular commitments
                   H
HARPHAM. LTD                                              -   1   -
S h o r th a n d Writer*
-P IE L O S i 2DX
where there was not likely to be anything unusual
happening, we decided upon the number of Officers they
would require for special duty on the ground.    We
invariably contacted |          [before each natch
just to ensure they either wanted the same number or
it might be a local derby so we would probably want a
few more sen or something of that nature.

"was it the practice during the season to draw up
operational orders for each match that was held? - A.
Yes.

Orders telling the Officers who was in attendance? - A.
The orders were drawn up in my office.

Telling those involved what was to be done? - A. What
their duties were.

Would a copy of these orders be given to the club? - A.
It was not, not in my day.   I understand it did happen
later on.

Would there be any other discussion between yourself
and club officials during the season, apart from this
initial one at the beginning? - A. Not unless there was
something wrong structurally or something like that and
then we always contacted Mr. Selwood, who was the
Chairman of the Ground Safety Committee.  If there was
anything relating to fixtures and fittings we contacted
him.

Was the club charged for the policing provided? - A.
Yes, sir.

Did they pay? - A.   Yes, there was never any argument.

Turning to match days if I may, because I think in the
course of your long police career you yourself have perfomred
this particular police duty, attending football matches
at the Bramall Lane ground and helping to  police the
spectators and the ground? - A. Yes.

Obviously one of the tasks that would fall to be performed
by Police Officers inside the ground would be the arrest
of any person who committed an ■ offence? - A. Yes.

Was that all you Officers were concerned with when you
went to the ground on match days, arresting people who
committed offences? - A. No, we were really there - we
were looked upon as servants of the club.   We assisted
with keeping gangways clear and that type of thing and
preventing climbing on the pylons and coming over the
fencing on to the ground, and that sort of thing.
You might say a thousand and one jobs that we more or
less did.   Obviously, if a crime was committed, then
as Folice Officers then it was our duty to see tot'nat.
Can I perhaps turn to one particular matter? Often,
I imagine, in the past when you were attending the
ground there would be very substantial crowds,
particularly at local matches with the other Sheffield
club? - A. Yes.

With particularly large  crowds there is always the
danger of people being crushed and injured by the
press of people? - A. That was the reason why I say
one of our duties was to ensure that all the gangways
were kept clear and that barriers were all all right,
the crash barriers and that sort of thing, but the
main thing was to keep the exits and entrances clear.

But that task of protecting those who were there against
crushing injury, who would undertake that task? - A. We
did and we assisted the stewards.   They had some
stewards there as well.

Did the club in your day have its own ground regulations
specifying how spectators and persons who entered the
ground should behave? - A. No, I never remember seeing
those.

However, were there other tasks, apart from crowd safety
and arresting offenders, that you and other officers would
find yourselves engaged in on match days? - A. As I say,
our main consideration was that the people who had gone
to watch a football match, we wanted them to watch in
comfort and we did everything we could to ensure that
happened and as you have already said about controlling
crowds, that was one of the main things to ensure they
could see it in comfort.

In those days it was not usual for the playing area  to be
fenced, of course? - A. Oh, yes, always.   The playing area
would always be fenced.

Not the kind of fences we see these days? - A. Oh, not
to that extent.   They are about eight feet high now
with spikes on, but not that type of thing.

In your day there would be a small perimeter fence which
was climbable? - A. Yes, but it was not easy to climb.

If spectators attempted to get on to the pitch during
play, what would be done about that? - A. 'Well, they
were escorted outside the ground.

I think you have mentioned also people would be turned
out if they started climbing pylons or ground structures?
- A . If they were interfering with the comfort of the
other people there they would be turned out.
          Cross-Examined by MR. GRIFFITHS:

You policed Erarcall Lane in the fifties and sixties?
- A. Yes.

Would you agree with me that compared with today there
was two major differences:   first, the behaviour of
football crowds was very different then from what it
is today? - A. Yes.

By and large they were well behaved in those days, with
very few exceptions? - A. Yes.

Do you support Wednesday or United, or perhaps just
from home? - A. Well, that is it, mainly from home
these days.

I do not know whether you know, but I would like to
read you three short sentences about something that
happened in 1980 at Sheffield Wednesday's ground in
this city.   What I am reading is a passage of a
description by a newspaper:

    " C u r r a n ’s sending off so angered a section of
     Wednesday supporters that they clambered over
     the protective fences to invade the pitch,
     tore lumps of concrete out of the terraces to
      use as ammunition and caused sufficient mayhem
      for play to be suspended for half an hour while
   - the Police and Alsatians restored order.
      Jack Charlton appealed for calm and was assailed
      by his own fans.         The situation was described
      as rio ting.”

I expect as a local man    you had at least heard of that
incident? - A. Oh, yes.

That type of incident, within your knowledge, has it been
multiplied at other football crounds   - Luton, Millwall,
Leeds? - A. According to press reports.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   I do not think Mr. Marshall
is in any better position than I am.  Ke either takes it
from the television or the press.

     THE WITNESS:     Exactly.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   That sort of thing did not trouble
you as a potential problem in the fifties and sixties?
- A. No.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   In those days we used to take
our children to football matches.   We d o n ’t now.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Again, how many of you would go
to Bramall Lane in those days?   How many police officers
approximately?  Half a dozen? - A. No, far more than that.
                                  Q. I put half a dozen because West Ham at that time had
                    A                half a dozenpolice officers? - A. It would be more like
                                     twenty.

                                  Q. And the crowds were, of course, in the fifties and sixties
                                     very, very much larger?   Do you recollect approximately
                                     how many would be, say, at a derby game - Wednesday and
                                     United? - A. They would get up to, say, 40,000, but we
                                     should have far more than twenty men on duty.
                    B
                                  Q. I understand that, but the grounds would, on occasions,
                                     be absolutely full - 45,000-odd? - A. Yes.

                                  Q. And a popular cup game, again the grounds   filled? - A.
                                     Yes.

                                  Q. Have you been recently to Bramall Lane? - A. No.
                    C
                                  Q. You would not be surprised to hear from what you have
          (       j
                                     read that of course it is somewhere round the 12,000
                                     mark? - A. Yes.

                                  Q.   I ought to make it clear I have no witness who goes
                                       back as far as you with your knowledge of the ground
                                       and so I am not in a position to agree or disagree with
                    D                  you as to what you said you used to do.   Can I ask you
                                       just one thing about your presence there?   You mentioned
                                       you would go before the game, inspect the fixtures and
                              }
                                       fittings? - A. That was before the season started.   If
                                       we had a big match coming up - cerby matches - we would
                                       probably have another look round anc make sure everything was
                                       all right if it was well into the season.  I did not if
                                       it was only at the commencement of the season.
                      E
                                  Q.   So once or twice a season you would go and look at the
                                       fixtures and fittings, crash barriers and so on? - A.
                                       Yes.
          I )
                                  Q. At the ground itself you said that occasionally you would
                                     be on duty and even in those days have to arrest people?
                      F              - A. Yes.

                                  Q. What would that be for?   What sort of offences? - A.
                                     Well, it is a question of where to start.

                                  Q. Was it for violence or pick-pocketing? - A. More likely
                                     for violence.  If you got your  rival fans together
                                     something silly like that could happen, raise the
                      G              temperature, and then we had go t to take action.

                                  Q. The real job for your twenty policemen  when the game
                                     was about to start was to watch out for that kind of
                                     thing and guard against it? - A. Yes, and throughout
                                     the match.

                                  Q. And throughout the match.    The major concern you had as a

 KARPHAM , LTD
! S h o r th » n d W riter*                                      - 5 -
<T!ELD 51 20X
                                policeman was the maintenance of law and order in the
                  A             ground? - A. Exactly.

                            Q. And all the other things were subsidiary to your concern
                               to maintain the Q u e e n ’s peace and law and order? - A. Yes,
                               sir.

                            Q. Similarly, for all the other officers that you had under
                               your command? - A. Yes.
                  B
                                     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:          I do not understand.  Y’hen
                                you say "main c o n c e r n ” does that mean the most important
                                thing that you had to do, or does it mean the thing that
                                we spend most of our time doing?          They may be very
                                different.

                            Q        MR. GRIFFITHS:   Can I approach it in this way?
                                First, when there was no trouble of course you had the
                                chance to watch the game and I suppose that would be
                                most of the time you were in there, is that right? -
                                A. Yes.

                            Q. But was your principal concern in the sense that it
                               was your duty to watch out for, guard against and quell
                               violence and similar breaches of the peace? - A. Certainly,
                   D           yes, sir.

                                              Re-Examined by HR.      BENTLEY:

                            Q. Eow important did you regard the safety of persons -on
                               the terraces, safety from crushing? - A. It was extremely
                               important, the safety of all people in the ground.   That
                               is what we were there for to ensure they could watch the
                               match in comfort and in safety.

                                     MR. BENTLEY:     Does your Lordship have any questions?

                                     MR.   JUSTICE BOREKAM:     No,   I have not.

                                     MR. BENTLEY:     Thank you, Mr. Marshall.

                                     MR. GRIFFITHS:    Would this be a convenient moment
                                tomake my application?

                                     MR.   JUSTICE BOREKAM:      Yes.

                                     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Might I invite your attention to
                                the amended Defence and Counterclaim?    Your Lordship
                                will see that there we set out     what in our     respectful
                                submission is what is called normal police duty.   If
                                you would be kind enough next to go to the Counterclaim,
                                in my copy it says page 9, and at the bottom - it is right
                                at the end of the pleading.

                                                              - 6 -
                   H
harpham       ,   ltd.

S h o r t h t n d Writer*
-F IE L D S I 20X
     MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:    Which part of the Counter­
claim?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:  It is the Prayer.   Your Lordship
will see that in that the Prayer is for a declaration
that it is the duty of the Police to ensure that at home
fixtures of Sheffield United, peace would be kept, to
preserve all property inside and outside the stadium
etc., irrespective of any request.   What we would...

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   I do not understand how it
reads at the moment.   There must be a word or two
missing.  It is a nonsense.

      MR. GRIFFITHS:         I am very sorry, there is missing
from your L o r d s h i p ’s copy and, indeed, from mine, after
’’offences" the words "against the persons and properties"

     What your Lordship will see is that goes to the
police duty.  The draft amendments which I would invite
your Lordship to look at, go, of course, to what is the
central question here, that is, the issues of principle
to which I referred earlier.   A declaration that in
respect of the attendance of police officers at home
fixtures at the stadium no payment is or has at all
material times been due for those of the said officers
present who satisfied the police duty as defined in
paragraph 9, but is only due in respect of officers (a)
requested by the Defendants and (b) to fulfil roles other
than police duties.   Eight, an account and 9, an order
for the payment of the money found due on the account.

     My Lord, what I hope that does is to raise what my
learned frienc referred to as the second general matter,
which will be for your L o r d s h i p ’s decision in the case.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:  It does not raise it, it asks
me to deal with it, whether or not it is raised will
depend upon the evidence.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Yes, but in my submission it is
raised in the case.   It has been and is certainly intend
by the parties throughout that that issue should   be
litigated.   Your Lordship m a y have seen in the third
bundle that at the time of the Bolton Wanderers...

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   What chance have I had to
look at the third bundle?   Do not assume I know anything
about anything in that bundle.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:    Could I then just amplify  slightly
what m y learned friend said in opening about the Bolton
Wanderers incident?
     Your L o r d s h i p will recollect he told you there
was a game due to be played on the 31st December, 1383.
In an exchange of telexes, which is to be found in that
bundle, the club made a specific request for such
Officers as the Police Constable thought neces sary to
maintain law and order to be present, but left it to
him in his disc retion to decide the numbers.

         The Chief Constable, or the Yorkshire County
C o u n c i l ’s reply was, "No, unless you make a specific
request under S e c tion 15 we are not prepared to come.
Secondly, unless you do make a request, we will
apply to the M a gistrat es to have the whole game
cancelle d.11

     That m a tt er was, if I can use a loose word "sett led”
by a final te l e x wh ich encompasses an agreement to make
a request l e a v i n g "without prejudice” to be argued
before a s uitable Tribunal - your Lordship is that
Tribunal - the question of whether or not in the
circumstances posited there was an entitlement for
payment if what the police were being asked to do was
maintain law and order.

     As I am sure your Lordship appreciates, the
issue in this case is, of course, an important one, not
only for my clients, but generally for other clients.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   If I had any doubt about it,
the Yorkshire Pest left me in no doubt this morning.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:       The Prayer which I have invited
your Lordship to allow us does, I hope, assuming the
Pleading justifies it and assuming the evidence, of
course, does a l l o w your Lordship to make a decision
as to the points of principle and everyone has known
throughout that is what this case really is about.
It is not about £50,000.

     Therefore, I would invite your Lordship to
allow that amendment.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:      Anything to say, Mr.
Bentley?

     MR. BENTLEY:   If my learned friend thinks this will
assist the Court to resolve the outstanding issues then I
do not oppose the application.

     M R . ‘JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Very well.    Then I will
allow it.

     MR. BENTLEY:     I will call next Mr. Karry
Shillito.
          .4




                                                KARRY SHILLITO Sworn

                                              Examined by MR. B E N TLEY:

                           Q . Your full name and address? - A. Harry S h i l l i t o ,


                           Q. You too are a retired police office.   I think you
                              joined the Sheffield City Police in 19^6? - A. Yes.
                   B
                           Q. You retired froin the Force with the rank of Chief
                              Superintendent in 1976? - A. I did, sir, yes.

                           Q. I think in your early police career you attended as a
                              constable at football matches played at the Bramall
                              Lane stadium? - A. I did, sir, yes.

                           Q. Very late in your career, I think in 1973, you took
                              over the role which Mr. Marshall, the last witness,
                              had performed? - A. Yes, I did, sir.

                           Q. Namely, that of exercising responsibility for the policing
                              of football matches at the Bramall Lane ground? - A. Yes.

                           Q. You heard Mr. M a r s h a l l ’s evidence, Mr. Shillito,    as to
                   D          the practice in his day? - A. Yes.

                           Q. A visit to the ground before the start of the football
                              season, inspections, discussions, provision of officers?
                              A. Yes.

                           Q. In your time between 1973 when you took over the
                              policing resp onsibility and 1976 when you retired, was
                              the situation any different than in Mr. M a r s h a l l ’s day?
                              - A. Things were pretty much the same.      We carried
                              out the same policy.      I think crowds were getting
        l !                   a little bit more out of hand.      I think there were
                              certain clubs which came to Sheffield.      One in
                              particular at that time, though to a lesser extent today,
                              Manchester United had a very large vociferous following.
                              On occasions like that we had to take extra precautions
                              and by that I m e a n we had to increase the number of
                              police officers within the ground and outside the ground
                              too.    It was m y job to make sure I liaised with the
                              Secretary at the time, a                      He is no
                              longer with the club now.      we used to discuss the number
                              of officers appropriate for the forthcoming match.          It
                              might vary from 30 officers in the ground to as m a n y as
                              80, depending on the club, whether it was the local derby
                              match or cup-tie or the club Manchester United who at that
                              time was a success with a big following.      They had their
                              problems among their followers.

                           Q. So you and club officials would look at a forthcoming
                              match and together assess the police requirements for
                              that match? - A. We would be told by Intelligence that
                   H
HARPHAM. LTD.
S h o rth a n d W riters                                   -   9 -
   there would be X number of coaches coming.  I remember
   at one particular natch at Bramall Lane Manchester United
   had something like 70 coaches arriving in Sheffield,
   so there was quite a big responsibility.

Q. Perhaps you could confirm this.    In your day was
   the club charged and did they pay for the policing
   they received? - A. They were charged and they paid.
   It all depended on the conversations I had, or my next
   in command had with the Secretary.    If he agreed' to
   the numbers there was never any problem of paying.     At
   times he would try to knock off a few but we would
   reply by saying, ’’You are going to get a bigger crowd.
   There will be more money coining in.  You should be
   able to pay i t . ” We solved it amicably.   There was
   never any problem.

Q. Was the role of police officers who attended the ground in
   your day simply limited to maintaining law and order or
   did they discharge and perform other functions? - A.
   No, I think it all revolved round m ai ntainin g law and
   order.    We had men at the access point on to the
   terrace.    At some stage the terraces would get too
   full.    We would see a problem arising with people
   pushing.    We would have an officer there to stop it
   and there would be no more let in at the terraces.     This
   happened in several parts of the ground from time to time
   and officers along with stewards from the club - stewards
   always like the presence of an officer there to give
   them'a little backing because many were the times they
   would not pay attention to stewards.

Q. But they could to an officer? - A. Yes.

Q. What you are seeking to do is to prevent people lower
   down the terraces being hurt? - A. Being crushed.

Q. What other tasks did the officers perform in your day
   who attended the ground? - A. During m y time I think
   problems were getting greater.   There was talk of
   high fences around the ground although at that time
   Sheffield United had not erected fences, because some
   of the followers of the other clubs used to like to
   run across the pitch to get to the other side.    They had
   been shepherded into one particular part of the ground and
   then they tried to get to the other side if they did not
   think that part of the ground was suitable for them.   We
   had to prevent mass exits from one part of the ground
   to the other side, so we would line the policemen up to
   prevent that.   There was always minor thefts - pick-pocketing
   - going on.   We had a central office for people to contact
   when this sort of thing happened so we could despatch
   officers to where it occurred.   Plain   clothes officers
   used to attend for that particular purpose.


                             -   1 0   -
Did the police officers who attended the ground have
any say or part in deciding who was admitted and who
was not? - A. At that tine we did have men at the
turn-stiles outside and there were times when
occasionally some people were not admitted, either
through drunkenness or something like that, with
cans of beer and vhst have you.      That did occur.
Or m a king them dsper.se with their drink before they
entered the ground.      There was the time too, as I
recall, Sheffield United were building their n e w stand
and there was a lot of rubble on the city side of the
ground and we had to bear in mind the possibility of
stone throwing, brick throwing, because there were
ample weapons for that particular     object.

          Cross-Examined by MR.   GRIFFITHS:

Mr. Shillito, I did not quite get your first answers.
You did this duty from 1973 to 1976? - A. Indeed I did
and prior to that.

That is when you were in charge? - A. Yes, but   from
1966 to 1973 I vas Chief Superintendent at the   Woodseats
Division in Sheffield and during my time there   the
responsibility for Sheffield United was put on   to that
Division so I had it before I came to west Ear   in 1973.

But your intimate involvement was 1973 to 1976? - A.
Yes, when I was stationed at West Bar.

It sounds from what you say that compared with what
Mr. Marshall told us, there was becoming a build up
towards the present situation with crowd behaviour?
- A. You could see it coming, yes.

Did that worry about crowd behaviour take the concern
in your mind that there might be violence on the ground?
- A. Yes.

You mentioned, for instance, the question when the
stand was being built  of a lot of rubble and stones?
- A. Yes.

What was your worry about that? - A. Throwing that in the
crowd.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:    He said they were potential
weapons.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   You said, when asked about your
view of the policing that it all revolved around law
and order? - A. Yes.

As far as crowd control was concerned, was your interest
in crowd control because if there got to be pushing or
people too packed, there was the potential spark for
violence? - A. Yes.
Similarly, with the stopping of people coming in, you
have mentioned beer cans and alcohol, was that the same
reason? - A. Yes.

The preventing o f people climbing pylons or going over
fences, was that the same reason too? - A. Yes.
Encroachment on the pitch too and attacking the referee,
that was beginning to show its ugly head in those days.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Supposing they encroached
on the pitch but did not attack the referree, was that
all right? - A. No, sir, they were ejected from the
ground.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:    Was the reason for that if they
encroached on to the pitch without attacking, but again
it had the possible spark of a conflagration, with
opposing fans objec ting and the fear of rioting and the
like? - A. Yes.

You mentioned th a t your officers and so on would
sometimes, by their uniformed presence, assist the stewards
to move sections of the crcwd, was that again for the
reason you have given, to prevent them packing too close
and trouble spots arising? - A. Yes, crushing against the
terriers and the barriers breaking, which they have in
the past, of course.     Yes, this was to prevent that.

And the concern that if that happened again you had the
potential for violence setting up? - A. And serious injury
of course.

But the potential     for violence? - A. Yes.

Did you find that      for instance it is known in policing
that some people deliberately try and set up surges in
crowds? - A. Y e s , this does happen.

As a means of aggravation leading to trouble? - A. Yes,
over-enthusiasm. Whenever the ball   was near the goal
mouth everybody would surge forward and the weight caused
barriers to give way and people to be maimed.

What sort of crowds were coming in your day? - A. I think
they were in between 2 0 , GOG and 30,000. At a big match,
of course, more, 40,000.

              Re-Examined by MR. B E N T L E Y :

You have been asked about the crowd surges and it has
been put to you that your real concern about surges
in the crowd was that this might cause violence and
disorder? - A. No.   Injury first of all, followed by
violence and disorder because if somebody gets injured
then somebody is going to blame somebody in the crowd
for pushing and shoving and that would lead to violence.


                             -   1 2   -
        MR. BENTLEY:      Thank you, Mr. Shillito.       Mr.
   Appleyard please.

                DOMINIC PAUL APPLEYARD Sworn

                   Examined by MR.    BENTLEY:

Q . Your full name and address? - A. Dominic Paul A ppl e y a r d ,


Q. You are a retired police officer? A. Thatis correct.

Q. I think you spent almost the whole of your service with
   the Sheffield Police? - A. All but about one year.

Q. You retired from the Sheffield City Police, I think, in
   1965 with the rank of Superintendent? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. I think like most police officers on occasions you were
   deployed to football grounds on match days to do duty
   there? - A. Yes.

Q. I think your principal involvement with the policing of
   football matches really came in 1954 when you were
   transferred to the Chief Constable's office? - A. I was
   in the Chief C o n s t a b l e ’s office at the time, but I went
   on to the Accounting Section in 1954.

Q. I think your duties in the Accounting Section involved
   the rendering of accounts for special police services to
   persons and bodies who had been provided with those
   services? A. That is correct.

Q. Were accounts for special police services rendered to
   the Sheffield United Football Club? - A. Yes, they were
   rendered on a m o n thly basis - a calendar month.

Q. W^re they paid as regularly as they were rendered? - A.
   Yes, regularly paid.

Q. I imagine that accounts would also be rendered to the
   other Sheffield Football Club, Sheffield Wednesday?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. Were the two Sheffield Football Clubs the only bodies
   or organisations within the city who were sent accounts
   for police services? - A. No, there were quite a number
   of people.   The odd cricket match when they came to
   Bramall Lane.   That was sent, of course, to the
   Cricket Club at Leeds.   The greyhound racing at Ollerton
   and Hyde Park.   Speedway racing.    I can recollect other
   instances where I personally went as a young constable.
   We used to send a person occasionally to the old theatre
   in Cambridge Street and to the odd picture house on a
   Saturday night.
     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Not always? - A. Not always.
I personally have been and never saw any trouble.

What did you call it, Mr. Appleyard, the old... - A. It
was the theatre in Cambridge Street which was pulled down
after the war.

    MR. GRIFFITHS:     I have no questions.

     MR. BENTLEY:    Thank you, Mr. Appleyard.   Mr.
Gcslin.

            ROBERT JAMES GOSLIN Sworn

             Examined by MR.   B E N TLEY:

Your full narae and present post?   - A. Robert James
Goslin, currently the D epu ty Chief Constable of the
Cambridgeshire Constabulary.

Between 1980 and 1984 I think you were one of the
Assistant Chief Constables in Sheffield? - A. Yes, I
was.

That is in the South Yorkshire Police in fact? - A.
Yes indeed.

That post involved you in particular in responsibility
for the policing of football grounds within the county
of South Yorkshire? - A. Yes, sir, I was the Assistant
Chief Constable, Operations, which took in that
responsibility.

I think you have had responsibility for the policing of
football matches during the course of your career whilst
working in other Police Authorities? - A. Yes, that is
right.   I started my police service in Bolton.    I was
involved as a police constable, sergeant and inspector
and later superintendent, policing Bolton Wanderers'
ground.    I was then a chief inspector at Old Trafford.
I was involved in policing the Manchester United football
ground and then in South Yorkshire, of course, I had
responsibility for the five football grounds within South
Yorkshire.

During your time at Bolton and Manchester United, was it
the practice of the Police Authority to charge those football
clubs for policing football matches? - A. Yes, it was.

Turning to South Yorkshire now if we may, I think in South
Yorkshire too during your time it was the policy of the
Police Authority to charge football clubs for the policing
provided at football matches? - A. Yes, it was, sir.  If
I can explain the system it might be of assistance.   The
charging was a retrospective charging in that the number of
police officers for which the club paid was decided upon
by the size of the gate for that particular game.

So far as the level of charges is concerned, I think it
was the Police Authority itself which laid down what scale
of charges should be applied? - A. That is correct.

I wonder if you could have a bundle of documents?   I was
proposing just to go to the front of the folder of
documents.   I think we can see in the bundle which his
Lordship has, Minutes of the Police Authority starting
at page 1(c) with a Minute o f a Police Authority meeting
held on the 7th of January, 1975.    Just looking at the
bottom of the first page of that Minute, item 165, one can
see a resolution passed as to the scale of charges which
will be levied upon private employers of police services
for the future? - A. Yes,sir.

Then I think going through the bundle of documents one
finds similar Minutes at page 3 for 1976;  page 5 an
increase in 1977;  page 6 another Police Committee
meeting, this time September 1978 where the rates are
further increased.   The following page, page 7, a meeting
of the Committee on the 30th of July, 1979? - A. I have
that, sir.

And again the hourly rates are revised.    A little later
the same year, page 8, October, 1979, the rates are
further increased to take acco unt of new pay awards? -
A. That is correct.

Then page 9, October 1980, the Police Committee resolves
to increase the charges further.  The 30th of March, 1981
is Minuted, I think, at page 10.  Again the scale of
charges is increased and this Minute records that a survey
of special duty rates by the West Mercia  Constabulary
in September 1980 had shown the rates charged by the
sevenforces in the No. 2 Region were substantially below
those charged by most other forces and were in fact more
than £1 below the average charge for police constables.
What is the No. 2 Region? - A. It is the sort of n o r t h ­
eastern region of the country.

And the rates are increased.     Then at page 1 1 a meeting
of the Police Committee on the 4th of September, 1981 and
at the foot of the page n ew rates brought into effect.
Again, page 12, a meeting in March 1982 of the Police
Committee and here there is a reference to the fact that
the Police Committee are n o w agreeing to adopt the rates
assessed by the West Yorkshire Metropolitan Police and
are going to apply those in their area.     Then overleaf
on page 13 the rates are set out? - A. Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:    Is that a convenient moment,
Mr. Bentley?
                ,         \
                <




                                         MR. BENTLEY:      My Lord,      I am sure it is.
                      A
                                                   (Luncheon a d j o u r n m e n t )

                               Q.        MR. BENTLEY:   Mr. Goslin, before the adjournment
                                    you were assisting the court by looking at some of the
                                    Police Committee Minutes d e a l i n g with scales of charges
                                    for special police services.         I think we had reached
                                    page 14 of the bundle? - A. That is right.
                      B
                               Q. The 4th of October, 1982 was the occasion of a further
                                  Police Committee meeting and here again we see that a
                                  resolution was passed increasing the scale of charges
                                  for police officers provided on loan to private
                                  employers? - A. Yes.

                       C       Q. The following month, November 1982 saw another Police
                                  Committee meeting where the question of charges was
           i                      dealt with again and a resol ution was passed on that
                                  occasion, as appears, i ncreasing the charges for the
                                  hire of police horses and certain other specialised
                                  vehicles? - A. Yes, sir.

                               Q. I think we then move to the 31st of December, 1982, at
                                  that Police Committee m e e t i n g there was a resolution
                       D          passed taking note of the m e e t i n g of the Working Group
                                  about which we shall hear more in due course? - A.Yes, sir.

                               Q. Then finally justtaking matters into 1983, at a Police
                                  Committee meeting held on the 28th February, 1983, at page
                                  18 of the bundle there is a resolution passed in relation
                                  to the revised criteria for police services and on the
                      E           following page the matter is dealt with again and the
                                  important resolution is perhaps the first resolution that
                                  subject to any national criteria  which might be forthcoming,
                                  it be a recommendation to the Police Advisory Sub-Committee
                                  that the charges for police services levied for football
                                  league clubs in South Yorkshire be calculated on a
                                  differential basis related to attendance levels? - A. Yes,
                                  sir.
                      F
                               Q. Then we see the next m e e ting Minuted in the bundle, a
                                  meeting on the 8th of July, 1983 at page 20, the
                                  resolution being passed that this new scale of charges
                                  which is to be based upon attendance levels be implemented
                                  as from the 1st of April, 1983? - A. That is correct.

                               Q. And another resolution passed to the effect that all the
                      G           football league clubs in the South Yorkshire area be requested
                                  to settle their outstanding accounts? - A. Yes.

                               Q. In August, 1983 at page 21 the Police Committee received a
                                  report about the action that is being taken to recover sums
                                  owing from the football league clubs in the county for
                                  police services.   At page 22 a Committee which met on the
                      H
. HAfiPHAM, LTD.                                                   -   16 -
i \ S h o r th a n d Wr!t*r»

crF JE L D SI 2 0 X
            <,           j,




                                 5th September,      1383 approves a new scale of charges?
                     A           - A. Y e s , sir.

                              Q. Finally, and this is perhaps the last Police Committee
                                 minute that relates to the period, the subject of the
                                 Police A u t h o r i t y ’s claim, a Committee meeting held on
                                 the 2oth of November of 1983, page 24 in the bundle
                                 and there is an item at 150 dealing with charges for
                                 police services.            It is resolved that revised charges
                     B           for the hire of police horses and use of vehicles on
                                 special duties be adopted with effect from the 1st
                         i       of December, 1983? - A. Yes.

                              Q. So there we have the picture from 1975 to 1983 of the
                                 Police Committee from time to time laying down an increased
                                 scale of charges for policing private functions? - A.
                                 That is correct,  sir.
                     C
                              Q. So far, Mr. Goslin, I have asked you simply about police
        i        j               services provided at soccer club grounds.   During your
                                 period of office as Assistant Chief Constable in South
                                 Yorkshire, were they the only bodies who were called
                                 upon to pay for policing? - A. No, they were not.    The
                                 racecourse at Doncaster is an example where charges
                                 were made for the hire of policemen.
                     D
                              Q. Are there other examples which you can give? - A. For
                                 the cricket ground at Padley Park.

                              Q. Where the Yorkshire matches are now played? - A-. Once a
                                 year we used to provide policemen for that and we would
                                 charge the club accordingly.

                     E        Q. Just perhaps to get out of the way some of the documents
                                 that we have in this case.   If you would be good enough to
                                 turn to page 34 of the bundle?   I think this is a specimen
                                 of the invoices that were currently in use during your
        i        }               time as Assistant Chief Constable?   This is an invoice
                                 to the Defendant club dated 15th October, 1982, invoicing
                                 them for police services provided at a football match
                                 held on the 13th October, 1982? - A. I have no direct
                     F           knowledge of these invoices.   This was dealt with by
                                 another Department.

                              Q. I follow that, but this is an example of the kind of
                                 invoices which  were used? - A. Yes, indeed.

                                          MR. BENTLEY:       My Lord, I think for the sake of
                     G           completeness one can say that pages 34 to 61 in your
                                 L o r d s h i p ’s bundle are the invoices which relate to the
                                 police services which are the subject of the present
                                 claim.

                                       THE WITNESS:       Yes.


                     H                                           -   17 -
 HARPHAM , LTD.
! S ho r1 h » n d Writer*
FFIE LD S1 JDX
               i




                                        HR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, as I understand it, and my
                                   learned friend will correct me if I am wrong, it is not
                                   disputed by the Defendant club that the services
                                   specified on the various invoices were provided as
                                   set out on the invoices.

                                       MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:       Yes, thank you.

                      B       Q.        MR. BENTLEY:   Of course, you will no doubt be as familiar
                                   as anyone with the provisions of Section 15 of the Police
                                   Act of 1964? - A. Yes, I am, sir.

                              Q. The Section that speaks of special police services being
                                 provided in response to a request? - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. During your time as Assistant Chief Constable when
                                 police services were provided at the soccer grounds in
                                 South Yorkshire, what requests were made about those
                                 services being provided?    How did it come about that
                                 they were provided? - A. I inherited a system.   It
                                 continued throughout my time in South Yorkshire, whereby
                                 prior to each season a meeting would be held with
                                 representatives of the five clubs in South Yorkshire,
                                 the five football league clubs.    I would chair the meeting.
                                 It was attended by the Divisional Chief Superintendents
                      D          and, where possible, the Secretary and Chairman of the
                                 clubs.   If they could not attend they would send their
                                 representative.     During the meeting the policing of the
                                 football grounds during the preceding season was
                                 discussed and any problems encountered were gone into in
                                 some detail.    Inevitably there was a discussion of police
                                 charges, not by way of suggestion that they were not met,
                                 but as a general complaint that they were too high in
                                 comparison with other clubs throughout the country.    The
                                 clubs were informed at that meeting, which would take
                                 place July or August, that in September of the year
                                 under discussion, because of the pay rises given to the
                                 police services, there would be an inevitable rise in the
                                 charges.    The method of policing the grounds throughout
                                 the following season was fully discussed.

                              Q. When the season started were police provided? - A. Yes.
                                 When the season began the Divisional Commander of the
                                 relevant Division would discuss generally with the
                                 Secretary the numbers of police officers required to
                                 police that particular game.    That, of course, would
                                 depend, or the numbers would depend, upon the visiting
                                 club and its reputation.   An agreed number of police
                                 officers'was settled on.   I should point out that the
                                 number of police officers who performed duty inside the
                                 grounds was far greater in number than those actually
                                 paid for by the club.

                              Q. Was any charge made for the services of police officers
                                 who attended in the streets around soccer grounds? - A.
                     H
..   HAFPHAhi,     LTD                                          -   1 8   -
*{ S h o r th a n d Wr!l*r*

 EFFIELD S i 2DX
     No.   The charges made against the football club were
     purely and simply for officers engaged exclusively on
     duties inside the ground.   The number of these officers
     was often supplemented by these officers who had un d e r ­
     taken outside duties, duties outside the ground prior to
     the game.   Once those duties were finished they would
     go in to reinforce the police contingent inside the ground.

Q. Can I deal with another point arising out of that?            Where
      did the police manpower come from to police soccer matches?
      Were you us ing your normal daily manpower and diverting
      it from other tasks or what was happening? - A. No, it
    f would be impossible to do that given the
      r         a       l l    ground.   In fact officers would
  jij^ g r f o r m rinf.y                              n were brought
  If in-from rest day duties.     In other w o r d s , had their
  l~rest days cancelled or were retained on duty having completed
  * a tour of duty or brought on early prior to beginning their
      normal tour of duty.

Q. So essentially the policing work inside the ground is
   being done by officers who a r e either w o r k ing rest days,,or
   working jpiv-ert4^5e^— ^ A^r££nerally speaking.    There were
 j a number of officers already or. duty who would perform
 I duty in or around the ground, but generally speaking
 ! JLnside~the--gr£>und they would be    cancelled rest day
^ j^rsonnel*      .~ " ~           1
Q. Would any plain clothes officer be deployed within the
   ground? - A. They would be but they were not usually
   cnarged•

Q. I would like to pass next to the work that was actually
    done inside the ground by officers who attended on match
    days.   One task which they would obviously perform - I
    think there is no dispute about this - would be to arrest
    offenders and to prevent, so far as they were able, the
  . commission of criminal offences? - A. Yes, of course.

c;        leers on police duty inside the ground have other
     »£wponsibilities than those? - A. Yes, indeed.       Officers
     v.!.o were on duty inside the ground, and again I would
     .-     the point that all those inside the ground were not
     l^ld for by the club, became in     effect for the purpose
     of the ground regulations, servants of the club.       There
     are matters which are published in the ground regulations
     which would not constitute by themselves an offence
     against the law, such things as keeping the gangways
     clear, such things as searching people before they come
     into the ground.     The ground regulations said if they
     were not prepared to be searched they would not be granted
     admission.

Q. It might be helpful to look at the ground regulations of
   the club.   I think this is at page 198 of the bundle.
   Mr. Goslin, if we look at these regulations I think we
   can find examples of the kind of   functions and duties
     you refer to.   I think the first five regulations are
     really not germane.   They deal with questions such as
     admissions and matches which are cancelled because the
     weather is inclement, but number 6:

          "Unauthorised persons are not permitted to
          enter upon the field of play.1'

     That clearly is a main regulation.  Is that a regulation
     which officers would enforce? - A. Indeed, yes.

Q. I suppose there could be a number of reasons why someone
   might try and get on to the pitch?   It might be for
   the hostile purpose of attacking the player or official
   or simply in an attempt to congratulate a player who has
   just scored or displayed some piece of skill? - A. There
   are a variety of reasons.

          MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   If he is going to commit a
     criminal offence you do not need the ground regulations.

          MR. BENTLEY:   That is right, but I was simply seeking
     to make the point that many people who run on to the
     pitch might be in breach of regulations, but would not
     thereby commit a criminal offence:

Q. If we look to number 7 we find another regulation, this
     time dealing wit h the taking of photographs inside the
     ground.      The regulations prohibit that.   Would the
     police concern themselves with that matter? - A. Had there
   . -;ot 1 sen a ground regulation we would not have concerned
  .. ov>r,n«lves.

Q.         MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     • That was not the question.
     T.      being a ground regulation, would the police then
     eor:;.. *n t hemselves? - A. Yes.

Q. If they saw me aiming a camera at somebody would they do
   something about it? - A. Yes, the y would.

Q.        MR. BENTLEY:      Another item, regulation 8:   only
     persons speci al ly authorised by Sheffield United are
     permitted to offer newspapers, periodicals or any other
     articles for sale at Bramall Lane.      If, for example, one
     of the club stewards or officials pointed out someone
     to a police officer and said, "That man over there is
     selling newspapers or rosettes and he is not authorised"
     would you expect one of your officers to deal with that?
     - A. Yes ,• I would, sir.

Q.    Then unnece ssa ry noise such as that from the use of radio
     sets or behaviour likely to cause confusion of any kind,
     is not permitted in any part of the ground.      One of the
     types of behaviour that could cause confusion is somebody
     in the crowd w i t h a whistle, blowing it and perhaps causing


                                - 20 -
   confusion on the field of play? - A . In which case I
   would expect one of my officers to take action under
   the Ground Regulations.

Q. Matter 10 we have had reference to already:

       "The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands
        or other buildings in the ground is strictly
        forb id den ."

   Is that a prohibition which officers would enforce? -
   A. Yes, indeed.

Q. Just as an example, if I was minded to try and get into
   a match without paying I might try and climb over the
   wall to get in.   Would Officers on duty be expected to
   deal with that? - A. Yes.

Q. So if I had paid to go on the terracing where one s t and s
   to watch the match and then attempted to climb up into
   the grandstand where there is a seat available, again is
   that something your Officers would intervene to deal
   with? - A. Yes.

Q. And 11:

       "Offensive weapons, glasses, flags, banners and
        other similar articles are not permitted."

   What would be done about that Ground Regulation in
   practice? - A. We would enforce the Ground Regulation
   but for the offensive weapon we would resort to criminal
   law for that one.

Q. If you have got something like a banner - on the face
   of it no criminal offence? - A. The Ground Regulations,
   we would deal with it under rules.

Q. During your time as Assistant Chief Constable was there
   ever concern about bottles of drink being brought into
   the ground by spectators? - A. Certainly.   The Officers
   would be briefed prior to taking up duty at the ground
   that they would not allow people into the ground who
   were carrying bottles of liquor.

Q. The final Re gul at ion we see here, number   12:

       "All persons entering Bramall Lane are admitted
        subject to the above Ground R e g u l a t i o n s , the
        bye laws of the City of Sheffield and the Rules
        and Regulations of the Football Association and
        Football League.   Sheffield United Football
        Club reserves the right to remove from the ground
        any person who does not comply with them or
        whose presence is a source of danger or annoyance
        to others."


                               - 21 -
Would persons who broke the ground regulations be
ejected if they came to the notice of the police?
- A. Yes, they would.

     MR. BENTLEY:   If we just go on a little further
in the bundle, I think your Lordship will see at the
end of the bundle two documents both headed, "Manpower
and Overtine Estimates for Policing Football Matches",
both have been served under the Civil Evidence Act.
I understand there is no dispute about then:

Mr. Goslin, they deal with all the South Yorkshire clubs,
but it may be that page 206 is a page which nay have
some relevance here.   I think this is a table which
purports to show club by club the action that police
officers have taken at grounds during the previous
season.   The first column dealing with arrests for
Public Order Act offences and then breach of the;
peace where nobody seems to have been arrested or
ejected at any of the grounds and then "Ejections under
Ground Regulations"? - A. Yes.

We see that Sheffield United - 70 home supporters and,
I assume, that is 16 away supporters, being ejected?
- A, Yes,that is what it means.

So that is people being taken out of the crowd and put
out of the grounds not because they have committed
criminal offences, but because they have offended against
the ground regulations? - A. Yes, sir.

Just for the sake of completeness, if we look at the next
document, which is the same analysis for the season
1983/84, page 215 of the bundle, I think we see in the
case of Sheffield United Public Order Act offences, 10
home supporters arrested, 7 away supporters arrested and
then "Ejections under Ground Regu lat io ns" , 55 home
supporters and 22 away supporters ejected.      This seems
to mirror the picture as far as this club is concerned
in the previous season, more people are put out because
they have breached the ground re gu lat ion s, it would s e e m ,
than are arrested for Public Order Act offences? - A.
Exactly.

This is a matter we can perhaps more conveniently deal
with when we look at some of the Minutes of the various
Working Parties there have been.   I think we shall find
evidence of discussion between the police on the one
hand and the clubs on the other, as to how the ground
regulations may be altered and improved to give a wider
power to deal with people who, it is thought, are better
out of the ground than in it? - A. That is correct.

Can I turn from that to another matter?       Kow far were you,
  as a senior police offcer, responsible for the policing
  of soccer matches, concerned with crowd safety, as opposed
  to disorder, violence and criminality? - A. Crowd safety
  took an equal amount of our concern, as did the enforcing
  of the law.  One of our things we talked about is to
  allow the match to be played to the comfort and safety
  of the spectators.

Q. No doubt as we have already heard matters like crushes
   in the crowd and so on? - A. V'e would intervene to
   relieve that pressure and crush.

Q. So the documents are identified - I do not think at this
   stage it is perhaps necessary to labour these at any
   length - but in the bundle I think we can find at page
   62 a document whi ch is entitled "Standing Instructions
   for the Policing of Football Matches".     This rather
   long do cument sets out general instructions as to how
   this impor ta nt duty is to be discharged? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. In add ition to standing instructions, it laid down the
   policing policy, I think, for each football match which -
   was to be policed by your force an operation order would
   be issued? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. At page 78 of the bundle we see examples of just such an
   order;  this being the operation order for the Sheffield
   United/Portsmoutfc match to be held on the 15th of January,
   1983? - A. That is right.

Q. I think Mr. Goslin, as you have already indicated, during
   your time there were complaints from the clubs about the
   amount that t hey were required to pay for policing? - A.
   That is right.

Q. I think this was not simply a complaint from Sheffield
   United, I think the other South Yorkshire clubs were
   saying the same, "We are having to pay too much.  We
   cannot real ly afford it. Elsewhere in the country the
   Police Authorities do not charge clubs anything like as
   much as we have to pay"? - A. That is correct.

        HR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Can I understand where we
   are?   This operation order is to be found at page 78.
   How far does it continue into the bundle?

        MR. BENTLEY:  It continues for a considerable
   distance, up to page 101, my Lord.

        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     So that is an operation
   order for a single cay?

        MR.   BENTLEY:   My Lord, that is right.


                               - 23 -
        'K  \




                       Q.        MR. BENTLEY:    I would just like to trace the
                            history of this matter through briefly with the documents
                            if I nay.   It nay be of assistance if we go to page 112
                            in the bundle.    I am not suggesting t h a t this is the
                            first time this matter was ever voiced by the clubs
                            to the police, but perhaps it records a fairly important
                            meeting which I think you attended.     It is a meeting
                            held on the 8th of October, 1552.    You attended, as
                            did the Vice Chairman of the Police Commit te e and a number
                B           of other officers from your force attended.       We'then
                            see listed the representatives of the l o cal soccer clubs
                            who were also at this meeting, i n c l u d i n g a
                            Director of Sheffield United and Mr. C hester the Secretary
                            of the club? - A. That is correct.

                       Q. The purpose of the meeting was "To Dis cus s charges
                          Levied by the Police for Officers on D u t y at Football
                          Matches", that is the heading? - A. Yes.      Mr. Chester
                          is no longer the Secretary of the football club.     He
                          was at that time.

                       Q. If we just go through the Minutes briefly, item 2.
                                         was Vice Chairman and he reminded those
                          present the m e e ti ng had been arranged in order that
                          representatives of the South Yorkshire Football Clubs
                D         could put forward their ideas for al l e v i a t i n g some of
                          the financial burden placed upon them by the policing
                          of matches.     The meeting wouid be a li s t e n i n g brief
                          to the points of view of these present.             Then item 3,
                          Hr. McGee,    Chairman of Sheffield W e d n e s d a y starts the
                          ball roll ing by stated that it was ra ther for football
                          clubs to speak with one voice, they were unanimous in
                          respect of police c h a r g e s , condemning them as being
                          excessive.     Mr. McGee     then asked why the football
                          clubs in South Yorkshire were being mad e to pay two
                          to five times more than clubs in other areas for
                          the p ol icing of their grounds.        Then it was recorded
                          as giving an answer to Mr. M c G e e ’s question, Mr.
                          Goslin stated that the Forces were not a s k i n g a
                          realistic amount when one considers all the attnedant
                          circumstances surround the policing of matches, not
                          least of which is the increase in the s a lar y of
                          police officers.       The meeting proceeds, according to the
                          Minutes and for my purposes if I refer you to item 8
                          in the Minutes,       We see in this item you               half
                          way down item 8:

                                 "He..

                            T h a t ’s you:

                                   "...then outlined the criteria whic h operated
                                   in South Yorkshire, a copy of which had been
                                   circulated to all clubs, stating this criteria
                                   was being looked at again, but it was felt the
                H                  un d e rl yin g problem was the incons is ten cy of
                                   charges throughout the country.'’
  HARPMA*. LTD.
: Shcxlharxl Writer*
.‘FFIELO S I 2DX
                                                         -   21}   -
          The meeting continues and winds up at page 116
     with Mr. McC-ea placing it on record that the visiting
     clubs were always frcst (complimentary about the manner
     in which South Yorkshire Police Officers policed their
     football grounds.

          The matter continues in some of the other Minutes
     that we have but it may well be that we can go next to
     page 122.   I think this is a meeting of the Working
     Group on the effects of professional football on "the
     community, held 15tn December, 1582.   Representatives
     of the Police Committee attend, as do certain other
     local Councillors and then representatives of each of the
     clubs, including Mr. Chester, the Company Secretary of
     Sheffield United? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think we can see at the foot of the page that the
   Terms of Reference of the Work ing Group are set out (a)
   to examine the charges for police services in South -
   Yorkshire, p a r t i c u l a r l y .where attendances fall below an
   agreed pre-determined level and...

Q.        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   What does (a) mean, where
     the attendances have fallen below what was estimated?
     - A. One of the concerns of the smaller football clubs
     was that the criteria laid down started at a small
     numbered crowd, so if they had an attendance of 45,000
     they would have to pay an initial figure which would
     be far in excess of a realistic figure.   What the}7 were
     asking for is the basic criteria "before police charges
     started, to be raised.

Q.        MR. BENTLEY:    I wonder if we can next go to page
     136 in the bundle?    I think we can see this is a
     meeting of the Working Group on the 28th of January,
     1983.   Representatives of the Police Committee and the
     Local Authority and the clubs and, on this occasion,
                   "] a Director of Sheffield United attends on
     behalf of that club, as dees Mr. Chester the Company
     Secretary.   We can see item 2 is "Charges for Police
     Services" and the item reads:

         "At the m e e ti ng on 15th December, the Chief
          Constable had been requested to prepare a report
          on the present criteria for levying charges for
          police, possible future criteria, the extent of
          co-operation between the clubs and the police,
          and the extent of community related activities
          already being undertaken by the clubs.

          The Working Group considered a report
          incorporating the information requested.

          Whilst the effect of the revised criteria could
          not be estimated with any real certainty (the
          football clubs being charged retrospectively,
          based on the actual number of spectators

                                   -   25 -
                                        present), it was likely that the total annual
                                        charges to Football League Clubs in South
                                        Yorkshire would be reduced by seme £50,000 per
                                        annum.”

                                 I think the criteria referred to there, which it is
                                 hoped will produce that saving as far as the clubs are
                                 concerned, is the one which appears at page 140? - A.
                 B               That is correct.

                            Q.    It is one of the annexes to the report.   It sets out a
                                 formula for calculating charges which really depends
                                 upon the level which the crowd attains at the match;
                                 the more people go the higher the charges will be
                                 because more officers will be charged for? - A. That is
                                 correct.

                            Q.    Finally, following that through to page  142, on the 2nd
                                 of June, 1983 we find the Working Group meeting, again
                                 representatives of the Police Committee present and Mr.
                                 Chester the Company Secretary of Sheffield United also
                                 attends.    Item 2 is "Charges for Police Services” .
                                 Effectively I think the clubs are being told, and this
                                 appears in the recommendation, that this new scale of
                  D              charges had been approved by the Police Committee, will
                                 be brought in, but only with effect from the 1st of
                                 April, 1SS3? - A. That is correct.

                            Q. I think that is the first recommendation that the
                               implementation of the revised scale of charges for the
                               services of the police at football matches from the 1st
                               of April, 19S3, be noted and then the clubs are
                               requested in item 2 to settle their accounts.   I do not
                               think the clubs were over happy at finding the new scale
                               of charges was only to have effect from the 1st of
                               April, but that is what the Police Committee had decided
                               and that is what the clubs were being told? - A. That is
                               correct.

                            Q. Really by this time am I right in thinking the situation
                               was this, the clubs had said to the Police Authority,
                               "We are having to pay too much” .  The Authority had
                               looked at the method of calculating the levying charges
                               and had produced a new formula which would give some
                               relief to the clubs? - A. That is correct.

                            Q. They were being told this new scheme would come into
                               effect from the 1st of April, 1983.   I think now having
                               revised the charges in some measure the Police Authority
                               were now taking the stance, "Well, we have revised
                               charges, we now want what is owing, paid"? - A. That is
                               correct.

                            Q. I think you were in this situation by the middle of
                               1983, that quite a large debt had built up in respect of
                               each of five clubs who had not made payments whilst this
                   H           negotiation was continued? - A. That is correct.
HARPHAM,         LTD.
S h o r th a n d W riter*
F T I E L D S i 2DX
                                                        -   26 _
       MR. BENTLEY:   Ky Lord, I wonder if it might be
convenient next just to go to the correspondence in this
case and see how it builds up?   Most of it is standard
form and need not occupy any Court time:

I think if one goes to page 151 of the bundle first. I
appreciate this is not a document that comes from you,
Mr. Goslin, but just looking at the document it is clear
what it is.   It is a letter in October, 1973 to
Sheffield United telling them that they are going to
have to pay higher charges from the 1st of October, 1973
for the policing of football matches? - A. Yes, sir.

Of course, that letter would follow a decision taken at
the Police Committee which we would find in the Minutes
we have looked at? - A. That is correct.

If we go through the pages that follow, 152,, we find a
letter to the same effect of January, 1975.    153 is a
letter of the 18th December, 1975 telling of a further
increase and then I think the first letter from the club
at page 154, signed by the then Secretary               to
the then Chief Constable Mr. Barratt, acknowledging the
letter of 18th December, telling them the charges are
going to be increased.   Paragraph 2 reads:

       "It is noted that the revised charges are
       effective from 1st November, 1975.   This
       decision will cause this Club and others in the
       area difficulty as we have all to obey Football
       League Regulations or be subject to a fine.    The
       Regulation calls for the disbursement of the gate
       receipts less expenses (including Police Charges)
       which are obtained by telephone in advance of the
       monthly statement from your Accounts Office.
       These payments must be made within six days of
       the match being played and obviously as you will
       gather, the monies for the month of November and
       early December have been sent to the Clubs and
       League respectively.   We understand that the
       first match we were advised of the new charges
       was the Manchester United game on 13th December.

       Accordingly, we ask that special consideration be
       given to the waiving of the additional charges
       for matches on 1st November v Manchester City;
       15th November v Leicester City and 6th December v
       Tottenham Hotspur, because of the special
       circumstances outlined above."

The comments of the Chief Constable are asked for and I
think his reply, and this would be from your predecessor
no doubt, reference ACC:
             i
                 X




                                       "Dear
                         A
                                      Thank you for your letter...

                                      I can advise you that the matter was discussed by
                                      the Police Authority at their meeting on 9
                                      December 1975, who gave careful consideration to
                                      the question of a retrospective increase and
                         B            decided upon 1 November 1975, when in fact the
                                      pay rises prompting the increased charges took
                                      effect on 1 September 1975.

                                       I regret therefore that the effective date cannot
                                       be changed but there is no objection to the use
                                       of this correspondence in seeking recompense from
                                       the Football League and the clubs involved."
                         C
                                Then I think we find another letter f r o m | a t
         i           ,          page 156, a letter dated 21st September, 1976, to Mr.
                                Barratt, the then Chief Constable:

                                       "I am writing to ask you for sympathetic
                                       consideration concerning our ground policing
                                       requirements here at Bramall Lane.
                         D             In recent months we have had many discussions
                                       with Superintendent Lambert CWoodseats) of your
                                       Eackenthorpe Division regarding this subject.
                                       My Chairman,                  is of the opinion
                                       that the policing requirements should be as per
                                       the Home Office circular, i.e. one constable per
                                       thousand spectators and in recent weeks as there
                         E             has been a severe drop in the average number of
                                       spectators attending matches here at Bramall Lane,
                                       we have asked Superintendent Lambert to revise
                                       the basic police numbers attending for duty on
                                       match days.   Our average gate is now
                                       approximately 15 - 16,000 and it is my Chairman's
                                       considered opinion that a force of 15 police
                                       constables plus the appropriate supervision is
                         F             the correct number for which the club should pay
                                       in our present financial circumstances."

                                Then he asks that the matter be considered and would
                                like these revised numbers to operate with effect from
                                the 25th September when there is a match against
                                Blackburn Rovers.
                          G            The reply from the Assistant Chief Constable is
                                dated three days later, the 24th September, 1976:

                                       "Dear

                                       Thank you for your letter of 21 September 1976,
                                       about policing requirements at Bramall Lane.  I
                                       fully appreciate the Club's changed circumstances
                          H            and would wish to be as helpful as possible.
 KARPHAM,                LTD.
» S h o r th a n d W riter*

I P F I E L D S I 2DX                                 -   28 -
      Nevertheless, my concern is with the public
      safety and I regard the old yardstick of one
      policeman per 1,000 crowd to be entirely
      irrelevant to the current situation which has
      unfortunately altered so dramatically since that
      formula vas suggested.   There are matches for
      which this criterion is acceptable and there are
      others for which it quite clearly is not.

       We need to judge each game on its merits and
       recommend police coverage accordingly."

He then says in the final paragraph:

       "The number of police officers for the Blackburn
       Rovers fixture has, I understand, been agreed to
       our mutual satisfaction and we will view future
       fixtures appropriately.   I hope to come along to
       Bramall Lane very soon when perhaps I could have
       a discussion with             |to iron out any
       further points."

Then at page 158, one of the standard letters telling
the club that the rate of charge is going up.   This
time it is a letter dated November 1977, page 159.
A similar sort of letter for 1978, October of that year,
page 160.   It has a different format but it is the same
kind of letter, a letter of 12th July, 1979 saying the
rates are to be increased as set out.

       Page 161, another letter dated 17th October,
1979, containing the same information that charges are
going up and then a circular letter, page 162, sent to
all the football clubs in South Yorkshire, dated 5th of
June, 1980:

       "Dear Sir,

       In order to ensure that we are able to properly polic
       forthcoming football events, having regard to the
       problems of public safety, crowd violence etc.,
       we have recalculated what we consider to be the
       appropriate number of police officers to be
       employed inside the ground.

       The policing levels as from 1 July 1980, will be
       charged at the special services rate applicable
       in relation to the crowd attendance as set out
       on the attached schedule.   Where the number of
       spectators is likely to be less than one thousand
       the police cover will be negotiated separately on
       each occasion.

       For the purpose of the calculation referred to in
       relation to crowd figures in excess of one
       thousand it is proposed that we round up to the
       nearest thousand any number between five hundred
       and one and nine hundred and ninety-nine.
                                         I have written this far in advance of the new
                                         season so that you have a reasonable amount of
                                         tine to properly consider the financial cons e­
                                         quences of our decision."

                                    Then on the 3rd D ec e m b e r , 1980, a letter from the Chief
                                    Constable to the Secretary of the Sheffield United Club
                                    which is really dealing with the question of increases
                                    which have taken place and are about to take place in
                     B              the charges levelled.         It is a rather fuller letter
                                    than the earlier one.

                                         The 6th of April, 1981, page 16 M , and this is a
                                    letter referring to previous correspondence concerning
                                    the approved charges for the hire of police officers and
                                    paragraph 2 says:

                                         "However, a recent survey has shown that the
                                         charges for the North East Region were s u b st an ­
                                         tially below those charged by other police forces
                                         and it has been agreed that new standard rates
                                         should come into effect on 1st May, 1981.     Details
                                         of the n ew rates are shown in the Appendix to this
                                         letter."

                      D             In fact I think we have     seen that particular item appearing
                                    in the Police Committee     Minutes when we looked at those?
                                    - A. That is right.

                               Q. Then it goes on to deal       with the method of calculation.

                               Q.        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Which is the north-east
                                    region? - A. That is the number 2 region referred to in
                                    the Police Committee Minutes.

                               Q.        MR. BENTLEY:    Mr. Goslin, at page 165 there is a
                                    letter dated m t h September, 1981, t elling the club that
                                    the charge rate is going up.

                                         A similar letter dated 23rd September, 1982, again
                                    notifying the club that the rate of charges is to increase.

                                         Page 167, a letter to the club dated 6th October, 1982
                                    telling the club the new charges have been approved by the
                                    Police Committee and on the 10th November, 1982, a letter
                                    from the Assistant Chief Constable, that is yourself? -
                                    A. Yes, it is.

                               Q. To Mr. Chester, reducing the charge for one particular
                                  match, a match against Manchester City, to £500.

                                         MR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, in fact we see this
                                    reduction reflected in the invoice at page 3^:

                               Q. The reason you reduced it was that this was a friendly
                                  match, which was attended by a comparatively low crowd?
                      H           - A. That is right.
.   harpham      ,   lto   .
el S h o r th » n d W riter*                                    -   30 -
S ? F ! ELD S i 2 0 X
          A        '
              V



                           Q. Special considerations which led the Police Authority
                   A          to be prepared to reduce the charges on that occasion?
                              - A. That is right.

                           Q. At page 169 we have got letters from you to the Secretary
                              of Sheffield United... - A. Not from me, sir.
                       t
                           Q. I am looking at the extension                       ? - A.
                              My name has no     at the end.                    .s an
                   B          Officer with the County Council.
                       i
                           Q. I should have realised.     The County Council Legal Section
                              requesting payment of the sum then owing £37,000, following
                              it another letter at the end of March, over £50,000 by
                              now.   There is a document exhibited to that at page 171
                              setting out h o w the sum is made up.
                   C               Page 172 is a letter from the club but it is not
      i                       germane to the issue.

                                    Page 173, 8th June, 1983, the County Treasurer is •
                              again asking Sheffield United to pay the amount that is
                              owing in respect of police charges.         Then on the 13th
                              of July of 1583 Mr. Chester at Sheffield United is being
                              told by the County Treasurer that a proposal which the
                   D          Chairman of Sheffield Wednesday, Mr. McGee, has sent
                              on behalf of all the South Yorkshire clubs that the amounts
                              due for the 1 9 8 2 / 8 3 season be paid by ten monthly inst al ­
                              ments commencing in September, 19 8 3 , is quite unacceptable;
                              pointing out the amount due has accumulated since August
                              1582.

                                    Then on the 1st of August, 1983, we have the County
                   E          Treasurer writing to all the five clubs in South Yorkshire
                              saying that if they do not pay legal action will have to
                              be t a k e n .

      i       )•                   The 8th of August, 1983, a letter from the Chief
                              Executive of the County Council enclosing a schedule of
                              outstanding accounts and threatening proceedings if they
                   F          are not paid.   This produced a response from the club,
                              from Mr. Chester, dated 11th August, 1 9 8 3 . It may be
                              worth reading this letter in full:

                                   ’’Further to recent correspondence and negotiations
                                   Sheffield United would like to clarify their position
                                   by indicating their acceptance of any agreed method
                                   of payment, endorsed by the remaining four South
                   G               Yorkshire Football C l u b s , relative to police charges
                                   due.

                                   It is anticipated that agreement to settle those
                                   charges due in no way impairs or prevents continued
                                   negotiations between the South Yorkshire County
                                   Council andSouth Yorkshire Clubs to arrive at a
                                   more reasonable level of retrospective charges and
                   H               to bring about an equalisation compatible with the
HARPHAM, LTD.
                                   remainder of the County.
Shorth»nd Writer*
r F! ELO S1 5DX
                                                         - 31 -
                                    Figures have been provided by the Clubs to
                                    give your Authority an indication of the anomalies
                                    prevailing.    In the case of Sheffield United's
                                    experience within Division 3 of the Football League
                                    the percentage of police charges to gross gate income
                                    during season 8 2 / 8 3 represented an average of
                                    13.79 as against an average of 5.^1 away from
                                    Bramall Lane.     Based on the figures presented
                                    a charge of 5.^1$ of gross gate income
                    B               would represent a police account for l e a g u e -
                                    matches of £15,^84.45, an over charge to existing
                                    charges of £2*J ,001. *11.   Surely a sufficiently
                                    high anomaly to justify some considerable revision.

                                    As an individual Club we have entered into
                                    correspondence with both the Home S e cre ta ry and
                                    Minister of Sport.     Resulting from same we have
                                    been advised that special police services are
                                    provided upon the request of the organisation
                                    requi rin g such services.   In the interest of
                                    public relations between our Club and the Folice
                                    our ground has always been available as an open
                                    door to the Police force at their discretion.       We
                                    feel that being charged for discretionary policing
                                    is not within the spirit, or the law, as advised.
                     D              Especially as a non-designated g r o u n d . ”

                               That is a reference to football grounds which are designate
                               as grounds in respect of which a Safety Certificate is
                               required? - A. That is correct, a Division 1 and Division 2

                               ' l;:ink attached to that letter were certain statistics
                               - c p l i e d by the club supporting the argument that they
                               ;< :- rd there.

                                    That produces on 19th August, at page 180, a
                               r   ,nse from the Chief Executive saying in effect that
                               the charges are not going to be reduced but offering at
                               the bottom of the page payment by instalment:

                                  "I am instructed to say that the County Council
                                    will accept payment as set out below and will
                                    not issue proceedings provided these payments
                                    are received on the due dates."

                               Then on page 181 we see the instalments which are required
                               and the dates on which they are required to be paid.

                                    Then on the 25th August, 1983, another letter advising
                               the rate of charge is to be increased.   31st August, 1983
                               a letter from the Club signed by Mr. Chester:

                                   "We thank you for your letter dated 19th August 1983
                                    and enclose herewith our cheque to the value of
                                    £1*4,173."
                      H                                   -   32 -
  KAftPHAM. LTD.
tl 3 h o r th > n d W riters
EFF1ELD S I 20X
                                   So that is the first instalment that the Chief
                   A               Executive was asking for in his last letter? - A.
                                   Yes.

                                Q. It goes on:

                                       ’’This payment is being made without prejudice
                                         to any action we, or you, may wish to take over the
                                         question of retrospection of police charges.  A
                     B j                 matter we are still in disagreement over and
                                         which is the subject of continuing talks between
                            I
                                         u s .11

                                   Then on the 5th September,      1983, at page   18*4 and the
                                   6th September, 1 9 8 3 ...

                     C                  MR. GRIFFITHS:   I do not want to create any
                                   difficulties and it may be that it is my fault, but
          (      )                 the numbering in my bundle appears to be totally
                                   different to my learned friend's.   I think the
                                   reason for this is that during the luncheon adjournment
                                   I was provided with further documents to add to my
                                   bundle.   I did not appreciate that that entailed the
                                   re-numbering of all the other documents.   I wonder
                                   if my learned friend could draw attention to the
                     D             old numbering as well as the new?

                                        MR.   BENTLEY:   Yes, of course:

                                Q. I think these next two letters which are the County
                                   Council's own documents really deal with the question
                                   of the costs.   I do not think we need to trouble with
                                   that, and the same with page 186.    At page 187 we do
                     E             get a letter of some importance, 14 th Oc tober, 1 9 8 3 ._____
                                   It is a letter from the new Club Chairman,I
                                   to Mr. Wright, the Chief Constable:

                                       "Further to our telephone conversation I write
                                        to request that the invoices be cancelled in
                                        respect of police services inside the Ground,
                     F                  apart from the specific requests for such
                                        services that we made by letter during last
                                        season.

                                         Sheffield United Football Club is not a designated
                                         ground and as such doesnot come within the Safety/
                                         Sportsground Act, which is restricted to the First
                                         and Second Divisions.
                     G
                                         When I became Chairman in the 1981/82 Season, I
                                         wrote to the the Home Secretary, Mr. Whitelaw,
                                         in connection with Police charges, and he made
                                         it perfectly clear that the Police entered the
                                         ground at the request of the Club and as such
                                         payment would rest entirely with the Police
                                         Committee of the appropriate Local Authority.
                     H
  KARPHAM. LTD.
•! S h o flh in d Writer*                                      -   33 -
'STIELC S1       2DX
                                      D u ring the 1982/83 Season, which is the one
                   A                  in question, I took particular care to write
                                      to your Office and request Police Services on
                                      the occasions when the Club considered we might
                                      have difficulties in controlling the "local
                                      Derby" crowd, and for such occasions we
                                      na turally are prepared to pay for such services.

                                      We have never, nor would we ever, deny access
                   B                  to our private property to the Police, for we
                                      realise that to do so could result in yourself
                                      re qu esting the cancellation of a natch, if, in
                                      your opinion, a Police presence was necessary
                                      inside the ground.

                                      As an ex-member of a Police Committee, I would
                                      always support the Chief Constable's recommendations
                   C                  on such matters, but the invoices rendered are
                                      for services that were not requested within the
        i      i
                                      framework of the law, as it stands at the
                                      present time.

                                      With reference to the charges made for matches where a
                                      Police presence was requested, we consider these to
                                      be too high, when compared with other Clubs
                   D                  and other Counties.    The charges made by South
                                      Yorkshire Police constitute between 13 and 16% of
                                      our total gate receipts, as against neighbouring
                                      counties, whose charges, on a recent survey, show as
                                      low as 1 and 2 % .  This is a matter I intend to
                                      take up with the County Council in the near future.

                                      I do not wish to become involved with the Local
                   E                  Authority at this stage, and request that you
                                      seek guidance from The Home Office on the
                                      question of Police Services inside the ground, in
                                      particular to our non-designated g r o u n d , when such
                                      services have not been requested.

                                      Many thanks for understanding our situation."
                   F                  First of a l l ,          I can you help about this?
                                 In paragraph 1              talks about writing letters
                                 specifically requesting police services for particular
                                 matters.   Have you any recollection of ever seeing such
                                 letters? - A. None whatsoever.     I cannot find them in
                                 the files.

                   G                   MR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, we are very nearly at the
                                  end of this correspondence, but at page 189 we do come
                                  to another letter which is of some importance:

                               Q. It is a letter from                  dated the 2 6th October,
                                  1983 to the Chief Constable:


                   H                                        -   3M -
 KARPHAM. LTD.             j
! S h o rth tn d W H ttn                                                                          *
AFIELD S I 2DX             |
                                           "Dear
                     A
                                               I have given further thought to the question
                                               of police at football matches and wonder
                                               whether you would agree to close circuit
                                               television cameras operating all round the
                                               ground;  operating from a central control
                                               room, either at the top of the stand or in the
                                               present police setup at the ground.
                     B
                                               If we were to install such apparatus, then it
                                               could be argued that there is no necessity for
                                               police to be within the ground, but would be
                                               outside and in readiness for any problem that
                                               may occur.   Although a presence within the
                                               ground could still be requested for the "local
                                               Derby" matches.
                     C
                                               Your thoughts on the matter would be appreciated,
          i                                    as I note that a police presence within the ground
                                               is still operating at great strength;   albeit at
                                               no cost to us."

                                               MR. JUSTICE BOREKAM:   What does that last bit
                                       mean,    "albeit at no cost to us"?
                     D
                              i             MR. BENTLEY:   I think what is meant, a lt h ough I am
                                       speculating, is that in view of his last letter
                                       has cast on the Police Authority for the future the burden
                              I        of-paying for any policing they provide.
                              |
                                               MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:       Yes, I see.
                     E            Q.        MR. BENTLEY:      Then going to page 190, originally
                                       page 1 8 3 , I think this is a letter, Mr. Goslin, from you
                                       - A. It is a letter from the Chief Constable.

                                  Q„ It is, yes.          I would like to deal with the first two
          V      !                     paragraphs:

                     F                         ‘I refer to your letter dated 14 October 1983,
                                                and having looked into the implications am now
                                                in a position to reply more fully.

                                               I know that Mr. Goslin, my Assistant Chief
                                               Constable (Operations), together with Chief
                                               Superintendent Broomhead, had a meeting with
                                               you in your office and discussed the general
                     G                         situation in relation to the policing of foot­
                                               ball matches, and in confirmation I would make
                                               the following comments."

                                       Just to try and jog your memory and set the thing in
                                       context, if we go back to the previous letter of the 2 6 th
                                       October, 1 9 8 3 .  I think this is you endorsing and noting
                                                      fs letter to the Chief Constable asking to
                     H                 speak to him and really effectively saying that it is
 KARPMAM. LTD
I 5 h o r th » n d W riter*
                                                                        -   35 -
IFFIELD S I SOX
     time we spoke to              about whether he wants
     the police at the ground or not? - A. That is correct.

Q. Do you recall following that letter, the letter of the
   26th October, 1983, having a meeting with
   - A. Yes, I do.;

Q. Can you tell his Lordship about that meeting? - A. As
   a result of the letter received on the 26th October,
   the Chief Constable, following our discussions, directed
   me to seek a m e e t i n g with              to discuss the
   whole situation.         At that meeting l explained to
                |the provisions of Section 10 of the Safety
   of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and the implications to his
   football club were police officers not to attend.         The
   provisions of tha t section allowed the Local Autho rit y
   to seek an Injunction against an organisation such as
   a football club if they consider safety measures are
   inadequate.

          MR. BENTLEY:   My Lord, we have a copy of the Act.
     It is Section 10 of the Act.   I wonder if I could just
     hand that in to your Lordship?

              MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:        This is an application to the
     M a g i s t r a t e s ’ Court?

           MR.   BENTLEY:    That is right.

          MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   The Magistrates' Court do not
     issue Injunctions.   It was rather a broad use of the thing

          MR. BENTLEY:       The effect is very similar,      but not
     an Injunction:

Q.    So, Mr. Goslin, you had drawn         s attention
     to that provision at this m e eiingv -A. les, I    did. I
     then went on to discuss with                 the financial
     implications of the South YorKsnnre t'once supplying
     police officers for his football club without recompense.
     I pointed out there was a budget to which the Chief
     Constable had to operate, that this took account of the
     fact that revenue would be received from football clubs
     and that as th e y were a commercial private organisation
     seeking the services of policemen at a function organised
     by them then the y were liable for charges, as special
     service police officers under Section 15 of the Police
     Act.    I reminded |             [that the subject of charges
     was under discussion and had been discussed with the
     County Council.

Q.   Following the m e e tin g with                  we then get the
     letter from the Chief Constable, pages          190 and 191.

          MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   I do not understand that.
     The note on page 189 is not dated until the Uth of November


                                      -   36 -
          J.




                               That is a fter the Chief Co ns t a b l e ’s letter and it would
                               seem t hat              had not then been seen?

                          Q.         MR. BENTLEY:   I wonder if you could assist? - A.
                               Yes, the dates - I can agree only that my note on the
                               4th N ovember is'correct, but I had several meetings with
                                             and the meeting referred to in the letter
                               from the Chief Constable on the 27 th October was a meeting
                               which took place w i t h a n d          Chief Superintendent
                 B             Broomhead in order to discuss the whole question-of finance
                               at Sheffield United.

                                       MR. BENTLEY:     I think I can help.  If one goes back
                               to page 187 one s       e   e   s  |  ’s letter of the 14th
                               October.       If one follows through to page 190 one sees the
                               letter from the Chief Constable dated the 27th October,
                               1 9 8 3 r eferring to that letter of the 14th October and
                               saying "I note Mr. Goslin has had a m e e ti ng with you in
                               your office".       My Lord, I think the whole ma tter is
                               really explained.

                                       MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     What you are saying is that
                               pages    190 — 191, that is not replying to page 18 9 ?

                                    MR. BENTLEY:    Exactly.  There is a letter on the
                 D             8th November at page 193 making that clear because it
                               says at paragraph 2:

                                     "I can only presume that your letter of 26
                                      O c t o b e r ...was written before you had received
                                      m y letter dated 27 October."

                                       MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:       That is not surprising,   is
                               it?

                                    MR. BENTLEY:   No, not surprising at all.            That is
                               the cause of the confusion.

                                       MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:       I think I can see now.

                          Q.        MR. BENTLEY:   Mr. Goslin, just dealing with the
                               letter of the 27th October, and I think without going
                               through it and my learned friend if there is anything
                               germane will no doubt refer to i t , really is setting
                               out broadly the matters which you have told his Lordship
                               about? - A. Yes, indeed.

                          Q. Bearing Se c t i on 10 of the 1975 Act in mind and so on.
                                              gets a reply to his letter suggesting that
                             closed circuit television be used, the letter of 2 6 th
                             October, 1983, on the 8 th November, 1 5 8 3 .  The final
                             paragraph says:

                                     "The provision of CCTV facilities both inside
                                      and outside football grounds for crowd control
                                      purposes already applies in various parts of the
                  H
KARPHAM, LTD.
S n o rttw n d W riter*                                         -    37 -
FFIELD    si   2DX
                                        country, is of great assistance to the police
                                        and in that connection your comments are most
                                        helpful.   Such equipment however is always
                                        used as an aid for the police and in no way
                                        reduces the requirement for a physical police
                                        presence inside the ground as now o c c u r s . 11

                                 A. Yes.

                     B        Q. On page  194 there is a letter from                      to the
                                 Chief Constable dated 25th N o v e m b e r , H T 5 3 T

                                      "Dear

                                        I have n o w heard from Home Secretary in reply
                                        to m y q uer y in connection with police charges.

                                        As we are meeting next Thursday, 1st December,
                                        1983, I will bring along photostat copy of his
                                        letter which more or less confirms the position
                                        I have taken all along in connection with
                                        police charges..."

                                        MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:         What is that?

                     D                MR. BENTLEY:   As I understand it, if you do not
                                 invite the Police you do not have to pay for them:

                              Q. It goes on:

                                       "...albeit no different than the previous Home
                                        S e c r e t a r y ’s letter.

                                        I acknowledge your letter of 8th November, 1 9 8 3
                                        and although I discussed police operations in the
                                        ground with Mr. Gosling, the Assistant Chief
                                        Constable and Chief Superintendent Broomhead I
                                        still take the same view that charges in an
                                        undesignated ground are not lawful unless a
                                        specific request for police presence is made
                                        and I confirm that we have not made such a
                                        request apart from three matches during last
                                        season and this season."

                                 What was the upshot of that letter when it was received?
                                 What was done by the Chief C o n s t a b l e ’s office when that
                                 letter was received? - A. The letter of the 25th November
                                 was recei ved by the Chief Constable.            As I can recall,
                                 it was not discussed with me because matters which were
                                 referred to in there were already in hand by the South
                                 Yorkshire County Council, that is, the recovery of charges.

                              Q. It is the final part of that letter where really what seems
                                 to be being said is "if we have not made the request we do
                                 not have to p a y " , what was the situation to be as regards
                                 future matches, as you understood it at that time? - A.
                     H
 KARPHAM. LTD.
I S h o r th a n d W riter*                                        -   38 -
FFIELD S t 2DX
     As I recall I   isn went to Sheffield United Football Ground
     and spoke to              and discussed the whole situation
     with him and again reiterated the possibility of my having
     to go to the Local Authority under Ssction 10 of the
     Safety at Sports GroundsAct if we did not send policemen
     in there.    In other words, if no request was made for the
     police presence.

Q. In the end the m atter was resolved in this way:            when told
   point blank if they did not make a request an application
   would be made to the M a g i s t r a r e s ’ Court, a request was
   ultimately made by the club for police services for the
   match that was in the offing against Bolton Wanderers?
   - A. That is right.

          MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:                Where do I find these
     telexes?

              MR. BENTLEY:          Your Lordship will find these in the
     D e f e n d a n t ’s bundle.

          MR.     JUSTICE BOREHAM:            They are not in the Crown
     bundle?

          MR. GRIFFITHS:            They are in bundle 3 at page 12.9 and
     following pages.

Q.          MR. BENTLEY:     Just one other matter that emerges,
     I think, from some of the other papers we have g o t .    One
     of the forms of liaison which took place during your term
     of ' ' 'ice between local soccer clubs and the police was
     trs .elding of joint meetings to discuss problems like
        • th;->ll hooliganism and football problems? - A. Yes,


Q,            upshot of a course of meetings that took place a
     pro;"/ ^l that the Ground Regulations be amended to give
     the     ice wider powers to turn people out of the ground?
     - A, I cannot recall whether a proposal was made.    I
     can recall the matt er was discussed certainly in relation
     to the searching of people who wished to go into the
     ground.

Q. I think there is a document in bundle 3 that can conveniently
   be looked at at this point.   It is page 77.   This is a
   letter from you to Mr. Chester dated 12th August, 1981:

           "Dear Dick,

            I refer to our meeti ng held last Friday at Force
            Headquarters and am forwarding to you as promised
            the w ording of a ground regulation which we would
            ask your Board of Directors to consider for
            inclusion at your football club -


                                          -   39 -
     •The Club reserves the right for its servants
     and agents and formembers of the police forces
     to deny access to or to remove from this
     Ground any person who does not comply with
     ground regulations and with the rules and
     regulations of the Football As sociation and
     the Football League or whose presence on
     the ground is or could reasonably be construed
     as constituting a source of danger, nuisance
     or annoyance to other s p e c t a t o r s . 1

     I hope that this will prove to be satisfactory and
     that we can look forward to its implementation in
     due course."

I think that is Regulation 12? - A. That is right.

     MR.   BENTLEY:     Yes, if you would wait there please.

            Cross-Examined by MR. G R I F F I T H S :

Can I get from you one point, I hope, of agreement, that
over theyears the relations between the Police Force in
which you were the Assistant Chief Constable and the
Sheffield United Club have been very good? - A. Indeed
y e s , they h a v e .

Leaving aside the issue of principle in this case, there
has been the closest co-operation by the club in assisting
the Police in any way that they could? - A. Yes, sir.

That co-operation has gone outside the mere policing of
g r o u n d s , it has embraced discussions on how the community
could become more involved in f o o t b a l l , particularly at
times of high unemployment and so on? - A. That is correct.

It would be fair to say that the issue of principle in this
case is not between the Police and Sheffield United, it is
between the Police Committee for South Yorkshire and the
club for being, as it were, the paymasters? - A. Yes, sir.

You heard Mr. Marshall giving evidence this morning and
describing, or agreeing, that since the fifties and sixties
compared with today, the Police and, indeed, the clubs, are
facing a very different situation so far as crowd control
is concerned. - Is that your experience too? - A. Yes,
indeed.

In those'days there was really little need for more than
the minimum of policing with the odd bad egg? - A. Yes,
that is correct.

You heard me read to him a description of the game in 1980
between Sheffield Wednesday and Oldham.   You, of course,
were in this Force at the time? - A. Yes.   I think that game
took place at Oldham.
                    1    ■


          r    ■

     '              ■;


                                 Q. You were in the Force at the tine? - A. Yes.
               A
                                 Q. No doubt that and similar incidents have come to your
                                    attention in your professional capacity? - A. Yes, indeed.

                                 Q. Is it the unfortunate fact that every season at several
                                    grounds there have been, in recent years, incidents amounting
                                    almost to riot? - A. Yes, sir.

               B                 Q. I am not picking on Sheffield Wednesday, despite -my
                                    paymaster today, but in 1931 Sheffield Wedne sd ay had a
                                    confrontation in Luton in which their coaches were destroyed
                                    within the ground? - A. Yes.

                                 Q. Then another local club, Barnsley, it had a wave of
                                    destruction in Barnsley when Newcastle came to visit in
                                    October, 1981? - A. Yes, sir.
               C
                                 Q. A local derby in November, 1981, Rotherham and Barnsley,
                                 ^ the police were involved in going in and out of the
                                    crowd almost throughout the game? - A. Yes, sir.

                                 Q. In February, 1982 Sheffield United and Scunthorpe, a lot
                                    of trouble in the town and then the Police having to go
                                    on to the terraces in order to break up contesting fans?
                                    - A. Y e s , sir.
               D             !

                                 Q. I will not go through the rest right up to the present day.
                             j
                             i      With clubs involved in this area and other clubs there
                                    have been like incidents? - A. Yes, there have.
                             i
                             j
                                 Q. Mow the development of this public law and order problem
                                    has led to a number of committees, culminating recently in
                e            j      the Inquiry by Mr. Justice Popplewell.   However, prior to
                             I      that there had been Home Office and other committees looking
                                    at the proper way for the police and the clubs to deal with
                                    that situation? - A. Yes, that is correct.
         ( )
                                 Q. Officer, I do not suppose it will be of any controversy,
                                    is the essential of policing football matches to
                F                   segregate the home supporters as much as possible from
                                    the visiting supporters? - A. As a rule, yes, sir.

                                 Q. For instance,      at Bramall Lane, the Bramall Lane end of the
                                    g r o u n d . ..

                                         MR. GRIFFITHS:   M y Lord, your Lordship will find a
                                    map at page 2 of bundle 3:
                    G
                                 Q. If we look at that, Mr. Gcslin, the left hand end is
                                    the Brarcall Lane end, the right hand end the Kop.  South
                                    Stand wi t h car park.  Behind it is the Bramall Lane end,
                                    the end to which the visiting supporters are guided? - A.
                                    Generally speaking, yes.


                    H                                              -   Hi   -
 HARPHAM, LTD.
: Shorth»od   Wrh*r»
?FIEL D S1 2DX
                             Q, In order to further the segregation have arrangements
                   A            been ma d e to sterilise, that is, keep vacant, a part of
                                the terraces between the away s u p p o r t e r s ’ bit and the
                                standing portion of the John Street Stand? - A. Yes,
                                sir..

                             Q.   That is part of the   segregation policy? - A. Yes.

                             Q.   In pursuance of the segregation policy do the police
                    B             really break down their operation into three parts:
                                  first the arrival of supporters, particularly opposing
                                  supporters, until they get into the ground.    Second,
                                  policing w ithin the ground and third, the departure
                                  of spectators, particularly the visitors? - A. Yes.
                                  Every m a t c h has got these three phases.

                             Q.   Dealing with the first of those phases,     the supporters
                    C             come, the majority, by train or coach?       Sometimes special
                                  trains? - A. Yes.
         i      '
                             Q. Arrangements are made by the police for them to be met
                                - those who come by train - at Sheffield Station, held
                                there until a pre-determined time and then taken under
                                escort by police horses and policemen to the ground?
                                A. That is correct.
                    D
                             Q. They are only allowed in through certain turnstiles so
                                as to debouch them into the places where you want them?
                                - A. That is correct.

                             Q. Then similarly, after the game, the vi siting supporters
                                retained in the ground, u s u a ll y for half an hour or
                                up to ha l f an hour can I say? - A. Yes, up to half an
                    E           hour.    It certainly would be unlikely to be longer than
                                that.

                             Q. Allowing the home supporters to clear out from the ground
                                and its surroundings and then the visitors marched - I do
        (       )               not use the word offensively but mere ly descriptively -
                                marched back to the railway station or the coach park?
                    F           - A. Yes, indeed.

                             Q    Now those three parts of the operations are all inter­
                                  dependent, are they not? - A. Yes, to a greater or lesser
                                  degree.

                                  In your duty to maintain law and order you would not
                                  regard it as sufficient merely to be within the ground
                    G             awaiting the kick-off, and trying to suppress trouble
                                  then? - A. No, indeed.

                             Q. Because trouble can start outside and is, indeed,
                                unfortunately quite deliberately engineered, is it not?
                                - A. Y e s , sir.

                             Q. Unfortunately by some Sheffield people as well as by people
                     H          from elsewhere? - A. That is correct.
 H&RPHAM, LTD.
’ S h o r th a n d Writer*                                    -   42 -
A F IE L D S1 2DX
And just as you would not be happy if it was only allowed
in the ground, you would not be happy if there was not a
police presence withi n the ground so as to control what
goes on in there? - A. That is quite right.

Now the problem within the ground is t h i s , and again it
may not be the right word, but what I mean is the loyalty
of the supporters of a particular team to its own team
tends to create quite a lot of high emotion in a
supporter? - A. Yes, indeed.

That high emotion can lead to incidents if something
adverse takes place to their team? - A. It is not restricted
merely to something adverse, but that conduct would
certainly have an effect upon the crowd.

For instance, one of the dangerous times during a game is
just before the final whistle when the disappointment of
losing is in some of the people there possibly? - A. Yes,
one of the               s at that time.

Would you accept that it is very important in your
policing within the ground to be able to identify flash
points? - A. Yes, sir.

And deal with them very quickly? - A. Yes.

Because if you do not, experience has shown that they can
escalate - I do not say out of control - but into a very
serious situation within a matter of minutes? - A. Yes,
xnoeec

For instance, an opposing fan running on to the field
waving his colours or banners m ay be a provocation? -
A. Hay be a provocation, yes, sir.

Therefore, using that as one example, not the kind of
thing that the Police would allow to happen? - A. That
is correct.

The reason you would not allow it to happen is because
of your role in preventing disorder of the type we have
been talking about? - A. A d d i/tianall.Y t of course, by the
ground rules people are not allowed on the playing area.

But l e t ’s be realistic.   Your true consideration when you
sec that sort of thing happening is the danger and the worry
as to what may happen if, for instance, not one man goes,
but he is^ followed by a group of others.      You have then got
  band of opposing     supporters on the field and the home
supporters go in to quell them, that is your real fear?
- A. Yes, indeed.      You may deal with the situation by
leaving the man on the pitch by blocking...       Or immediately
concerning yourself with stopping the man on the pitch.
The main concern is to get him off (a) for escalation of
violence and (b) to eject him from the ground on the grounds
6f>the GromitPBegul'aLluiis.------ -—  . -----                 “

                               *»3
                          Q. But the underlying reason is to prevent a flash point? -
                             A. Yes, it is.                                       — ^




                                                                                           -
                          Q. Again you made reference to not allowing people in with
                             glasses or bottles.    Experience has shown that these
                             tend to be used' as weapons? - A. Yes, indeed.

                          Q. Therefore, in your role of preventing a riot situation
                             escalating from a flash point, you think it is correct
            B                to prevent any weapons, including glasses, bottles and
                             the rest being taken in? - A. Y e s , there is an added
                             ingredient with the bottle side.

                               You prefer them not to drink? - A. Absolutely,      We do
                               not want to increase the state of intoxication.

                          Q. Again if we look at that, the reason basically for not
                             wanting them to drink is that that again tends to act
                             as a lessenor of their behaviour? - A. Yes, indeed.

                          Q. If their behaviour is lessened you get again the flash
                             point syndrome with escalation to riot potential? - A.
                             Yes, sir.

                          Q. I think it was Mr. Marshall who talked about climbing
             D               up the pylons.         Again, without going through every
                             d e t a i l , this is another example where the chap who
                             climbs the pylon is a hazard because he m ay well do so
                             to get himself into a position where he can make
                             offensive gestures and you have got a flash point? - A.
                             There is a dual reason for that.        One is a safety reason.
                             If people go to the top of the pylon there is a very
                             real danger of electrocution.         There is also the possibility
                             that they will generate disorder from the positions that
                             they occupy.

                          Q. Because one of the prime motivators of disorder, unfortunately,
                             is the propensity of spectators to abuse v er bally or by
                             gestures either the players, the referee or the other side
                             and you get a response from the opposition? - A. That is
                             true, sir.

                          Q. You were taken to the Ground Regulations at page 189.

                                    MR. BENTLEY;      I think it is page 198 in your
                               Lordship's bundle.

                          Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:      These are the old Ground Regulations?
                               - A. Yes", they are.

                          Q. They are not the ones  that were changed in 1983, they
                             precede the ones for 1983? - A. Yes.

                          Q. The last one had in it a provision which allowed the police
                             to remove people from the ground but did not allow them to
                             deny access? - A. That is correct.
               H
 MARPHAM, LTD.
t Shorthand Writers
                                                            -   44 -
rFFIELO S I 2DX


                      !
The purpose of the amendment which m y Lord saw in the
letter which m y learned friend referred to at page 77
in m y bundle 3, was to allow the ground rules to deny
entry as well as to merit expulsion? - A. Yes.

That was because so far as your law and order policing
was concerned it was desirable to be able to prevent
trouble makers coming in either because they were known
trouble makers or, alternatively, because the circumstances
- banners, drink or whatever - identified them as trouble
makers? - A. Yes.

You, when you wrot e to the club saying "Would you please
alter your Ground Regulations" viewed that regulation as
an aid to the Police in its law enforcement job? - A.
And is ensuring the safety of other spectators.

Because if a riot takes place the spectators are liable
to be injured? - A. Yes, you would not need to get to the
extent of a riot.

If people are t hr owing b o t t l e s ,swinging poles or whatever,
it is the innocent who usually suffer? - A.Yes, indeed.

So your mo ti vat ion in requesting that condition was a
law and order motivation and the safety of others which you
had in mind, which you explained, was if a bad egg were to
abuse the public whilst in there, either by throwing or
fermenting trouble... - A. Or mis-use of whatever they
were carrying.

.. .there would be the possibility of injury to innocent
people just as there is in any potential riot situation?
- A. Y e s , i n d e e d .

Would it not be correct that so far as you are concerned,
Regulation 6, for instance:

    "Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter
     upon the field of play."

You vie w that, as you have said a m o me nt or two ago, as
a law enforcement matter to prevent an escalation from the
spark? - A. Yes, and also prevent the game being stopped.
If one gets people on the field the referee will stop the
game, which a gai n is a flash point.

One of the worst things is when everyone is kept waiting?
- A. Yes.

And idle hands look for evil things to do in that situation?
- A. Yes.

Again, number 9, n ois e from radio sets or behaviour likely
to cause confusion of any kind is not permitted in any part


                              -   45 -
of. the ground.  Again, from your point of view, that
is the same principle? - A. I t is the safety,, the
comfort and the welfare of the spectators we are
concerned about.   The mere fact that s o m e b o d y is
playing a radio,is cot by itself likely to cause a
public order situation - obviously it can develop
into that - but in these circumstances we would
enforce it strictly because it is a Ground Regulation,
unless there are attendant circumstances.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:    You mean you will stop them
having their radios blaring in m y ears even if I am
unlikely, to punch them on the nose? - A. In a football
ground?

Yes.   - A. Yes, by virtue of. the Ground Regulations.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:    One of the reasons for that is
that not every bod y is as self-controlled as m y Lord.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     It is not self-control.
I am much older.'

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   But again, noise, confusion,
matters of that sort, there is that flash point? - A.
Yes, indeed.

For instance, you want to avoid on the radio the result
from the other Sheffield side, again because of flash
point?

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     I think he is just saying
he wants to stop the noise:

Is that right? - A. Yes.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:    But the underlying m o t i v e is
flash point? - A. Yes.    Because it says "You will not
play radios" we stop them playing radios.

But the reason is flash point? - A. Yes, a reason is
flash point.

That is the primary reason as far as you are concerned?
- A. If someone was playing a radio in a stand and there
were no complaints from people sitting nearby, we would
sti^ll tell the m to stop playing the radio.

     MR * JUSTICE BOREHAM:  Even if surrounded by agreeable
lonely, mature ladies who would not dream of objecting to
anything at all? - A. We would not wait for a complaint.
If we heard a radio we would tell them to stop playing
the r a d i o .

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Forgive me for pr essing you.   The
reason for that being that it is very difficult to size
up the demeanour and nature of the people su rrounding and
therefore you prevent that sort of thing, in case?
     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Mr. Griffiths,       you have got
better points, I think, than this one.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   A g a i n , look at number ,1T , for
instance, which I think is the only one we have not
dealt with:

    "Offensive weapons, glasses, flags, banners and
     other similar articles are not permitted."

Again, obvious flash points? - A. Yes, indeed, sir.

     MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:     Would that be a convenient
moment?

     MR.   GRIFFITHS:    If your Lordship pleases.

     MR.   JUSTICE BOREHAM:     Very well.
r         -

         •\



                               IN THE HIC-H C O U R T OF JUSTICE
                    A
                               QUEEN'S B E N C H DIVISION


                                                                                           The Court House,
                                                                                           C a st le Street,
                                                                                           Sheffield. .

                                                                                          4 t h February,   1 5 S6



                                                                    Before

                                              T H E H ONO URABLE MR. J U S T IC E B O R E H A M
                     C


                                                         JOHN CHARLES HARRIS
                                    (On B e h a l f of the South Y o r ksh ir e Police Authority)
                                                                  (Plaintiff!
                     D
                                                                        -V-



                                           S K E F F I E L D U NI TE D F OO T B A L L CLUB L I M I T E D
                     E                                             (D e f e n d a n t )




                      F                                        APPEARANCES:

                                   For the Plaintiff:                               MR. D. B ENTLEY Q.C. ana
                                                                                    MR. W. B. PHILLIPS
                                                                                    (Instructed b y J.C.
                                                                                     Karris, Solicitors,
                                                                                     Barnsley)
                      G            For t h e Defendant:                               MR. J. G RIFFITHS Q.C.
                                                                                      and MR. M. CHAPPLE
                                                                                      (Instructed b y Clegg
                                                                                       Son, Solicitors,
                                                                                       Sheffield)


                      H
 HARPMAM, LTD.                              F r o m the Notes of J.L. H a r p h a m Ltd.,
i S h o r t h a n d W riter*                         Official Court Reporters,
LFFIELD S1 2DX
                                              55, Que en Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                 INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                              Page


ROBERT JAMES GOSLIN (Cont)

      Cross- Ex am in ed by M R 0 GRIFFITHS     1.
      R e -Examined by MR. BENTLEY             23.


CHo INSPo G 0E. P A Y N E Sworn

      Examin ed by MR„ PHILLIPS                30.
      Cross-Examined by M R 0 GRIFFITHS        36.


DR. W I L F R E D EASTWOOD Sworn

      Ex amined By MR. GRIFFITHS               40.
      Cross- Ex am in ed by M R 0 BENTLEY      48.


_________________________ Sworn

      Examined by MR„ GRIFFITHS                51.
                                           4th February, 1986




Mr. G-oslin, I was reminded overnight, there are four incidents
that I n e gl ec te d to put to you yesterday, but which y o u m a y k n o w
of, and I must just quickly do that.       I will do it as shortly as
can.  In September, 1981, and I am g> ing to take one club, Leeds
United, wh ic h is a neighbouring club here, though not policed by
your Authority, and tell you of four incidents for yo u r comments.
In September, 1981, in a game against Coventry City, at Coventry,
quotes:

     "The Leeds fans were angry at seeing their team be aten
     four-nil.  They ripped up seats and used the woo d an.d
     metal as missiles.    One Policeman received 15 stitches
     in the face af te r being hit by a flying seat, while two
     other Officers were also injured.         The Police spokesman
     said, *This shows that, policing or not, there mus t be
     a strong Police control at m a t c h e s * ".

and then it describes 59 arrests, most of them in the .town centre
Did y o u have knowledge of that incident? - A. Only fr o m r eading
in the papers - no personal knowledge.

Would you agree w it h the statement by the Police spokesman, that
it is that kind of incident which is the high water mark, which
you are there as Police to prevent? - A. Certainly to prevent,
and to deal with, should we fail in our prevention.

And that is -the principal reason, is it not, for the ne ce s s i t y to
have Police at football grounds? - A. Yes.-— x - w G I t f m a k e the
point we are   there as servants of the club, for those Officers
who are paid   for b y the club, and we therefore have a dual role -
we would do tasks on behalf of the club that we wo ul d n ot do on
behalf of law and order.

But the principal reason you are there ... - A. Is to m a i n t a i n
law and order and ensure the safety of the spectators watching
the football.      — ----          ‘                        “

Right, and again, going to the next year, May,         1982, Leeds agains
West Bromwich Albion:

     "The game was marred by scenes of crowd violence.     At
     the end some of the 4,000 Leeds spectators packed in ...
     attempted to stop the game.   100 Policemen made a ba to n
     charge up the terrace - an unprecedented event on an
     English  football ground.   It was only the latest ou tbreak
     of violence b y the notorious Leeds fans".
A. I am aware of that, yes.

Then January,   1983, Derby County against Leeds, not far from
home:

      "Leeds United supporters caused an estimated £ 20 , 000 -
      worth  of damage.   Police made 47 arrests, 29 Leeds fans,
      before and after the three-three draw.   Ten Police Officers
      were injured and eight spectators taken to hospital.        The
      worst of the damage was caused by Leeds fans, r i p p i n g up
      seats behind one .of the goals and hurling them dow n on
                                the Derby supporters".
                           A. Again, I am aware of that

             A          Q. An d then bringing it almost up to date, March, 1985, Shef fi el d
                           United against Leeds United - and I am sure y o u will have this
                           one in mind:

                    i             "At half-time we witnessed the peak of the Leeds
                                 barbarism.      Seats were ripped up and thrown at the
                    j            Police, followed by bottles, iron bars, snooker balls
                                 and anything else th e y could find.    Police made 50
             B|                  arrests ...."
                    t      A. Could you r em in d    me of the date?
                    i

                        Q. 23rd March,   1935. -   A. Yes,    sir.   I was not in this Co unty    at
                           that stage.

                        Q. Did it come to y o u r k n o w l ed ge ? - A. I am aware of it, yes.

                        Q. Against that background, m a y we look at the Standing I n s t r u c t ­
                           ions? In para. 1.1, y o u set out the core of the objective:

                                "Additionally, by standardising our procedures w h i c h
                                have be e n evolved through experience we should be more
                                able to ensure the safety of spectators; l ook to the
                                protection of residents and business concerns likely
                                to be affected b y the influx of football supporters into
             D                  their area; provide good value for money to the clubs
                                who pay for the hire of our services; and display a
                    I           high standard of smartness and professionalism before
                                large gatherings of the public".
                           A. Yes.                                                   -

                        Q. And the next page sets out the "Command Struc tu re ” , 2.2 - it
                           sets out the duties of the Officer outside the ground:
             E
                                 "The duties of the officer outside the ground w i l l
                                 encompass the prevention of public disorder, the
                                 supervision of car and coach parks, an ti -v andalism
                                 patrols, the supervision of licensed premises in the
                                 vicinity of the ground, and the escorting of groups
                                 of supporters to and fr o m the ground."
             F
                           - all those l a w and order matters. Then next page, para.
                           5.1 you set out some six matters to take into account w h e n
                           estimating manpower, and those are really all directed, are
                           they not, to the likelihood or otherwise of trouble - l a w
                           and order trouble? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. Then 5.3, yo u set out the importance of not u n d e r - es ti ma ti ng
             G             the Police commitment, and again make specific reference to th;
                           reputation of the home and visiting supporters, and set out
                           various things, such as the Police control room, p ri s o n e r
                           reception and so on that have to be looked to? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. Then on the n ex t page, para. 6.4, where you are d ealing w i t h
                           plain clothes personnel:

             H                   "The m ain function of detective and plain clothes
                                 officers at football matches is the prevention a n d
harpha m . l td .
Shorthand Writer*                detection of crime outside the ground ...."
FFIEUD S I 20X
                                                        -    2 -
                          A. Yes, sir.

                       Q. Then in 6.5, they are also to be u sed to gather intelligence
             A            for use inside the ground? - A. Yes, sir,

                       Q. A n d that is intelligence for l aw and order? - A. Yes,    indeed.

                       Q. Then we come to transport, and that includes provision for the
                          carriage of prisoners; overleaf on page 11, police horses -
                          again, the use of horses is in a l aw and order context, is it
                          not ? - A. Yes, sir.

                   i   Q. They are to be us e d for segregating the opposing fans, and
                   i
                   i      for escorting t hem from the railway station to the ground, and
                          bac k again, for the reason you mentioned yesterday, namely to
                          prevent mayhem, if I can put it like that? - A. That is right.

                       Q. Police dogs, the same goes, they also are p u rel y a l a w and
                          order ro le ? - A. Yes, sir.
              C
                       Q. A n d indeed y ou say that although they are not to be us e d on
                          a crowd, the last sentence of 7.8:

                               ’’This advice does not preclude the officer in charge
                               from allowing them to be paraded around the perimeter
                               track before the kick-off and during half-time so as to
                               interest the spectators in their p r e s e n c e . ”
              D
                          It is not a Crufts Show - it is to let them kn o w there is a
                          means of keeping l a w and order, i s n ’t it? - A. Yes, sir.

                       Q. Then specialist equipment, if we go to the paragraph on p . 12,
                          what that is refe rr in g to is spotters w i t h binoculars u p in
                          the tops of the stand, in radio contact w it h the police control
                          room, and the object of that is to be able to spot crime or
              E           potential crime and trouble, and send in Officers to arrest,
                          directed b y the spotters who have a clear v i e w ? - A. They are
                          there in an endeavour to anticipate trouble and if trouble
                          does start, to highlight the ringleaders so we can remove
                          them.

                       Q. Once offenders have bee n located b y the spotters, other Officers
                          can be guided into the crowd and directed by radio to the
              F           persons to be a rrested? - A. That is right.

                       Q, Purely la w and order? - A. Yes,     sir.

                       Q. I don*t think we n eed detain y o u on Special Constables or
                          the media, or refreshments.    The movement of spectators, para.
                          8.1, y o u set out the basic strategy, whi ch is the entire
               G          segregation of the opposing factions.     That is to be done in
                          three stages, before during and after the match, setting out
                          that this is all one Police operation, from arrival at the
                          railway station to dispatch back home again three or four
                          hours later? - A. Yes, sir.

                       Q. A n d the thrust of that is l a w and order? - A. Yes,   it is.

               H
                                                     -   3 -
 HARPHAM, LTD.
I Shorthand Writer*
TFIELD S I SOX
                               Q. Then on the nex t page, 13, you set out the Operations Room
                                  and that is r e a l l y liaison, isn*t it, "between the m a t c h and
                                  Police Headquarters, in case there is desperate trouble wh er e
                                  y o u nee d reinforcements or something of that sort? - A. That
                                  is correct.

                               Q. Page 14, y ou talk about processing prisoners and then crime
                                  prevention.    Y o u say you h ad a survey completed b y the crime
                                  prevention officer, and in item (i) it is really, so far as
                                  l a w and order is concerned, to prevent the theft of cash
                                  from gates receipts, liquor ...? - A. Prom the sale of liquor
                     B            inside the grounds, yes, sir.

                               Q. And you look .at the conveying of money and so on.       At 12.6
                                  y o u mention:

                                         "If the v i s it ng supporters have a reputation for
                                         violence, endeavours will be made to br in g forward
                                         the k ic k-off time ..."

                                    - again thrusting at l a w and order - that is the purpose of
                                    that, isn*t it? - A. Yes, sir.

                               Q. Inspections of football stadiums - you describe the working
                                  party, of which the Police are one element, but the Fire
                                  Service and lots of others are elements? - A. That is right.

                      D        q   . Then at appendix A, page 17, you set out a Proforma Operation
                                    Order? - A. Yes,   sir.

                               Q. Can I get this right, that for each match the Officer in
                                  charge - and that, for the last f ew years, has been Chief
                                  Superintendant Broomheaa, has it not? - A. That is right.

                               Q. Issues an Order based upon this? - A. Indeed, for every
                                  match played at Bramall lane.

                               Q, Ana that deals with where the Police are to go, what they are
                                  to do, what their duties are? - A. Yes, indeed.

                               Q. And there is an oral briefing of all the Officers involved an
                                  hour or two before the game, in the gymnasium at the ground?
                                  = A. That is right.

                               0, In whic h he goes through, telling them what their duties are.
                                  If we can glance at 1.1, that is where y o u put in your
                                  intelligence, and y o u give the example, e.g., previous
                                  sncounters bet we en the two clubs resulting in serious out­
                                  breaks of public disorder, etc., and what you are looking at
                                  is the law and order side - is there a histo ry of bad l aw
                                  and order? - A. Absolutely, sir.

                               Q. And then intention:

                                         "It is the intention of the police to facilitate
                                         the playing of the m a t c h and to ensure public order
                                         and safety both^inside and'outside i;he ground; to
                                         segregate and control opposing fans and prevent
                      H                  u n necessary obstruction of the highway and damage
                                         to property."
.   harpham      .   ltd   .
»t S h o r th a n d W riter*
EFFIELD S I SOX
                                    A. Yes, sir.
                                                              -   4 -
    _______
Q. "Safety" - what y o u have in m i n d there, is it not, is matters
   y o u were refe rr in g to y e s te rd ay wh i c h we heard ea?lier this
   morning, seats b e i n g thrown, b i l l i a r d balls, etc.? - A. Less
   than that - it is to ensure those people who wish to go to
   the ma t c h can do so in comfort and safety, and I would go bac k
   to the objectives at the beginning, and the safety is at a l o w
   k e y as well as a h i g h key.

Q. A n d again, if I m a y take an example wh ich may not be exact,
   but w h e n y o u say to allow people to attend the football match,
   it is really analogous to the problems there were during the
   recent miners* strike, wit h rega rd to the picketing - it is
   to al l o w people who have a lawf ul right to do something to do
   that, and the Police do not take sides but stand between, in
   order to a l l o w people to go about their lawful business? - A.
   Yes, there are certain comparisons, but we are involved,
   certainly at a football game, bot h inside and outside the game,
   in assisting people to clear gangways, which has not got a
   public order connection, it is a safety measure to ensure there
   is no u nn ec es sa ry crushing, so people are not injured, so it
   is, if y o u like, a lead u p to a public order situation, but
   we are ve r y concerned we do n o t have a situation that could
   occur purely a n d simply because of overcrowding, without an y
   public order situations at all.

Q. But that aspect of it, the overcrowding for instance, is dealt
   with b y different people - that is dealt with by the ground
   certificate, not by the Police on the d a y ? - A. No, that is
   laid down in the ground certificate, but the enforcement of
   the regulations ana rules in the ground certificate are
   carried out by the stewards of the club and Police Officers
   employed inside the ground.     _

Q. That is a separate thing and, for instance, in the certificate
   it says yo u m a y have so m a n y people in this stand, so m an y
   people on that terrace, that is a separate thing from your
   duties on a m a t c h day? - A. No, I am talking about the
   distribution of spectators on a m a t c h day.      If one part of
   the ground is allowed to have 10,000 spectators, obviously
   if one gets an uneven      di st ribution y o u will have pressure,
   and therefore it is our responsibility, together with the
   stewards, to ensure the di st ribution of the 10,000 is spread
   evenly in that area, so y o u do not get crushing.

Q. Well, I will come back to that.            You set out the method
   during the match.       Prom kic k - o f f to ten minutes before the end
   of the game is Phase 2, a n d then Phase 3 is after the game,
   and the next page, it says there should be a briefing.            It
   mentions the sort of people involved, deals with the question
   of prisoners, and if we can then go on, at Appendix B, it
   sets out the procedure for briefing, then a description of
   the event about to take place is to be given, along wit h the
   ::vstem of P o l i m g to be adopted, escorting and segregatbn
   of fans etc., the basic reasons for the officers* presence,
   and what is expected of them - that is to facilitate the
   attendance of spectators, exercise crowd control, maintain
   public order, prevent vandalism, give attention to licensed
   premises, bars and other locations where problems of public •
   order m a y be anticipated, and then the dogs, about task
   cards, and about intelligence reports of the general reputation
   of the visit or s? - A. Yes.


                                 -   5 -
Ag ai n directed to l a w and order? - A. Yes.

     "Instruct that no persons will be ejected from the
     ground w i t h o u t first being taken to the Police r o o m
     and their particulars noted".

That is part of the objective of locating troublemakers
isn*t it? - A. No, it is to ensure we have a proper record of
people who have be e n handled by the Police.

So that is a Police law and order r eq ui rement? - A. Indeed,
yes.  We obviou sl y need to have the fact we have -dealt with
someone, that information.

Then A p p e n d i x 6, y ou set out the duties of the various people
involved, the Officers? - A. Yes.

     "Officers on the playing area track pie vent spectators
     sitting on the boundary walls, fencing, or climbing. No-
     one to be allowed to have their legs on the playing area
     side.  Officers will be spaced evenly in close proximity
     to the g a t e .n

- then -

      "No u n a u th or is ed person must be permitted to encroach
      u p o n the pi t c h perimeter track before, during or after
      the match.        A n y person doing so will be detained and
      taken to the Police room.          Officers w ill not pursue
      such offenders but wait until they return.           In the
     'event of anyone persisting someone will have to do
      something about it."

That is to p r e ve nt flashpoints? - A. If y ou are looking purely
and simply at no. 3, yes, that is to prevent flashpoints.       If
one takes no. 1, that is purely and simply a safety measure.

And, in fact, I a m right in saying that because this is 1980,
the time we are talking about, that was n ot possible because
y o u ha d got a perimeter fence all round, so they could not do
it except on the main south side, which is all seated? - A. Yes.

So it would be odd if people sat on the wall instead of their
seat? - A. Yes.

So that is h i s t o r y ? - A. But no. 2 would apply, where we are
siting officers close to the gates opening.         They would be
opened in the event of a crushing taking place in that part
of the crowd, to bring them out on to the pitch to alleviate
crushing.

They may be opened for quite a number of reasons.      First, they
were opened, were they not, in a recent game, in order to move
one section of fans away in order to prevent confrontation w it h
opposing fans? - A. That I cannot say, but certainly, yes,
there will be other uses than that for the gate.      They would
also be used f or Policemen to go into the ground to deal w it h
trouble in the ground, and also should a crush develop, as
happened at a m a t c h at Sheffield Wednesday, where we brought
spectators on to the pitch because there was a crushing,
although there was not an excess of spectators.
                                Q. I suppose the other ma jo r possibility for evacuation in these
                                   days, unfortunately, would be an IRA bomb threat, whose
                                   veracity y o u h a d reason to believe in, for instance? - A. Ve r y
                                   much so.

                                0. And that is something always on your mind, isn't it? - A. Yes,
                                   indeed.

                                0. Can we look at the next group of Officers - turnstile duties,
                                   i.e., ma intain orderly queues, watch for offensive weapons,
                                   s a f e t y of the m o n e y - all l a w and order? - A. Yes, sir.
                    B
                                Q.   And     then not to      take bottles,     toilet rolls     or missiles in,
                                     the same point? - A.    Yes.

                                Q.   And     then no. 7,      I am sure y ou    would wish me to refer to:


                                           ’’Officers engaged on duties in the stands will take
                                           up positions at the rear.         Passageways will be ke p t
                                           clear and the ne c e s s a r y advice and support given to
                                           stewards".

                                     That goes back to what y ou were saying earlier does it,
                                     i.e., that y o u say it is a support the stewards role? - A.
                                     Yes, sir, and also these people will be in a position to see
                                     any breaches of the ground regulations because of the position
                     D               they have placed themselves in.

                                Q. No. 8:

                                           "The Officer in command will ensure there is at all
                                           times someone b y the D i r e c t o r ’s Box, to prevent entry
                                           to the B o x b y irate or celebrating supporters, and
                                           also at p l a y e r s ’ dressing rooms".

                                     Again, l a w and order? - A. Yes.

                                q,   Public Order Duties - again I need not go through those - they
                                     are all l a w and order, aren't they? - A. Yes, sir.

                                0,   Appendix F, Control of Spectators - a crucial period for
                                     disorder is in the half h o u r preceding the game - "Try and
                                     use en te rt ai nm en t’’.- then - "Segregation is essential. You
                                     should persuade the club to have barriers because they are
                                     better than hu m a n barriers". - A. Yes, sir.

                                Q. I-hen two paragraphs on:

                                           "The most common way to attempt to capture the
                                           opposing su p p o r t e r s ’ end is by home supporters trying..."

                                           MR. JUSTICE 30REHAM:       Where are you reading from?

                                           MR. GRIFFITHS:      The third paragraph, m y Lord, page 29:

                                Q.         "The Police should be in a position early to prevent
                                           this, but sometimes the supporters take care to be
                       H                   unidentifiable until in sufficient numbers to cause
 K ARPH»H.           ltd   .
                                           t r ou b l e . "
1 S h o r th a n d W r l tv n

'FF1ELD S I 2DX
                                                                   - 7 -
                                 la w and Order? - A. Yes.

                              Q. Then two paragraphs on:

                                         "Officers should never go into the crowd alone
                                         to deal w i t h trouble."

                                 What y o u fear is they will be overwhelmed? - A. Yes.

                              Q. Then,    continuing:
                   B                     "Where serious disorder occurs in a section of the
                                         crowd, it is not good strategy to attempt to clear
                                         the whole terrace, whether onto the pit ch or o the r­
                                         wise.  It is better to drive a double line of police
                                         officers, preferably f ro m the rear or side of the
                                         terrace, towards the centre of the trouble."

                                 It is m u c h more difficult to do that,   of course, if the
                                 gangways are obstructed? - A. Yes.

                              Q. And that is a reason why y o u do not want the gangways
                                 obstructed? - A. One reason why, yes.

                                 Next paragraph,     second sentence:

                    D            "In the event of a surge onto the playing area to
                                 avoid violent scenes on the terraces, clearly police
                                 attention must be directed to stabilising that position and
                                 spectators can then be returned.  In an event of an
                                 invasion designed to disrupt play, all uncommitted officers,
                                 and as a last resort police dogs on short leads, should
                                 go onto the playing area and clear it under the direction
                                 of the officer in command .... if nece ss ar y by a ’sweep*
                                 of the pla yi ng area."

                                 - A. Yes,    sir.

                              Q. l a w and order?.- Yes,   sir.

                              Q. Then post match, second paragraph, yo u re fer to the matter
                                 we discussed yesterday,on holding b a c k visiting supporters
                                 until y o u have discharged the home supporters.   Again, a
                                 law and order matter? - A. Yes, sir.

                                      MR. GRIFFITHS:      M y lord, I do not propose to go through
                                 the rest of it, because your lordship has seen the Proforma,
                                 but I would draw attention to pp. 31-55, which is an actual
                                 game played, against luton, where what yo u r lordship ha s seen
                                 as the Pr of or ma takes place, and m y learned friend h elpfully
                                 reminds"me that there is a different one in use in 1982-83,
                                 in his bundle, which he referred to yesterday, your lordship
                                 will recollect:

                              Q. But b o t h of them based on what we have just been looking a t? -
                                 A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. Would y o u look at p. 56? That r ea ll y is a briefing directed
                                 to l a w and order, almost in its entirety, is it not?    Would
 M A R PH A M , LTD .
[ S h o r th a n d W riter*

F F I E L O S I 2DX                                           - 8 -
                                 yo u read through it? Were you present? - A. Not at the
                                 briefing, sir, no.     Not purely l a w and order, sir.  If I
                                 could ref er y o u to the ninth paragraph, on gates and fences:
                                 "All gates in the fence will be manned th ro ug ho ut ” - I think
                                 we have discussed that, where there is a large element of
                                 safety involved in that aspect of the briefing.

                              Q. M a y I take issue:

                                      "All gates in the fence will be m an ne d throughout and
                                      only Police Officers, officials or prisoners should be
                   B                  allowed through them.  They will n ot be used to allow
                                      spectators from one part of the ground to go to
                                      another."

                                 - A. It does n o t exclude the possibility of them being moved
                                 to avoid a crushing, from one part of the ground to the other.

                              Q. Would y o u accept, Officer, ha ving been through that document,
                                 that so far as the briefing given to Po lice Officers is con­
                                 cerned, on site, it is 99 per cent re st ricted to enforcing
                                 l a w and order? - A. I think it is difficult to put a percentage
                                 on it.    There is a very h i g h level of l a w and order involved
                                 with Police at football grounds.       There are ground regulations
                                 which involve the Officers on duty inside the ground, and the
                                 pre-game p ol icing and the post-game policing, which is purely
                                 law and order in its entirety.       It is inside the ground, where
                    D            it is the safety element of the spectators which has not got a
                                 l a w ana order connection, which comes into being.       We have
                                 that responsibility by becoming, for that time, engaged inside
                                 the ground.

                              Q. Taking those three elements y ou have referred to, would you
                                 agree that unless you were to train a quasi police force, the
                                 only proper w ay and satisfactory way of ensuring law and order
                                 is through the Police inside the ground? - A. Yes, I would,,
                                 sir.

                              Q. Would y o u agree that so far as the ground regulations are
                                 concerned, some of those, as we saw yesterday, are aimed at
                                 the l a w and order situation? - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. Some, -indeed, were at the instigation of the Police,     to assist
                                 them w i t h l a w and order? - A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. And would y o u accept this, that things such as cameras are
                                 matters w hi ch the club could, if they wished, enforce them­
                                 selves?   That is not beyond the stewards? - A. No.   The
                                 difficulty of enforcing any sort of rule and regulation inside
                                 a football ground is the reaction one wi l l get from the person
                                 whom one is dealing with, and therefore, as you have seen, we
                                 locate Police Officers where we can, close to stewards, to give
                                 them that degree of authority when they are endeavouring to
                                 enforce those rules and regulations.

                              Q. That m a y be v e r y sensible once the Police are there, b ut do you
                                 not accept the enforcing of that sort of regulation is of ve r y
                                 small importance indeed? - A. Yes, it is, but I am not satis­
                     H           fied it could'be done solely by stewards without unfortunate
                                 repercussions.
 HARPHAM .         LTD.
I S h o r th a n d W riters

IF T IE L D S I SOX                                         -   9 -
Let us take an analogous situation:     no smoking areas in either
public transport, shops, places like that, those have to be
enforced and re in forced customarily b y the shopkeeper, and'
the bus or train authority, without Police assistance? - A.
Yes, th e y are sir, but they are not dealing wit h a volatile
football crowd.

Officer,I mus t just suggest to you the enforcing of that w o u l d
be p e r fe ct ly competently done by stewards. For instance,
people br in gi ng cameras in are likely to be fairly respectable,
sensible people, are they n o t ? - A. They could well be, sir,
yes.

Then dealing w i t h crushing, is that the question m entioned by,
I think, fir. Shillitoe, yesterday, when he talked about the
danger of crowds surging forwards onto crash barriers, and
people be i n g h u r t ? - A. Yes, the m a i n aspect of it.

"What tr aining have y o u given your Police Officers to prevent
that? - A. The training given to them is to divide the crowd,
to therefore relieve the pressure.          We have seen in here where
we use double lines of Police Officers w h e n the situation gets
to critical stages, w h e r eb y we can funnel more reinforcements
in, not m e r e l y to deal w i t h trouble but to deal with crushing.

Would y o u agree that once a surge of the type y ou m ention
starts, it is impossible f o r anyone to do anything s b out it?
- A. To do anything about that immediate surge, yes, I would.

And secondl j t would y o u agree with the expert I am going to
call, that the design of the Sheffield ground was so arranged
after Ibrox, means that that type of surging is not going-to
happen? Were y o u here then? - A. Here in Sheffield, yes I
was, and m y response would be yes, I wou ld say the chances of
that sort of surging has bee n almost eradicated.

Ma y I nex t ask y o u to look, because it comes up in the
correspondence, at page 107, and it is the Minutes of the
Mee ti ng of the Football League Secretaries, and so on, w it h
you, on the 9th August, 1983, and if we turn to page 108, we
see y o u were di sc ussing an item on hooliganism, a letter sent
from the Football League to the Clubs, and y o u discussed one
aspect of that, and on page 109, third paragraph, you, as
Chairman, m o v e d on   to the second part of the letter, wh ic h deal
wit h the increased     use of stewards:

     u The Chairman called f o r the views of the meeting and
     a lengthy discussion ensued,     fir Chester ...”

That was the then Secretary of Sheffield United? - A. Yes.

He parte d with the Club, did he? Not on, I d o n ’t say terms
of animosity, but not on v e r y good terms, and went to Sheffield
Wednesday in the identical job? - A. I have no knowledge of the
reasons for the move at all.

At any rate, he pointed out the Police were in attendance at
grounds to administer law and order, whereas stewards were
there purely in an administrative role.  There was then a
discussion ....
        MR. J U S TI CE 30REKAM: What does the expression,
   "administrative role" mean?

        MR. GRIFFITHS:     M y lord, in the role of supervising,
   where people go, showing them to their seats and things like
   that; opening a n d shutting gates at entry and so on:

Q. Then Mr. V a u g h a n points out various things, as does
   Superintendant Mole and Chief Superintendant Watson.                 The next
   paragraph:

        "The consensus of opinion was that stewards' were
        used m a i n l y in the seating areas of grounds and to
        use th e m on the terraces and in an increased^ c r o w d
        control capacity would expose them to an unacceptable
        aegree of danger with few beneficial all-round results."

   And the danger we are talking about is be i n g beate n u p
   physically? - A. Yes, very mu c h so.

Q. The Chairman,      that is yourself,        summarised b y saying:

        "...it w a s the feeling of the m e e ti ng that an
        increase in the role of stewards at football
        grounds w as undesirable and that the status quo
        should be maintained."

   - A. Yes,   sir.

Q.|And the status quo was the Police looking after l aw and order
  land the stewards looking aft       administrative functions?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. M a y we next l oo k quickly at p. 72? That is the sort of f or m
   that is here as a specimen, which the Police produced w h e n they
   wanted people to ask-for special Police services? - A. That is
   correct.

Q, Am I right in saying not a single one of those was ever filled
   in by Sheffield United? - A. You are correct.

Q. May we go next to p. 103? Before I ask y o u about it, I would
   like to ask y o u a little bit about the interior workings of
   the Police, the Home Office and the M in is t r y of Sport.    We have
   seen at an e arlier stage that                  had written to the
   Home Secretary, and after this date to the next Home Secretary,
   then Mr. leon Brittain, and those replies in due course, but
   in ths interval the Home Office has wri tt en to your Chief
   Constable, r ece iv ed a reply from him, and incorporated such
   as they think right in their reply to                  |?. - A. Yes,
   that is “-correct.

Q. That is the u su al thing,    is it not? - A. Yes,         it is.

Q. And I assume that as an A ssistant Chief Constable, Operations,
   when such a thing comes in from the Home Office, the Chief
   Constable will depute you to l ook into it and y ou will feed up
   the information to him, upon which he wil l base his reply? - A,
   That is correct, if it is in my area of responsibility.


                                 -   1 1   -
                                  Q. And. this would b e? - A. This would be.

                                  Q. A nd y o u would p rob ab ly put before h i m a draft which he might,
                     A
                                     or not, correct? - A. It might be that w a y or by discussion.

                                  Q. When I say a draft, one use d to receive the suggested draft
                                     letter which y o u could use if you wanted, or amend as you
                                     wished? - A. Yes, or by discussions.

                              I   Q. The l etter to Mr. Macfarlane, the M in ister of Sport, that
                     B!              pr es umably wo uld have been drawn to the Police by then - can
                                     you h e l p us? - A. This one I have no knowledge of, sir, that
                                     I can recollect.

                                  Q. In that l e t t er,, the last paragraph on that page, we see
                                                     saying:

                                                   "I have b ee n particularly careful since the date
                     c                             of that letter ...."

                                               MR. BENTLEY:    M y Lord, with respect, this cannot be
                                          admissible.  It is p u re ly self-serving, and this Officer has
                                          no knowledge of it.

                                               MR. J USTICE BOREHAM:           There is no point in putting it
                                          to him.
                     D                             MR. GRIFFITHS:   My Lord, it seems a short w a y ....

                                                   MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:        We have not got a Jury, y o u know.
                              I
                              i
                                               MR. GRIFFITHS:       I appreciate that.            M a y I formulate the
                                          question then?

                     E                         MR. J USTICE BOREHAM:        Y ou are entitled to.  There is no
                                          point in put ti ng this letter to this Officer.       If y o u have got
                                          a question to p ut to him, put it, but n ot this letter.         He
                                          says, "I d o n ft k n o w anything about it".

                                                   MR. GRIFFITHS:   I quite appreciate that, my Lord.

                                                   MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:        If you want to formulate a question
                     F                    1'Y all means.

                                                   MR. GRIFFITHS:   M y Lord,           the question I want to put is
                                          !*iis:

                                  •ry ■     u. will see in that last paragraph,                           makes mention
                                              the fact, according to him:

                      G                            "We have made requests by letter for specific games,
                                                   and are prepared to pay for these games only".

                                          Later on, in October, in the correspondence with
                                          exactly the same point was made? - A. Yes, it was.

                                  Q. Have you yourself any knowledge of any specific requests ever
                                     made b    y    L     or the responsible officers of Sheffield
                      H              United, for Police to come to the ground, since the date of
  HARPHAM , LTD.                     that letter? - A. The only one I can recall is the match,
! S h o r th a n d W riter*

• F F t E L D 5 1 2DX
                                                                          -   1 2   -
     Lincoln City versus Sheffield United.   The date I cannot
     r e member - towards the end of 1983. Cert ai nl y in previous
     letters I have no recollection of requests, no r have I been
     able to fi n d a n y in our files.

          MR. BENTLEY:   M y Lord, wi t h respect, if m y learned friend
     wishes to pursue this line of enquiry, the fair course is to
     put to this Officer, the letter said to have been written.

          MR. J U S TI CE BOREHAM:  Yes.  I repeat, I am not a Jury.
     I think I k n o w what to sift from questions and answers.

Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:    Apart from Lincoln City, you have no
     knowledge of an y specific requests?

           MR. JUS TI CE BOREHAM:         Are y ou suggesting there were
     re auests?

             MR. GRIFFITHS:      M y Lord will h e a r                's evidence.

          MR. J U S T IC E BOREHAM: We are entitled to k n o w where we
     are going.    A re you saying there were requests?

             MR. GRIFFITHS:      Yes, m y Lord.

             MR. J U S TI CE BOREHAM:     Have yo u got the letters?

             MR. GRIFFITHS:      No, m y Lord.

             MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:         They were w r i tt en reauests, were
     they?

             MR. GRIFFITHS:      Yes,    they were:

Q. You have no knowledge of written requests then? - A. No, m y
   Lord.

          MR. J U S TI CE BOREHAM:        Are y o u suggesting there were
     real requests?

             MR. GRIFFITHS:      No, m y Lord.

          MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:            I a m r at he r baffled by all this,
     but never mind.

             MR. GRIFFITHS:      May      I ....

          MR. JUST IC E BOREHAM:      I tell y ou what is in   m y mind. I
     see no point in asking an Officerwho has said nothing about
     it, "Have y ou a n y knowledge of requests", and there never were
     any requests.    It seems a waste of time.

          MR. GRIFFITHS:   M y Lord, save that one of the issues in
     this case is whether or not   Sheffield United have     requested ..

           MR. J U S TI CE BOREHAM:        Well,   I have told y ou      what is in
     m y mind.

             MR. GRIFFITHS:       I am obliged, m y Lord:


                                        - 13 -
                                 Q 0 Can we turn to 111 please.  That is             s letter of
                                     14th October, to the Chief Constable, presumably drawn to y o u r
                                     attention? - A. Yes, I have seen this.
                   A
                                 Q.   And drawn to y o u r attention at the time? - A.     Yes,   sir.

                                 Q.    And m y lord has read the first paragraph previously,       then   the
                                      third paragraph:

                                           "During the 1982/83 Season, which is the one in
                   B                       question, I took particular care to write to yo u r
                                           Office and request Police Services on the occasions
                                           w h e n the Club considered we might have difficulties
                                           ...     We never, n o r would we ever, deny access ...."

                                      and so on.  In the next paragraph he mentions  he had be e n a
                                      member of the Police Committee in a different part of the
                                      country, and is sympathetic towards Police problems, and then
                   C                  overleaf, a complaint about the level of charges, saying:

         I                                 "The charges made b y South Yorkshire Police constitute
                                           bet we en 13 and 16 per cent of our total gate receipts,
                                           as against neig hb our in g counties, whose charges, 021 a
                                           recent survey, show as low as 1 and 2 per cent".

                                      - A. Yes,   sir.
                    D            Q. Now, that was replied to by the Chief Constable, or was it by
                             i
                                    you?  I notice it says "ACC (OPS)". - A. This would be one of
                             I      the drafts I p re pared for the Chief Constable. He w o u l d h ave
                                    signed it.

                                 Q. You refer first to the mee ti ng which you told us of, on the
                                    26th was it? - A. I cannot recall the date.
                    E            Q. He says he is going to send on the invoices to the legal
                                    Services of the South Yorkshire County Council, and i n the
                                    next paragraph, the last two sentences:

                                           "Should the situation arise where police officers
                                           were no t to attend a football match, then obviously
                                           the risk of disorder would be greatly enhanced".
                    F
                                  Y.h":.aat was your phrase,   I suppose? - A. Yes,     sir.

                                 Q . j r ... .that I would be right in saying that it was your v i e w that
                                               the Police not at a match, leave aside anything else for
                                        ' .noment, there would be an unacceptable risk of the l a w and
                                                 situation getting out of hand? - A c Yes, indeed, sir.

                    G            Q.jAiiii has t ha t been the position throughout the period we have
                                    I been considering, i.e., 1982 onwards? - A. Yes, sir.    I hold
                                   ( that belief, sir.

                                 Q. Then in the n e x t p aragraph the Chief Constable sets out his
                                    problems, that on the one side he has to provide efficient
                                    policing, and see that la w and order is maintained? - A. Yes,
                                    sir.
                    H
 KARPHAM. LTD.
I S h o rth a n d W riter*
EFF1ELD S I 2DX
                                  1
                                 Q j On the other h a n d he has to satisfy the Police A u t h o r i t y as
                                     to costs? - A, Yes, sir.

                                                                  -   14 -
Q. A nd this was w r i t t e n at a time, was it not, wh e n there were,
   in fact, some difficulties between your Force and y o u r Police
   Autho ri ty as to the costing of policing the strike? - A. N o t
   in 1983, no.

Q. Not in October,    1983? - A. No, sir.     The dispute started in 198

Q. I am sorry.     Then overleaf,    you refer in y o u r letter to the
   fact:

          "...that y o u made specific requests f o r police officers
          at some de rb y fixtures last season, but that no requests
          h a d b e e n made b y y ou rself for police attendance at an y
          other fixtures.        However, I would point out ..."

     - and he deals wi t h the meetings which y o u gave evidence about
     yesterday, at wh ic h the Secretaries were present, and tie
     question of charging was discussed? - A. That is right.

Q. There is no  suggestion, is there, in that letter, that h i s
   letters were n e v e r r ec e i v e d or anything of that sort? - A. No,
   other than that we could n o t find any copies of letters, n o r
   had I seen them, n o r anyone else working for me.          We did n o t
   say that in the letter, no.

Q. So far as the meetings of the South Yorkshire Football Clubs
   that we have seen were concerned, w a s n ’t the situation this,
   Mr. Goslin, that essentially they were there to discuss two
   things:     on the one side, hooliganism and h o w to assist in
   the community by the use of the grounds and things like that;
   on the other side, meetings took place between the r e p r e s e n t a ­
   tives of the Clubs and the Police on the basis of which charges
   should be m a d e ? - A. Yes, sir.      There was an element of
   community involvement discussed at the meetings with the Police
   Auth or it y and w i t h the County Councillors, as well as the
   charging for P o l i c e m e n at football matches.

Q. But what was b e i n g discussed at those meetings were the
   complaints that the clubs thought the charges were di s­
   proportionate in their vi e w ? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And that there should be a different method of charging? - A.
   That is right.

Q. Which woul d be easier on their pockets? - A. Yes,        sir.

Q.   The meetings n e v e r act-ually discussed, did they, whether or not
 ,   the Police should come at all - that was not on the agenda?
 I   The agenda was, if they come, h o w much? - A. Yes, th at was, n o t
 I   discussed.           — —                 ;-           —

Q. And was the r eason the obvious one I have just put to you, that
   it was no t on the agenda, it was a matter of h o w much, n o t of
   other matter s? - A. It just did not ;get raised at all.

Q. Then y ou referred to the passage from Mr. Chester, w hi ch we
   looked at a m o me nt ago, and the second sentence reads:

          ’’All the Secretaries present stated quite categorically


                                 -   15 -
                                    that this suggestion which had b ee n put forward by
                                    the F o o t b a l l League was without merit and Mr. Chester
                                    in fact p o i nt ed out that the police were in attendance
                     A              at g r o un ds to maintain law and order, the stewards
                                    b e i n g there m ere ly in an administrative role."

                               These comments, I would suggest, are confirmation of the need
                               for Police O fficers at football grounds? - A. Yes, sir.

                          Q. And what goes u n s a i d there, but was in you r mind, was it not,
                             was that y o u w er e adopting Mr. Chester's categorisation of
                     B       Police for l a w and order, stewards for administration? - A.
                             Well, it was n o t adot>ting - it w a s a belief we always held.

                          Q. Y o u were p u t t i n g it forward to say,   "Well, y o u share our view,
                             that is w h a t it is all about"?

                                    MR. J U S T I C E BOREAHM:     That is what it says.
                      C   Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:         Then p. 117, this was y our Chief
                               Constable w r i t i n g to the Home Office.  I w ill take it quickly,
                               but it is m u c h to the same effect, because                 had
                               written to the Home Secretary and they had writ ten to y ou wit h
                               a copy of his l etter and so on? - A. Yes.

                          Q. The penult ima te paragraph, you say you have no knowledge of th
                             specific re qu e s t s made, and you say that it has evolved over
                      D      the years, and then I need not take y ou through the next page
                             because it is basic all y repetitious? - A. I am sorry, sir?

                          Q. It is b a s i c a l l y repeating the arguments? - A. I have lost the
                             page.                                                _

                          Q. Would y o u go to p. 119, at the top of the page y o u tal k about
                             the su ggestion he had made that perhaps overtime was one of
                      E      the reasons w h y yo u were sending the numbers of Officers you
                             did, and y o u give yo u r answer there to that allegation, which
                             y o u thought w as offensive? - A. Yes, that there was no suggest
                             ion the operat io na l level was decided without thought to cost
                             at that stage.
               (
                          Q. But what g u i d e d y o u to say, "manning levels are kept to
                              what I co ns ide r to be an operationally neces sa ry l e v e l ” ? Is
                      F   ... that an ope ra ti on al ly necessary level to enforce l a w and
                               urder? - A. It is to fulfil all the functions for w h i c h we are
                            [: :).t a f o o t b a l l ground; the ground regulations, to ensure the
                              s a f e t y of the spectators and to maintain la w and order.

                          0 C :£?id again, y o u point out at the next p ar ag ra ph but one your
                              meeting wi t h h i m ? - A. Yes, sir.
                      G   Q. An<i the last sentence, you pointed out that the clubs
                             emphasised the desire to employ P olicemen to ma in ta in law
                             and order and:

                                    "...there was a real fear that were they not there the
                                    matches w o u l d be unable to be completed".

                      H        Then p. 120 we have looked at, I need not take y o u there
                               again.  That was the start of a talk about videos, was it not?
 HARPMAH. LTD.
I Shorthand Writer*
:f f i e l d   si   20X
                                                                 - 16 -
8

                                 A. It was the use of closed circuit television we discussed at
                                 some of the me etings I had w     i   t   h    [ or one or two of
                                 the staff at Sheffield United, the suggestion being were they
                      A          to be p l ac ed strategically inside the'ground, we could remain
                                 outside and respond to trouble inside.

                              Q. An d out of that there then came a p ro po sa l that closed circuit
                                 television should be installed, wh i c h y o u regarded as helpful
                                 so far as po li c i n g was concerned? - A. Indeed, yes, sir.

                              Q. A n d h e l p f u l fo r policing the law and order aspect? - A. For
                      B          all aspects.

                              Q. But for l a w and order principally? - A. Yes,             indeed.

                              Q„ And y o u w o u l d be using that, would yo u not, to video trouble,
                                 y ou could id ent if y    troublemakers and so on, and for use as
                                 evidence if n ec essary? - A. Yes, for a deterrent, because once
                      C          people who are prepared to cause trouble appreciate that there
                                 can be a retrospective arrest b y use of the video film, it has
                                 the effect of damping down trouble i n the first place.

                              Q. There was then a discussion as             to who was pa ying the m a i n ­
                                 tenance for the future, and it             ends u p w i t h a letter wri tt en
                                 by y o u r successor, Mr. Watson,          w h i c h unfortunately, perhaps,
                                 put the video ma tter to sleep,            in v i e w of legal difficulties?
                                 - A. Yes.        I have not seen the       l etter before, but it is Mr.
                      D          W a t s o n ’s signature.

                              Q. Now, can y ou go next to p. 126, because I want to turn to the
                                 Bolton Wanders incident.   That is a l e t te r from the then
                                 Solicitor to the Club, written to the South Yorkshire County
                                 Council, and at the bottom of the page he states:

                                       "We have advised our client not to p a y any
                      E 'r"            fur th er sums to the SYCC for police charges until
                                       the n e c e s s a r y information ..."

                                 - i.e.,   details of the facts of l aw -

                                       "has b e e n supplied to us by the SYCC".

                      F          Quite shortly after that, at p. 129, there is a t e l e x . ■ It
                                 is not v e r y clear, but it is, in fact, f r o m             the
                                 Solicitor to the Club, and the man us cr ipt addition at the top
                                 of the page points out that the date should be the 20th - that
                                 emerges later.     In the second parag ra ph it states:

                                       "We u nd erstand from              that the SYCC is
                                       aware that the Club has a home game against Bolton
                      G                Fo ot ba ll Club on Saturday 31 De ce m b e r 1983 in which
                                       the Club does not request any Police Services".

                                 - A. Yes,   sir.

                              Q. Now, by this date, and indeed certainly fro m the time w h e n
                                             jwrote to your Chief Constable in October, 1983,
                                 making clear that he was only asking for, or had only asked
                     H           for specific games? - A. Yes, he was saying he had asked.
    HARPHAM. LTO.
I 5 h o r th » n d W riters
                                 And not fo r others, and therefore was n ot liable for other
:ffie lo    si    20X            payments in h is view? - A. Right.

                                                               -   17   -
                             Q. Y o u k n e w from then on his attitude on behalf of the Club was:
                                "We are only going to ask for specific games"? - A. I had no
                                direct contact w ith him.      I kn e w his views were, "Unless we
                                request we should not pay", but we had n ot had, -until this
                                telex, a direct, forgive the contradiction, direct n o n ­
                                request.

                             Q. Yes, but leaving aside w hether there h a d been communications
                                bet we en yo u,from the time of his letter and your discussion
                                on the 26th, y o u k n e w that was, in fact, his attitude? - A.
                                Yes.
                   B
                             Q. Here y o u say y o u have the first direct communication of a n o n ­
                                request, and                goes on:

                                     "We further understand that the Officers of the
                                     S YCC have threatened, subject to the anticipated
                                     a uthority from the elected Members, to commence
                                     proceedings in the Sheffield Magistrates Court for
                                     a n Order under the provisions of Section 10 of the
                                     Safety of Sports Grounds Ac t if the Club does n ot
                                     request such services."

                                - A. Yes.

                             Q. That approach was one w h i c h stemmed from you, did it? - A. Yes.

                    D        0. A n d your reason for   that approach was that if there were no t
                                 Police inside there    was a considerable risk, in your opinion,
                              ]i that a b reakdown of   l aw and order would occur? - L It w o u l d be
                              u unsafe to allow the     fixture to go ahead without^Policemen.

                             Q.|*iBecause your principal fea r was a breakdown of law and order
                               jifand for public safety? - A. That is right.

                             Q. You were not prepared to go there to prevent that unless y o u
                                got a Section 15 request? - A. No, we were not prepared to do
                                that.   I had discussed the possibility of using Section 10 with
                                               at one of our meetings, and said this was ve r y much
                                a possibility should he no t request Police Officers.         Being
                                faced w it h this situation where no request was made, I h a d then
                                ■various factors to consider:      one was to allow the ma t c h to go
                                «/iead without Police Officers, and I ve r y quickly dismissed
                                th-at possi bi li ty on the grounds of safety and public order; I
                                •then"had to consider the implications of sending Police
                                Officers as there had been a specific, and again forgive,the
                                tern, non-reouest for Police Officers, w h e n we have always
                                within the Police Services, not m e re ly South Yorkshire, acted
                                on the principle that Police Officers performing duty inside
                                a football club were pe rf orming special services, and therefore
                                the club was liable for p a y m e n t . I wo ul d have gone contrary
                                to that principle and therefore, after discussion, I reached
                                the decision that the proper course of action for me to take
                                was via the local Authority, and Section 10 of the Safety of
                                Sports Grounds Act.

                                11 d o n ’t w ant to trespass on the discussions with your legal
                                 advisers, b ut would it be correct that your a ttitude was,_
                    H           [from the time y ou first spoke t o |             ~| that (a), there
 HARPHAM, LTD.
I S h o rth a n d W riter*                                   -   18   -
f FI ELD S t 2DX
                                    had to be P o li ce inside the ground for public order; and (b),
                                    that y o u were no t prepared to place the P olice in there withou"
                                    a Section 15 request, because of the financial implications of
                                    so doing? - A. That is corrsnt. sir.

                                 0. That therefore you made clear to the Club that if no Section
                                    15 request was made, that then y o u wot la go to the Magistrates
                                    Court to apply to have the game stopped? - A. I w o u l d go to
                                    the Local Au t h o r i t y for them to apply, yes.   I think not
                                    ne ce ss ar il y to have the game stopped, b ut perhaps for the game
                       B            to be p layed be hind closed doors, where spectators were not
                                    involved.       I w o u l d like to expand on that: ha d'that taken piac
                                    where it was p l ay ed behi nd closed doors, it would quite probabl
                                    have created extreme public order problems b y spectators
                                    arriving and n o t being allowed into the ground, so I was in a
                                    dilemna w h i c h e v e r course of action I took.

                                 Q. Y o u rec ogn is ed if it was played behind closed doors it was
                                    not m u c h use to the Club? - A. Absolutely.

                                 Q. Agai ns t the ba c k g r o u n d of those questions I wi l l no t go into
                                    the detail of the ensuing telexes.            Then on p. 130 the Club
                                    was saying;

                                             "The Club does not admit that it is liable for Police
                                             attendances which it does not specifically request.
                                             However, it is the hope of the Club that the dispute
                        D                    concerning charges for Police Services may be resolved
                                             and the legal rights and liabilities of the Parties
                                             he re in be clarified as soon as possible, amicably, and
                                             w i t h the min im um expense and inconvenience.    Accord in gl y
                                             we" propose that without prejudice to the question of
                                             w h e th er or not the Club is liable f o r the charges for
                                             Police Services at the Bolton game, and without the
                                             Club mailing a specific request therefore, the Police
                                             attend it in such numbers and at such times as the •
                                             Chief Constable m ay direct.      The matter of liability
                                             for payment, if any, m a y then be decided b y a competent
                                             Tribunal at a convenient time."

                                    So they were suggesting, "Let's have it resolved but meanwhile
                                    r-M /rry on". The reply at the next page:

                                              "The Chief Constable ... is prepared to provide
                                        /•    Police Services inside the ground ... on request of
                                             ' vhe Club in accordance with the provisions of Section
                                              c;    it


                                    -    .    .paragraphs on:

                                             "In the absence of a request of the club to the
                                             Chief Constable, as provided in Section 15 (1) of
                                             the Police Act, the Chief Constable considers, in
                                             v i e w of the degree of risk to spectators, that the
                                             County Council should consider m ak in g an application
                                             u nde r Se ct io n 10 ...."

                                    And the risk to spectators is the law and order one we are
                        H           talking about? - A . l a w and order and safety, yes.
 HARPHAM, LTD.
I S h o r th a n d W r h t f i
•FFIELD S1 2DX                                                       -   19 -
                             Q. And at the bottom,        the Local Authority saying:

                                      "Policing of the ground is a m at te r for the Chief
                   A
                                      Constable and shall be discussed wi t h h i m or
                                      Assistant Chief Constable Mr. G-oslin".

                                Then the re pl y to that at p. 132, last paragraph, concerning
                                the threat of the South Yorkshire County Council to commence
                                proceedings un d e r Section 10:

                   B                  "Our client has decided not to make any application
                                      to the Court today ...."

                                - and then p. 133, that application was to be to a          H i g h Court
                                Judge for an I nj unction to stop you doing it? - A.        Yes, it was.

                             Q. At p. 133, is the statement that the Council has resolved to
                                bring Section 10 proceedings, and that this would be w i th dr aw n
                     C          in the event of a satisfactory request be in g received by the
                                Chief Constable f r o m the Club, and wo ul d it be fair to say that
                                the County Council, the Police Authority, and the Police, we r e
                                all acting to gether in this approach? - A. Yes, sir, it would.

                             Q. Then at p. 134 a suggestion from the Club:

                                      "With reference to the above, we propose that, without
                     D                prejudice to the question of whether or not the Club
                                      is liable for the charges for Police Services at the
                                      above football match, and without the Club making a
                                      specific request: for Police attendance, the Police
                                      attend in such n umbers and at such times as the Chief
                                      Constable m a y direct".                         ~

                                - A. Yes,      sir.
                     E
                             Q.'Then overleaf, p. 135, they say they have reconsidered it, and
                                they put f orward.a slightly different formula, second paragraph

                                      "Without p rejudice to the question of whether the
                                      Club is liable for charges for Police Services at
        v        '                    the above m e nt io ne d Bolton match, and w it h this
                                      request n ot b e i n g made under the provisions of
                     F                Section 15 (1) of the Police Act 1964, we hereby
                                      request on b e ha lf of the Club that the Police attend
                                      the above m e n ti on ed match in such numbers and at
                                      such times as the Chief Constable m a y direct."

                                - A. Yes,      sir.

                               'An d the last p a r a g r a p h :
                     G                   ft*



                                       "For the avoidance of doubt the above request is
                                       for Police Services and not ’Special Police S e r v i c e s 1".

                                - A. Yes,      sir.

                             Q. So y o u b y now, at the time of the telex, w e r e 'apprised' of the
                                 distinction they were making? - A. Oh, yes, indeed, sir.           In
                     H           f a c t , during the f l o w of telexes I h a d one or two conversations
HARPMAM, LTD.                    with
S h o r th a n d W rite rs
-F IE L D S I 2DX
                                                                    -   2 0   -
                                 Q. A nd it is fair to say, i s n ’t it, that the Police and the Club,
                                    n o w that this n a t t e r of principle h ad arisen, were each
                                    conscientiously trying to find a meth od of resolving it that
                    A               would not prejudice either Party, and would a l l o w football to
                                    continue and the public to be served? - A. Yes, sir.

                                 Q. And             was not in any wa y b ei ng difficult or do mi ne er ­
                                    ing? - A. Not au all, no.

                             i   Q. A nd then a re pl y from the Council, p. 136,       second paragraph:
                    b        !             "There is no provision for the supply of Police
                                           Officers at the request of private individuals or
                                           concerns other than und er Section 15 (1) of the
                                           Police A c t 1964.   Therefore our operational r e q u i r e ­
                                           ments are not satisfied and Police Officers will not
                                           pe r fo rm duty inside Bramall Lane Football Ground on
                                           the above date".
                    c                 - A. That was m y telex.

                                 Q. Under the present circumstances the P olice would support under
                                    the Sa fety of Sports Grounds A c t ? - A. Yes.

                                 Q. Then p. 137:

                                           "The agreement is that the Club will request Special
                    D                      Police Services from the Chief Constable under Section
                                           15 (1) of the Police Act 1964, for the Bolton match
                                           on 31 December and all subsequent home matches for
                                           the rest of the 1983/4 football season.

                                           This request is without prejudice to the right of
                                           the Club to challenge in the Courts whether alternative
                                           means for the provision of Police Services were av ai l­
                    E                      able other than b y a request u n d e r Section 15(1), for
                                           example und er the general duty of the Chief Constable
                                           to keep the Q u e e n ’s Peace and enforce the law, and
                                           without prejudice to the C l u b ’s l iability for payment
                                           for such services.
         (      i
                                           On confirmation of this agreement the Chief Constable
                    F                      wil l advise the County Council that a satisfactory
                                           arrangement has b ee n m ade wi t h the Club and the Chief
                                           Executive will w it h d r a w the application to the Sheffield
                                           Ma gistrates Court ..."

                                        and that is what has led to us b e i n g he r e ? - A. Yes,   sir,

                                  *    id then p. 138,   just to complete it:
                    G
                                           "On behalf of the Club we h e r e b y agree to your terms
                                           of your telex received on 22 December 1983 at 16.20
                                           hours and note the without prejudice nature of the
                                           C l u b ’s said requests und er Section 15."

                                      Now, h av in g gone through those telexes and asked y o u some
                                      questions about your attitude and wh a t y o u made pl a i n to the
                    H                 Club at tha t time, y ou will remember y o u told us y ou had
                                      spoken to                about Section 10, and along those lines?
 HARPMAM, LTD.
I S h o rth a n d W riter*
                                      - A. Yes, sir.
IFFIELD S1 20X
                                                                   -   2 1   -
                      Q. Can y o u hel p us wi t h the approximate date for that? His
                         letter was the 14th October, if that helps. - A. A letter from
                         the Chief Constable to                              makes reference to me
                 A       m e e t in g w i t h Mr. B r o o m h e a d . I t was late October, I would
                         suggest.

                      Q. A n d at that m e e t i n g of late October, was it made clear by y o u
                         to h i m r e al ly the attitude that b l e w up in the telexes? - A.
                         Yes, it did.

                 B    Q. N am el y that y o u believed the Police presence was essential?
                         - A. Yes.

                      Q. That y o u were not prepared to provide it unless a Section 15
                         request was m a d e ? - A. Yes.

                      Q. A n d that if a Section 15 request was not made y ou w o u l d ve r y
                         seriously consider going to the Courts and probably wou ld ne e d
                 C       a Section 10 application? - A 0 If I could just make a comment
                         about the S ection 15 requests, I do n o t t h ink I was as specific
                         as that.    What I would have discussed w i t h | i s           if
       I                 the existing agreement whereby Police Officers policed, inside
                         Bramall Lane was not continued, then I would have to consider
                         a Section 10 application, or recommend to the County Council
                         they went for Section 10.    I make the distinction between our
                         existing arrangements as opposed to Section 15.
                 D    Q. Again, just analysing that, y o u had already received his letter
                         describing the non-reauest situation, the letter of the 14th?
                         - A. Yes.

                      Q. Y ou k n e w that that was his attitude? - A. Yes, indeed.

                      Q. You made clear to him that unless there was an agreement to paj
                 E       you w o u l d have to make a Section 10 - does that fairly
                         summarise the upshot of your conversation? - A. Yes, and the.
                         hand w r i t te n note i made on one of the letters, b ecause I
                         wi shed to clarify the situation f rom                ^whether he
                         wanted Police Officers or not, w h i c h is indicative of the fact
                         I was aware this situation was coming to boiling point.
       (     '
                      Q. A nd again I a m sure it goes without saying, to be cautious
                 F       perhaps I ought to just get it from you, it is quite obvious
                         that y o u r concern was not h a v i n g pe rm is si on to go in and enforc
                         the ground regulations, it was the other aspects, par ti cu la rl y
                         law and order? - A. It was a combination of safety, ground
                         regulations and l a w and order.

                      Q. You are n ot suggesting if the Club said, "We do not want y o u
                         to enforce ground regulations except in the law and order
                 G       context - don*t bother with cameras and things like that",
                         that y o u w o u l d still have thought you h a d better go for Sectior.
                         10? - A. If we had no request for Police Officers inside the
                         ground, no request at all, m y considered v i e w at that time,
                         and still is, is yo u cannot have a football match with ou t
                         Police Officers inside the ground.            If they are there they
                         quite o bviously will have a combination of purposes:           one is
                         law and order; one is safety; one is to enforce the g round
               H         regulations.        There is no w a y I w oul d suggest I could divide
MARPHAM. LTD.
                         in percentage terms those responsibilities - they are p art of
i Shorthand Writer*      the w h o l e .
FFIELO S I 20X

                                                       -   2 2   -
 Can I raise one other m att er with you?  It is going to be
 evidence called by m y clients that in recent years, f rom about
 1982, there has been no discussion week b y w e e k b y the Police
 with the Club, as to the numbers of Officers that the Police
 considered necessary.    What has happened Is that the Police
 Movement Order, wh ic h lists the numbers, Is sent to the
 Secretary, four or five days before the game starts? - A. I
 have no knowledge of that.    The contact between the Club and
 the Police to decide numbers would be done at divisional level.

 That would be Chief Superintendant Broomhead? - A. Or one of
 his Superintendants - not me.

 Again, in pursuance of your "Law and Disorder Pr e v e n t i o n Scheme
 from time to time, as for instance a fortnight ago, the Police
 say we mus t open more turnstiles, open those, shut those, and
 instruct the Club what they would wish to have done? - A.
 Recent events since 1984 I have no knowledge about.

 Does that fall w i t h i n the pattern you would u n d e r s t a n d ? - A. I
 would expect that wo uld be done b y consultation, n o t that we
 would demand.   I think it should be pointed out w h e n y o u are
 talking about p o l i c i n g levels at the ground, the n u m b e r of
 Police Officers in the ground would have very little effect
 upon the charge to the Club.         Inevitably there w o u l d be f ar
 more Police Officers inside the ground, performing duties there
 than were charged for.

 But the numbers are difficult, because what in fact happens is
 that a lot of the Police Officers who escort people to the
 ground come into the ground, are there as a reserve, but are
 .actually used to take them away again? - A. Yes, those Officers
..outside p r e -m at ch will come into the ground, but even those on
/duty exclusively inside the ground would be more in n u m b e r thai
 Ahcse actually charged for, by virtue of the criteria.

,T. am reminded of one matter, Mr. Goslin.       One of the reasons
     :t y ou do n o t wan t clumping of spectators is that that is
Si,-"..
 potentially a flashpoint, because very frequently the clumping
 -j&w^sople who are coming together with a v ie w to a c t i n g as a
          in a disruptive sense? - A. Forgive me, a clumping is a
 £ v,.p of spectators yes, that is one of the reasons.

  Be': .ase, (a), they form a target for people to lob things
  in Vo* and (b), the y m a y themselves be of a disruptive frame
  of mind? - A. Yes, that is one of the reasons.

               Re-rExamined by MR. B E N T L E Y :

  Mr. Goslin, d e a l in g first of all with the responsibilities of
  the Chief Constable, and y o u as his Assistant, as m y learned
  friend has r i g ht ly said, the duty of the Chief Constable is to
  enforce the l a w w i th in his police area? - A. Yes, sir.

  But as we know, the m an pow er available to a Chief Constable
  is limited, is it n o t ? - A. Indeed so.

       MR. JUSTICE BOREEAM:   I d o n ’t think it quite defines it
  does it? As I understand it, his duty is to enforce the l a w
  within his area in an even-handed manner.     I think that has
  to be added.
         -A

                                            KR. BENTLEY:       Ky Lord, yes.

                                            MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM:       It is a ver y important part of the
                      A             duty.

                               Q.        MR. BENTLEY:        What about the financial resources available
                                    to the Chief Constable wit h wh ic h to discharge his duty? Are
                                    they l i m i te d or unlimited? - A. They are limited.

                               Ql^ Until this dispute arose w it h Sheffield United, as we have
                                   heard, a contribution was made to the cost of polici ng Sheffielc
                      B            U n it ed home games by the Club itself? - A. Yes, it was.

                                    If n o t h i n g is p a i d b y the Club for the p ol i c i n g of its matches,
                                    and y et p o l i c i n g is provided, on w h o m will that cost now fall?.
                                    - A. Ultimately, the ratepayer.             It would have to come from the
                                    County Council budget.

                      C             A n d w h a t effect will it have on the financial resources a va il ­
                                    able to the Chief Constable?- A. Well, it would, if his budget
                                    were n o t i ncreased to compensate for that loss of income, it
                                    would c o n se qu en tl y reduce his budget b y that amount.

                               Q
                                    r    MR. J U S T IC E BOREHAM: Well, that is if he still provided
                                    the same resources to the football ground? - A. Yes, m y Lord.

                                    He w o u l d either have to trim those resources,             or trim other
                      D             resources, to pa y ? - A. Yes, my Lord.

                               Q. In order to me e t the cost? - A. Yes,               indeed.

                                         MR. JUST IC E BOREHAM:   Do I need-this.    A r e n ’t I allowed
                                    to   take judicial knowledge - I kn o w roughly h o w the Police are
                                    funded.
                      E                  MR. BENTLEY:          M y Lord, I do not take that ma tter any
                                    further:

                               Q. In that event, Mr. Goslin,                 m a y I turn from that ....

          (      ,)    .                 MR. J U S TI CE BOREHAM:             If you are going to turn,    m ay I
                                    complete m y interruption:
                      F
                               Q. Supposing the Club says to you, unlikely of course but suppos
                                  ing t h e y do, "We don*t want you. Y ou can stay away, you and .
                                                                                                  all
                                  your Officers", do you u nderstand? - A. Yes, sir.

                               Q. I a m n o t suggesting it has been said here.  I accept that the
                                  relationships between you are and always have been, good, and
                                  long m a y it continue, but supposing they did say, "We d o n ’t
                      G           want you, get away", of course y ou could patrol the streets
                                  and l o o k after the crowds there, but not in the ground.   Have
                                  y o u got any rig ht to go in? - A. To enforce the law, yes, we
                                  have a right to go in.

                               Q. You w o u l d have the right.   Would you have to w a i t until there
                                  was a b r e a ch ? - A. We would have to wait until we anticipated
                                  a b re ach of the peace, we would need something other than a
                      H           gathering of spectators.
> HARPHAM, LTD.
rt S h o r th a n d W riters                                             -   24 -
EfFIEL D S I 20X
 V ■'            I:i ■



                         Q. But I would have thought that y o u would n eed a situation which
                            suggested to you, as a sensible and experienced Police Officer,
                            that danger was on the horizon, or imminent? - A. Yes, my Lord.

                         0. Then y o u could go in? - A. Yes indeed, and would, u n d e r those
                            circumstances.

                         Q. Of course.

                         Q.        MR. BENTLEY:      Mr. G-oslin, again, perhaps just a r i sin g out
                              of .that, the Officers who presently do attend to p o l i c e matches
               B              are, as one can see, specially assembled.          These’ Operational
                              Orders specify w h i c h Officers shall p e r for m this particular duty
                              - A. That is right, sir.

                         Q. A nd I think y o u told us yesterday, these are Officers who in
                            the main will be asked to wo r k overtime, or are b r o u g h t in on
                            rest days? - A. That is right.

                              Now, suppose that the situation w h i c h prev ai le d were  this,
                              that the Club h a d made no request for Officers to attend, and
                              indeed h a d said, ”We don*t want Officers at the ground at all,
                              what Police resou rc es w o u l d you have available to res po nd to
                              any call for h e l p from the Club? - A. Without special a r r a n g e ­
                              ments we wo ul d have purely and simply the norma l day b y day
                              policing resources.
                D        Q.        MR. J U S T ICE BOREHAM: So they wo u l d come off the streets
                              if they went into the ground? - A. Yes indeed, m y Lord.

                         Q.          MR. BENTLEY:      Would you, in those circumstances, always
                              be able to r e s p on d to a call? - A. We would make a response to
                              a call de pendant u p o n the size of the incident.      There are so
                              ma n y variables on this, depending on what is going on in other
                              parts of the C o u n t y would depend u p o n the response to the
                              incident at the football ground.

                         Q.         MR. J U S T IC E BOREHAM:   Does that mean yo u w o u l d make a
                              response but w h e t h e r or not it was adequate w o u l d depend u p o n
                              the gravity of the incident itself, and the gravity a n d n u m b e r
                              of any other incidents in you r area? - A. That is correct, m y
                              Lord.

                         Q.         MR. BENTLEY:       Just dealing w i t h safety, a n d I do n o t wanl
                               to deal w i t h this at length, Mr. G-oslin, but I suppose it is
                               a commonplace that one of the things that m a y happen, if there
                               is a crushing i n a crowd, is that the weake r m a y go down a nd be
                              .at risk of b e i n g trampled? - A. Yes.     Children quite obviously
                               are v e r y vulnerable; women are v e r y vulnerable.      If y o u get a
                              imiCficiently s t r on g crush then personal strength r e a l l y becomes
                               immaterial and y o u wi l l be affected b y it.

                                   MR. JUS TIC E BOREEAM:  I doubt, if I m a y dare to say so,
                              it is in any event just a matter of strength - it is a m a t t e r
                              of strength a n d agility? - A. A g i l i t y wo ul d p ro ba bly p la y an
                              equal part, m y Lord.

                         Q.        MR. BENTLEY:          Kr.Goslin, as m y learned frien d says, yo u
                H             can, of course, get crushing deliberately engineered by p eo pl e
                              who are p u s h in g fr o m the back w ith evil intent? - A. Yes, sir.
  KARPHAM, LTD.
1 Shorthand W riter.
■.FTtELO S i   201
                                                             -   25 -
                              Q. Is it also yo u r experience that sometimes a mere anxiety to get
                                 out or get in through an entrance quickly can cause the same
                                 kind of problems - people pushing to get in?

                                        MR. JUS TI CE 30REHAM:    Mr. Bentley, I will tell you, we
                                   have n o t got a Jury.  A m I not allowed to take judicial k n o w ­
                                   ledge?

                                         MR. BENTLEY:     M y Lord, yes, you are:

                              Q.   "If y o u r Officers are confronted w ith in the ground by a
                     B             scene of that kind, where there is crushing and p eo pl e going
                                   down, who wil l deal w i t h it? - A. The Police.

                              Q. And is that, in yo u r view, an important or unimportant reason
                                 for be in g at gr ounds? - A. It is a v e r y important reason for
                                 being at grounds.

                              Q. If there are n o t Police there to deal wi t h that incident who
                                 will have to? - A. The stewards wou ld then have to be r e s p o n s ­
                                 ible.

                              Q. Would y o u expect them to be able to cope as well as Police
                                 Officers? - A. No, I would not.

                              Q. Tell his Lordship why. - A. Yes, sir.   One of the basic reasons
                                 is that the P olice Officer is identifiable.  The stewards
                     D           would have an armband or a coloured jacket to identify them.

                              Q.         MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:      Are the stewards at Sheffield what
                                   I call a permanent band or body? - A. M y Lord, yes.       There are
                                   changes but basi ca ll y they are a permanent band, yes, my Lord.
                                   The Police Officers, generally speaking, are youn ge r and
                                   fitter than stewards.      They are better trained to act in
                                   concert, whi ch is the sort of action one needs when dealing
                                   wit h a serious crushing problem, and they are. also all trained
                                   in first aid, w h i c h is a valuable attribute wh e n dealing with
                                   this sort of situation.

                              Q.        MR. BENTLEY:       Could I go b a c k to look at these operations
                                   documents, w h i c h you have b een taken through.    If we go to the
                                   standard Operation Order, p. 17 of bundle 3, at 2.1, where the
                                   general objectives to be attained are set out:

                                         "It is the intention of the police to all ow this
                                         ma tc h to take place and to ensure public order and
                                         safety ...."

                                   ■v'T-here is a reference there,   clearly, to safety? - A. Yes,
                                   .indeed.

                              Q. And if we f o l l o w through the document in a little more detail,
                                 if we go to p. 22, these are the v er y matters that the Officers
                                 who attend are to be instructed about at the general briefing?
                                 A. Yes, sir.

                              Q. A t (11), "Remind officers as to appropriate legislation", and
                                 then the r el evant public order legislation is referred to^
                     H           but finally, the rules of the particular ground? - A. Yes, sir.
 HARPHAM, LTD.
I S h o r th a n d W riters
                              Q. So there is the Operational Order saying tell the men? - A. Oh,
FF1ELO S I 20X                   yes, and a copy of those ground regulations w o u l d nor ma ll y be
                                 affixed to the Operational Order.
                                                                - 26 -
                         *v '


.r
                                Q. A n d then turn in g to the individual "briefing that appears at
                                   p. 23, and he r e individual Officers who are being deployed in
                                   various parts of the ground^ are n o w being told what functions
                                   they must p e r f o r m ? - A. Yes, sir.

                                Q. We have dealt a l r e ad y wit h (i), preventing spectators sitting
                                   or standing on bou n d a r y walls, and w i t h (ii), gates or openings
                                   and then (iii), "No unauthorised person must be permitted to
                                   encroach on the pi tc h       .       I d o n ’t think we dealt wi t h (iv),
                                   and that is:
                B                             ’’Spectators will not be allowed to remain in p a s s a g e ­
                                              ways a dj ac en t to entrances and exits, or to be in
                                              terrace or stand gangways.      Persons seen to be so remain-
                                            • ing will be directed to move."

                                     - A. Yes,      sir.

                                Q. A nd that is f o r the reasons y ou have explained a lr eady? - A.
                                   Ver y m u c h for safety.

                                Q. The Officers at the turnstile, at the foot of the page, and
                                   one appreciates this is outside the ground, but maintain order,
                                   ensure orderly queues form ...

                                Q.           MR. JUS TI CE B O R E H A M :        Is it outside the ground? - A. Yes.
                                     sir,    it would be.
                D
                                Q. There are two sides to a turnstile, one is in and one is out?
                                   - A. This, my Lord, is outside the ground.

                                Q.        MR. BENTLEY:   Al though some of the entrances to parts of
                                     the ground are within the club curtilages? - A. Yes, but the
                                     only stationing of Policemen at the turnstiles would be outside

                                Q. And then an instruction to give attention to the safety of
                                   money at turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

                                Q. I suppose a lot of people on ma t c h days may be at ris k of bei ng
                                   relieved of m o n e y by persons attending the m atch? - A. Yes.

                                Q. But here is a specific direction for the benefit of the club?
                                   - A. To look aft er the money taken over the turnstile.

                                Q. Then we have dealt wit h bringing into the ground pr ohibited
                                   items.  Then (iv) on that page;

                                             ’’Prevent unauthorised entry into the ground by
                                             persons climbing walls and fences or by climbing
                                             over t u r n s t i l e s . ”

                                     - to stop people trying to get in without paying? - A. T hat is
                                     on behalf of the Club, to make sure of people paying the fees.

                                Q. And (v), ’’Prevent anyone climbing from one section of the
                                   ground to a n o t h e r ” , and that can involve from standing sections
                                   to sitting? - A. An element of public order and an element of
                                   looking after the C l u b ’s interests, to make sure they do n o t
                 H                 go into a more expensive part of the ground.
I j ARPHAM* l t d .
r» 9 fth a n d Writer*
                                                                             -   27   -
F. ELD S I 2 0 X
                           Q. (vi)
                                     "Persons re mov ed fr o m the ground t hrough illness
                                     or i nj ur y m a y be treated on the track b y ambulance­
                                     men."

                                If someone is taken ill or injured on the terraces, how, in
                                your experience, is the injured or ill p e r s o n got f r o m the
                                terrace down to the p erimeter track? - A. If it is a well
                                attended game, and if I m a y h ar k back to Ma n c h e s t e r United,
                                which is g en er al ly full, the injured pe rson will be passed
                 B              above the crowd.      The crowd will pass the injured p erson down.
                                If it is less w e l l attended, Police Officers, stewards, or
                                ambulancemen, w o u l d go in and attend the person or assist h i m
                                to the track.

                           Q.    And    a ft er first aid treatement         they will either be returned
                                the crowd, a c c o m p a n y the first aid man, o r leave the grounds

                                     "If the p e r s o n is no t r et urned into the crowd, the
                                     nea re st offi ce r wi l l accompany such perso n and obtain
                                     full partic ul ar s in order that, if necessary, h i s
                                     next of k i n m a y be informed."

                                Is that a fu nc t i o n you w o u l d expect of y ou r Officers? - A. One
                                would expect that w herever y ou ha d an injured p erson who w en t
                                to hospital y o u wo ul d inform next of kin.
                 D
                           Q.    An d then (vii), another direction, that gangways are to be kept
                                clear.     Mr. Goslin, turning t o another aspect of the case if l
                                may, w h e n y ou too k over the responsibility for po li c i n g of
                                football grounds in South Yorkshire, was it the practice at
                                that time for an y clubs to make specific requests f or p o l i c i n g r
                                - A. No, sir.

                           Q. But p ol icing was paid for b y all of the clubs? - A. Yes,           sir.

                           Q.   They were invoiced and paid the invoices? - A. Yes,          sir.

                           Q.   Until the dispute that we see in the exchange of telexes
                                occurred, u nt il then, what had your attitude been to the p r o ­
                                vision of Poli ce Services at football .grounds? W as it that it
                                was to be paid f or or that it was to be free? - A. That it was
                                to be paid for, sir.

                           al^'JTaw, •the m a t t e r was discussed by you with Mr. Brealey, you
                                       in late 1983? - A. Yes, sir.

                                   >:nade clear "his unhappiness about the matter? - A. Yes.

                           Q. Wl’at did you tell hi m your v i e w was about pa yment? - A. Well,
                              I pointed out that as a football club was a commercial concern,
                              a private not a public concern, in common w ith cricket matches,
                              race courses, etc., if Police Officers were to p e r fo rm duty
                              inside the ground, then that would have to fall w i t h i n the
                              description as I un derstood it of Special Police Services/ and
                              therefore w o u l d have to be paid for by the football club.

                  H        Q, You have told m y lord that the Operational Orders, of w h i c h we
                              have seen specimens, would be sent by the Club e ach we e k ? - A.
MARPHAM. LTD.
                              Sent to the Club.
S h o r th a n d Writ***
FFJELD S I 2 D t
                                                              -   28 -
 For each game that was in the offing.    D ur in g your time in
 office were y o u ever aware of Sheffield U n i t e d saying, in
 response to one of those Orders, "Don*t come, we don*t want y o u
 - A. No, sir.

A n d as f a r as y o u were concerned, w h e n w as it, do y o u say, that
it was first made clear to you b y Sheffield U n i t e d that the
Police wer e not wanted? - A. I w o u l d n o t p u t it as strongly as
that the Police were not wanted.

          MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:         I do not think they have ever     said
 they did not want them.            They did no t want them 'on particular
 terms? - A. Yes.            I became aware that there was a non-request
 f o r S pecial Police Services wi t h the exchange of telexes.          I
 was aware, quite obviously, wi t h m y m e e t i n g wi t h
 w h i c h a g a i n I wo ul d stress were always conducted very civilly,
 very properly, but that he was concerned at the level of Po lice
 charges, that we were one of the high es t charging Councils in
 the County, and he was seeking alternatives to Police Officers
 inside the ground.            He recognised h e h a d no control outside the
 ground, a nd that the suggestion rega rdi ng closed circuit
television was one means of achieving that end.               I pointed out
 that was ve r y m u c h an impractical suggestion, because the w a y
 in w h i c h disorder escalates inside the grounds, we n eed to be
 there as quickly as possible, and to see it on a television
 screen a n d to react would be operationally suicidal.

      MR. BENTLEY:        M y Lord,    I have no f urther questions.

      MR. GRIFFITHS:   M y Lord, m a y I, arising out of what y o u r
 Lordship asked, which was a hypothesis I did not s e e - ....

      MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:            You want to a s k a question?

      MR. GRIFFITHS:        Yes.

      MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:            Yes.

       Fur th er Cross-Examined b y Mr. G R I F F I T H S :

Mr. Goslin, y o u remember his Lordship said supposing the
unlike ly happened, and the Club said, "You are, under no
circumstances, to come in", you p ointed out to m y Lord you
would have a Police duty to keep la w and order.    Y o u poi nt ed
out to m y Lord if you anticipated a real possibility of
trouble inside you would have a legal right to go in, and the n
yo u turned to the question of plans y ou might, or might not,
have to make.     Can*I explore that aspect of it against m y
Lord*s hypot he si s? Would it be right, if that came up you,
or y o u r successor, would have to assess the situation as to
the degree of risk and the degree of Police reserve needed to
counter that risk? - A. Yes, indeed we would.

Is that a task which, in one w a y or another, Officers in y o u r
pos ition are doing day in day out, in a v a r ie ty of different
ways? - A. Yes indeed.

 Strikes are one example?

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM: ' Mr. Griffiths, I repeat,             I am not
without judicial knowledge.  I un de rstand all this.            I do n o t
                                    want to stop y o u from making a point, but you do not need to
                                    make that sort of point to a Police Officer.

                                         MR. GRIFFITHS:    M y lord, I a m obliged.   I did not want
                                    it to be on re cord unchallenged.

                                         MR. BENTLEY:   Unless your Lordship has any questions?
                                    Thank you, Mr. Goslin.

                                         Ch. Ins-p. GORDON ERIC PAYNE Called    (Sworn)
                       B                          Bx^^lned by MR. P HI~T'IPS:

                               Q.   Your full name, please? - A. Gordon Eric Payne.

                               Q.   Are y o u a Chief Inspector with the South Yorkshire Police,
                                    stationed at Woodseats? - A. I am.

                               Q.    Have y o u been, in fact, a Chief Inspector since 1979? - A.
                                    That is correct.

          c       'i           Q. And y o u have been at Woodseats Police Station since August,
                                  1981? - A. Yes.

                               Q. And does Sheffield United Football Ground come within the
                                  dsitrict of Woodseats Police Station?  - A. It did at that time
                       D       0.   It is only a year or two since it was put into the West Bar
                                    district? - A. In September, 1983.

                               Q.    So during the period we are concerned with, that is to say the
                                    football season 1982/83, it came within- vour jurisdiction? - A.
                                    Yes.

                               Q. At Woodseats Police Station what is the rank of the Officer in
                                  overall charge? - A. Superi nte nd an t.

                               Q. Is that Superintendant Furness? - A. That is correct.

                               Q. He is in hospital at the moment? - A. He is out of hospital but
          I        )              off sick.

                               Q. And y o u r rank is one below that of Mr. Furness? - A. Yes.

                               Q. And are y o u his deputy? - A. I am.

                               Q. So w h e n Mr. Furness is available he is in control of the Police
                                  Station, otherwise y ou are? - A. Yes.

                               Q. And so far as the policing of football grounds is concerned,
                                  until the time you mentioned was that dealt w ith on a practical
                                  and operational basis from your Police Station? - A. It was.

                               Q. The Assi st an t Chief Constable had a directive kind of control
                                  over it, as he has described? - A. Yes.

                               Q. But y o u were dealing with it on a day to day basis? - A. That
                                  is correct.
                       H
 K&RPH&M. LTO.
                               Q. Did y o u therefore have to assess what sort of forces to deploy
: S h o r th a n d W rite r*      to the football ground in relation to a n y one matc h? - A„ Yes.
FFlELO S I 2 0 X
                                                               - 30 -
                            Q.    Was that a job wh ic h y ou did personally, or is it something y o u
                                 delegated? - A. At the beginning of the season we looked at
                                 the matches that were coming up.     We received a list from the
                   A             Secretary of the Football Club, and then we categorised the
                                 matches according to the manpow er requirements we anticipated
                                 would be required to police the match.

                            0.   "When yo u say "we” ,who did that categorisation? - A. The
                                 senior Officers in the sub-division, which included myself.

                            Q. Did yo u go to the Ground before the season started? - A. We
                   B           went to the Ground with the Fire Services, and various other
                               organisations, I believe structural engineers, to look at the
                               premises.

                            Q. Were the Club officials present? - A. Yes.

                            Q. H o w often did this take place during the season? - A. I believe
                               it was twice a year.
                   C
                            Q. And w hen y o u had the list of forthcoming fixtures for the
                               season, h o w did y o u k no w w hi ch category to put a m a t c h into?
                               - A. It was based on the anticipated size of the crowd, plus
                               the possible problems we experienced in previous years w i t h
                               visiting supporters, and the home supporters.

                            Q. How would you know the anticipated size of the crowd? - A. We
                   D           would get that from the Club itself, if they could help us,
                               also if it was a local derby we would anticipate the greater
                               crowd, and it 'would vary through the season. If the team was
                               doing well we might change the category.

                            Q.        MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   I was going to ask this:           things
                                 are never entirely predictable? - A. No.
                   E        Q. A run of luck and they flock in, bad luck and they f l o c k out?
                                 - A. Yes.

                            Q. Or may do?

         I      ■           Q.       MR. PHILLIPS:  Lid you get, then, liaison and assistance
                               from the Club in assessing these matters? - A. Yes. We would
                   F         . ask the Club to give us information about supporters travelling,

                            Q* Did the Club know, the person you spoke to at the Club, k no w
                            ■>., why you needed this information? - A. Yes.

                            Q.. And why was it? - A. So we could anticipate the n umber of
                               'Policemen we required.

                    G       Q.- In fact, as we have heard, the Club was not charged on a m a n
                               ..by man basis, but according to the attendance? - A. That is
                                ;correct.

                            Q. So did you feel the nee d ever to go so far as to ask the Club
                               h o w many Officers they required to attend? - A. No.

                            Q.   That was dealt wit h in your Police Station? - A. Yes.
                   H
KARPMAM, LTD.
S h o r th a n d W riter*
                                                             -   31 -
'F IE L D S I 2DJC
                           Q. Did you, i n fact, make arrangements for m e n to attend when
                              matches were p layed?- A. They were dealt w i t h at the sub-
                              di-asion, yes.
                A
                           Q.   That is to say, your Police Station? - A. Yes.

                           Q.    A n d were the Operational Orders such as we have seen, drawn up
                                at y our P o li ce Station? - A. They were.

                           Q.    Is thers a --bundle of documents in front of you? Could you
                 B              turn to do cu me nt 78.  That is a specimen of an Operations
                                Order and it is headed,in fact, woodseats Police 'Station? - A.
                                Yes.

                           Q. And we see f r o m this, in fact, on this occasion it was
                              S uperintendent Furness who would be in overall command? - A.
                              Yes.

                 C         Q. A nd are v a r i o u s other people me nt ioned? - A. Yes.

                           Q.    We see l a t e r on the names given of the various Officers              who
                                were to be concerned with it - for example, we have the                   names
                                of those a t t e nd ing ? - A. That is correct.

                           Q.   An d this w o u l d all be done on a we e k b y w e e k basis? - A. Yes.

                           Q. And what h a p p e n e d to this document w h e n it was completed? - A.
                 D            It was circulated to the Police Force and to the Club.            Variou
                              persons in the Police Service received it.

                           0. H ow would you get the men to come on this kind of dutjr? - A.
                              It     m i d consist of men we raised who were on leave, and m en
                                      other divisions.       At one time it was the responsibility
                              o-' f-:xe s ub -d ivision to raise the manpower, then it passed over
                 E                  .;;e F oo tb al l Liaison Department.

                                     ' ':e at p , 84, in the centre column, various figures.  These
                                ';->c-y.;rlifferent divsions, different Police Stations, and I see
                                   1 .^mtioned - that is Road Traffic? - A. Yes.

                           C             \>-ou collec te d them from different parts of the city? - A.
                                ■■■ ‘ ' *•' ’ 9

                  F
                           Q. And                 these wer e   m e n on leave? - A. Some of them, yes.

                           Q. Would the y be m e n on normal duties w i t h i n their own divisions,
                              taken off for this purpose? - A. If they were on w eekly leave
                              they w o u l d be no rm al ly on a day off, and we would bring them
                              in to police a match.         The other people wo ul d be people where
                              we h ad ad ju s t e d the shifts.
                  G
                           Q. These were the names and numbers which y ou had prepared - b y
                              what time in the week, how far in advance of the match? - A.
                              I would say at the beginning of the week.

                           Q. A nd a copy was sent to the Ground? - A. Yes.

                           Q. Did you get on any occasion, any response to that, saying:
                  H           "We d o n Tt want these P o l i c e m e n 11? Or "We d o n ’t want as m an y
KARPMAM, LTD.                 Po licemen"? - A. No.
S h o r th a n d Wrtt*r«
FFIELD S1 2DX
                                                                          -   32 -
                                          MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM:     It has ne v e r been suggested, that
                                    has b e e n the response.

                                          MR. PHIL LI PS :     No, that is right.

                                         MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM:      Let us not go f o r unnecessary
                                    points.

                            Q.           MR. P HILLIPS:  On the weekend itself, w o u l d y o u be presen'
                                    at the Ground? - A. Yes, if it was m y w e e ken d at work.
                  B         Q.      Do y o u - pe rh ap s y o u can deal wit h this one m a t t e r - do you
                                    recall a m a t c h w h i c h took place on 15th August, 1983? - A. Yes,
                                    I do.

                            Q.      "What sort of m a t c h was that? - A. It was a f ri en dly match
                                    b e t we en S hef f i e l d United and Motherwell.

                            Q.      What h a p p e n e d ? - A. No Policemen were pres en t at the Ground at
                                    the start of the match.          The Club, I understand, informed the
                                    Police that there were to be no away supporters "visiting the
                                    Ground, but one stand was to be opened, and they believed, or
                                    felt, the y were able to cope wit h the p oli c i n g of the Ground
                                    themselves.

                                             MR. J U S T I C E 30REHAK: ' There were going to be no visiting
                                    s u p p o r t e r s ? - - A. That is correct.
                  D
                            n       Ana only one stand being opened? - A. Yes.

                            n   <         MR. PHILLIPS:        And the Police accepted that? - A.. Yes.

                            Q.      15th A u g u s t w o u l d be before the season p ro per starts? - A. Yes.

                            Q.      And what h a p p e n e d then? - A. I received a call at home to say
                                    there were some Drobless at the Ground.

                            Q. What did y o u do? - A. I turned out from home and arranged for
                               about 30 Police Officers to attend.

                            Q.      Were y o u able to find 30 Police Officers re ad il y? - A. We had
                                    to get h e l p f r o m different sub-divisions.

                            Q. A nd were y o u able to deal with the trouble? - A. Yes.

                            Q.      Wha t sort of crowd was there at the time? - A. I'cannot recall
                                    the num be rs of the crowd.

                            Q.             MR. J U S T IC E BOREHAM:       It sounds like a v er y small crowd?
                                    - A. Yes, it was.              I think there were about two or three coach
                                    .iLoads of M o t h e r w e l l supporters.

                                    So there were some visitors? - A. Yes.

                            Q.           MR. PHILLIPS:        Do you think, in y o u r division, y o u would
                                    be able to m u s t e r enough men together? - A. No, we would not.


                   H        Q.      So now, w h e n y o u have assessed what y o u require for these
                                    purposes, y o u then turn up with the men, sometimes yourself,
KARPHAM, LTD.
                                    sometimes some ot he r senior Officer at the Ground? - A. Yes.
S h o r th a n d W riters
FFIELD S I M X                                                         - 33 -
An d y ou take part in the briefing of the men? - A. Yes.

And y o u take part in the supervision of them while they are
there, inside the Ground? - A. Yes, b o t h inside and outside.

And h o w do you see your role inside the ground? - A. The role
is two-fold, dual purpose, to m a i n t a i n public order and also
to ensure that    the ground regulations are complied with, and
to thus ensure    the safety of the publ ic and the players.

In addition to  the u niformed Officers in the G r o u n d , are there
any other Officers there? - A. No.

Whe n y o u are in the Ground y o u say y o u have a dual function? -
A. Yes.

Y o u obviously do not want trouble to occur,         do you? - A. No.

But if it does occur, y o u feel able to cope with it, wi t h the
numb er of m en y o u have? - A. That is correct.

M e n ti on has be e n made of s tewards? - A. Yes.

What is your experience of the capability of the stewards
there? - A. I wo ul d say that they w o u l d not be capable of
dealing with problems w i thi n the Ground.     They are generally,
perhaps, elderly members who go along there to earn a little bi
of pin money, if that is the correct expression.

They are not fulltime employees? - A. No.

And h o w many of these stewards are there,        do you say? - A.
I could not give y o u a figure.

"What do the stewards actually do? - A. They are scattered rounc
the ground, •h a v i n g certain re sponsibilities for monitoring the
crowd, working on the turnstiles.

You mean collecting the m o n e y ? - A. Yes.

fhey w o r k in isolation fro m the P o l i c e ? - A. They have a
ispecific role, certainly at the turnstile, but there is a
Police Officer present as well.

 An d I d o n ’t think it is n e c es sa ry to go through all the
"details of the Operation Order that is drawn up; that has b e e n
 done already.      So far as the w or k y o u do in the ground, y o u
 mentioned the regulations and y o u m e n ti on ed the public order
 aspect of it.      Do the Officers, or do you, encourage the
 Officers under your command to draw any distinctions at all
 when they are inside the Ground? - A. No,           none whatsoever.

Is it possible to apportion what time is spent on public
order and what time is spent on re gu lations? - A. No, it is
not.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:             Surely it will depend on c i r c u m ­
stances.  If y o u have some dreadful occasion, such as h ap p e n e d
at Bradford City, law and order goes b y the board, and public
safety is a b s o l ut el y p re do minant? - A. Yes.
                       Q. A n d you get those other awful occasons where there is
                          violence.    Safety h a s to take second place and public order
                          has got to be f i r s t ? - A. The success of the Ground is when
                          no body is arrested.

                       Q.         MR. PHILLIPS:       We have been looking at the Operation
                            Order in re la t i o n to the Portsmouth match.  Would y o u look at
                            p. 203? That is a summary of various figures concerning the
                            matches during the p e r i o d in question? - A. Yes, that is
                            correct.

                   B   Q. A n d if we look to the 15th January, 1983, and the first column,
                          which is about threeauarters of the w a y down, we see the ma t c h
                          against Portsmouth, wh ic h is the subject of this Order ? - A.
                          Yes.

                       Q. And we find there is an attendance, 12,907, and there is then
                          a figure f or the n u m b e r of Officers on overtime, or days off,
                          who attended? - A. Yes.

                       Q.   And then the cost is w orked out?

                       Q.         MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:  I suppose those on overtime, that
                            means extended shift, does it?- A. Yes.

                       Q. A n d day off? - A.   They will be on a no rmal weekl y leave day.

                   D   Q.   They still get overtime? - A. Yes.

                       Q.        MR. PHILLIPS:   A n d then we see the n um be r of Officers
                            actually on their ordinary duty time? - A. Yes.

                       Q.   So there were 47 P.C.'s, for example, on overtime, a nd      only
                            30 on ordinary duty time? - A. Yes, that is correct.

                       0. And. then we see that the nu mber of Officers there in all
                          categories, in re la ti on to this particular match, and we find
                          that is to say 77 Constables, 10 Sergeants, and a smaller
                          number of Inspectors and above? - A. Yes.

                       Q. But then these deployed inside the ground, one Superintendant,
                          one Chief Inspector,'one Inspector, seven Sergeants, and 51
                          Constables? - A. Yes.

                       Q. And the charge has b e e n made for one Inspector,     four Sergeants
                          and 36 Constables? - A. Yes.

                       Q. And that appears, in fact, to be a smaller charge that is made,
                          or a charge that is made in relation to the gate? - A. That is
                          correct.

                       Q. Rather than to the n u mb er attended? - A. Yes, as opposed to
                          the number of Police Officers.

                                 MR. JUSTICE BOREEAM:   To the gate rath er than the n u m b e r
                            of people attending.  What is the difference?   I thought that
                            was the gate.

                   H             MR. PHILLIPS:    I am.sorry, I meant the number of
                            Officers attending, n ot spectators:
KARPHA**, LTO.
S h o r th a n d
FFIELO S i 7 0X                                         - 35 -
                            Q. A nd y o u have, in fact, Inspector, had the opportunity of
                               checking those against the Operation Order which we have looked
                               at earlier on? - A. Yes.

                            Q. And does that tally with those figures? - A. It does,

                                           Gross-Examined b y MR. G R I F F I T H S ;

                            Q. Of the Officers who are in the Ground, some are solely on
                               crime prevention, are they no t ? - A. No.

                B           Q. What about the spotters w it h their binoculars? — A. They wi l l
                               be, yes, for b o t h purposes, for crime prevention and also if
                               we see in a pa rticular part of the crowd where a crowd is
                               getting too compacted together, we w ou ld use the spotter to
                               tell the Officers on the Ground to move people along.

                            Q. I suggest that is not w ha t they are h ab itually u s e d for,
                               Officer, that y o u can see what is going on on the Ground fr o m
                               the control b o x where a senior Officer is placed, because it is
                               right up in the top of the stand, wi t h a v i e w of the whole of
                               the Ground? - A. That is so, yes.

                            Q. And the spotters are outside and away f r o m that control box?
                               - A. The spotter is on a level above the actual place where I
                               or the Superintendant would sit.  He is, in fact, on the south
                               stand in the gods, above the actual seating area.
                 D
                            Q. Immediately outside that is the Police control room, in which
                               there is the gentleman who has access to the tannoy a n d to the
                               Police communications? - A. It m ay be now. It w a s n ’t then.
                            n    When are you r eferring to the change ha ving taken p l a c e ? -
                                 A. Well, since the Ground was no longer our responsibility,
                                 which was September, 1983.

                                      MR. JUSTICE BO REHAM:            Is that a convenient m o m e n t ?

                                      MR. GRIFFITHS:         If y o u r lordship leases.

                                                   (lunch eo n A d j o u r n m e n t )

                            Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:         Chief Inspector, y ou m e n tio ne d in your
             :lF
                                 evidence that in you r      v i e w one of the roles of the Police is
                                 to prevent crushes in       the crowd,     and thus injuries to people,
                                 is that correct? - A.       Yes, that is correct.

                            Q. The Ground at Sheffield has a capacity of some 44,000, 45,000?
                               - A. I would think that wo ul d be about the figure.

                                 , The last time that there was anything like that a mount of
                                   .spectators in the Ground was way b ack in 80/81, was it not?
                                   - A. I do not k n o w that, but I would not disagree.

                            Q. And over the last three or four years the m a x i m u m order of
                               gate has been of the order of just above 20,000, a f e w above
                               that? - A. Yes.

                   H        Q. With that quantity in the Ground there is no risk of the
                               crushing of the type y o u m a y have seen in earlier days, or
MARPHAN. LTO.
S h o r th a n d W rlt»r»

FF 1E L D S I SOX
                                                                   -   36   -
                                may not, I d o n ’t know, is there? - A. That is incorrect, there
                                is a chance, "because the Ground is split into sections, and
                                people wi l l congregate in certain areas, and particularly near
                     A          the entrances, where they come fro m the back of the stand to
                                the standing areas, and therefore it is necessary to moire them
                                away f r o m the entrance to prevent crushing taking p l a c e ,
                                because if we do not do that, as people come up they will p ush
                                peopl forward towards the barriers.

                             Q. So what you are doing is protecting the innocent spectators
                                against bodily injury? - A. Yes.
                     b II
                        i
                             Q. How, so far as enforcing ground regulations is concerned, would
                                you agree with me that many of the ground regulations aie
                                especially designed to assist the Police in their la w enforce­
                                ment? - A. No, I would not agree with that.

                             Q. Did y ou k no w that one of the regulations had been brought in at
                     c          the r equest of the Police? - A. No.

                             Q. You see, we had evidence from Mr. Goslin about that yesterday,
          ('     ;
                                that at his request the Club brought in a regulation to al l o w
                                the Police to prevent entry of people, as opposed to mexely
                                ha ving power un de r the regulations to eject them? - A. 1 was
                                not aware of that.

                             Q. To take one example, fireworks, smoke canisters, bottles, glass
                     D          cans, flags, banners, poles, and other smaller articles,
                                including anything which might be used as a weapon, are not
                                permitted within the Ground - that is really aimed at the Polic-
                                law enforcement? - A. Those items you have mentioned are not
                                offensive weapons as such, and therefore could be lawfully
                                carried.  They only become offensive weapons if they are used.

                             Q. Exactly, and the reason that is to help the Police is so that
                     E          you have power to prevent people bringing them in, right? - A.
                                Yes.

                             Q. If they bring in banners it is likely to be what Mr. Goslin
          I                     described as a flashpoint, if the opposing spectators start
                                waving their banners? - A. Certainly if they started us in g them
                                to hit people with.
                     F
                             Q. When they start one of the difficulties is that ill-disposed
                                spectators try and goad the opposition, d o n ’t they? - A. Yes.

                             Q. And by using things like I have         just read out? - A. Yes, it is
                                possible.

                             Q. A n d if thejr do y ou have then got a volatile flash situation,
                     G          whei-s trouble can burst out in moments? - A. There is that
                                possibility.

                             Q. I do not propose, with m y l o r d s h i p ’s permission to go over
                                the ground I covered with the last witness.

                                     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:        Well, I have told you you must
                                take y o u r own course.
                     H
                                     MR. GRIFFITHS:   I do not want to waste your l o r d s h i p ’s
 HABPHAM, LTD.
1S h o r th a n d W riter*
                                time going through all that again.
FFIELD S i 2D X
                                                             -   37 -
        MR. BENTLEY:     My Lord, I have no re-examination.        Thank
you, Inspector.       The only other m at te r we would wish to put
in b y w a y of evidence, is a report wh ic h we put in as a
p u bl is he d document.  It appears at p. 145 of the D e f e n d a n t s
bundle, the third bimdle.

     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:        Is this the Departmental Committee
on Crowds?

     MR. BENTLEY:    My Lord, yes.        It is commonly referred to
as the Short Report.

      MR. JUSTICE 30REHAM:       It looks far from short.

     MR. BENTLEY:      That is right.  It was chaired by Mr.
Edward Short and has been ever since referred to as the Short
Report.   It is a matter which we h a d not noticed, at p. 147,
one sees the Warrant of Appointment set out, and the Committee
appointed by the Home Secretary to enquire into the arrangemen
made to deal w i t h abnormally large attendances on special
occasions, especially attendances at athletic grounds, and to
consider, in v i e w of the increased fa ci l i t y and rapidity of
transport, what further steps, if any, should be taken to
ensure the safety of the public, and yo u r Lordship will see
that   the Warrant was dated 11th June, 1923, and the Committee,
in fact, reported the following year, 1924.

      M y Lord, there are only a f e w passages we would seek to
refer your Lordship to, and we refer y our Lordship to them
simplj* as evidence as to the p re vailing practice at the time
of the Report.    We would first of all invite your L o r d s h i p ’s
attention tc p. 13 of the Report, that is, p. 157 in the
bundle, at para. 20, heading, ’'Provision of Police for Iraty
inside Grounds":

      "The definition of the responsibilities of the
      Police inside a ground is not so easy, and it will
      be convenient first to consider the arrangements under
      whi ch their services are made available.  At present
      the number of police to be provid ed on any particular
      occasion is settled by consultation between the ground
      authorities and the Chief Officer of Police, and the
      former are charged for the services of the 'police at
      rates fixed by the police authority."

And m y Lord, the paragraph continues, but it may be that the
remaining passages in the p aragraph add little.  Para. 21,
at the foot of the p a g e :

      "As regards the charges made f o r the services of the
      police at football grounds or similar places, we
      understand that they are fixed according to the rank
      of the individuals employed and the time for which
      their services are required, the rates being calculated
      to recoup the police authority for the full cost
      involved, and that as a result of the increase in the
      p a y and allowances received by the police during the
      last few years the charges have been considerably
      advanced.    We have had no evidence that the enhanced
      rates n ow payable have led to any undue economy in the
      number of police employed at sports grounds; indeed
      Mr. Chapman expressed the opinion that no ground
    authority would risk being made liable to a large
    fine by the football association as a result of
    disturbance arising from the provision of an
    inadequate number of police in order to secure some
    small saving in the amount of the charges payable.
    At the same time we would regard it as important
    that ground authorities should be encouraged to
    utilise the services of a reasonable nu mber of men,
    provided they can be made available, since the
    presence of the police at a largely attended football
    ma t c h or similar event is in itself desirable as the
    most effective means of preventing disorder- an d of
    dealing w i t h it promptly should it arise.  Their
    employment is, in fact, not solely for private
    advantage, but serves also     a useful public purpose;
    and we think that this mig/it properly be recognised
    by fixing the rates to be charged on such occasions
    at something less than the full cost of the m e n con­
    cerned and that the matte r should receive the consider­
    ation of the Home Office."

     -      and my lord, finally, at p. 159, para. 24, the
Committee deals with the duties which Police Officers who
attend inside football grounds were, at that time, commonly
performing:

     "As indicated above, the ordinary, and, as we believe,
     universal arrangement at present is that the police
     provided within the ground are paid for b y the ground
     authority according to the scale prescribed b y the
     police authority.      Such a system does not, in our
     judgment, affect the question of what duties the police
     may properly be called on to perform, and as a general
     rule we consider that the police should not be expected
     to p e r fo rm within a ground any duties which they would
     net have to perform in a public place outside.      The
     police should act in every respect as if they were on
     ordinary duty under the control of their officers and,
     while we do not consider that the l a tte r shcu Id be
     placed in the position of having to take orders from
     any officials of the ground, we think that on r e ce iv in g
     a request from any such official they should take the
     nece ss ar y steps to comply with it in so far as it m a y
     not be inconsistent with their duties as police officers
     and the purposes for which they are engaged.      Apart from
     the objections of principle to the performance b y the
     police for private persons of other than police duties,
     if they are employed on any such duties it will be
     obvious that there is a risk of their not b e i n g able
     to pay proper attention to their primary duties of
     preserving order and preventing offences against the
     law.     We should not, however, see any objection to
     their performing duties which m ay not strictly fall
     wi th in the definition of police duty provided that the
     foregoing principle is not infringed."

and, m v lord, the following paragraph, which it m a y no t be
n ecessary to read, touches on the question of the duties of
stewards, and indeed that ma tter is taken up specifically at
para. 27 of the Report, but it is really the paragraphs to
which 1 have invited your lordship*s attention w h i c h we
                                   primarily rely on as evidence of what the practice was at the
                                   date of the Report, and before.

                    A                   MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:      Yes, and the conclusion they come
                                   to is that the Police might very well, with the C o m m i t t e e ’s
                                   approval, assist the stewards in their duties, provided it
                                   does not interfere w i t h the proper discharge of the ordinary
                                   duties of the Police.

                            !
                                        MR. BENTLEY:   M y Lord, yes.         M y Lord, that is the
                                   evidence for the Plaintiffs.
                    B
                                           DR. W I L FR ED EASTWOOD Palled      ( Sworn)

                                                Examined by MR. G R I F F I T H S :

                                Q. Dr. Eastwood,   what is your full na me? - A. Wilfred Eastwood.

                                Q. And y our address? - A. M y business address,           23 Eingfield Road,
                    C              Sheffield, 11.
         (
                                        MR. GRIFFITHS:   M y Lord, we have prepared a short CV, if
                                   it is of any assistance:

                                Q. What is your pr ofession? - A. I am a consulting engineer.

                                Q. And your qualifications are these, are they not, that you
                    D              served on the staff of the Universities of Manchester and
                            i
                            i      Aberdeen, became Professor of Civil and Structural Engineering
                            I
                                   at the University in this city in 1972, retired from academic
                                   practice to found, or to join a practice of consulting
                                   engineers, subsequently starting the firm whose letterhead m y
                                   Lord has? - A. Resigned rather than retired, sir.

                                Q. And I see your qualifications are a F e l lo w of Engineering -
                    E              what is that? - A. This is a body whi ch was set up at the
                                   instigation of the Duke of Edinburgh, who acquired a Royal
                                   Charter for it - he is a Senior Fe llow - and it was meant to
                                   be a balance to the Royal Society, but for engineers rather
         ( ■'                      than scientists.

                                Q. And I think y o u are the only consulting engineer outside
                    F              London in England who has had the honour of being elected?
                                   - A. I think that is so.

                                Q. Have you, as part of your professional experience, h ad the
                                   conduct of safety procedures at a number of football grounds?
                                   - A. That is so.

                                Q. Since when? - A. The boundary of it, between safety procedures
                    G              and being responsible for structures, is a vague one, but I
                                   have been concerned w it h this particular ground since 1962.

                                Q. Can you list other grounds you have been concerned with safety
                                   at? - A. Yes, Sheffield Wednesday, Rotherham United, No tt ingham
                                   Forest, Southampton, Swindon Town, Torquay United and Newcastle
                                   United.

                   H            Q. Have you prepared, and do you have, a number of plans setting
                                   out details of the Ground, (a), as it n o w is, and (b), as it
HARPMAM. LTD
S h o r th a n d W riter*
                                   was at the time in 1982 we are concerre d with? - A. Not
‘ FIELD S I 2DX

                                                                 - 40 -
                              specially prepared, but I do have a nu mber of drawings, yes.

                           Q. Before we open the plans, can yo u just deal with one matter
                   A          whi ch m y learned friend referred to in opening.  He mentioned
                              the disaster at Ibrox Stadium, in the context of crowd crushing
                              Are y o u familiar with the details of that incident? - A. Yes.

                           Q. H o w did y o u become familiar? - A, Well, I became familiar, of
                              course, as everyone else did at that time, through the press,
                              but because of my professional interest I gained m u c h more
                              knowledge of_it, and of course, because of my professional
                              commitments i became involved at some six grounds, in d esigning
                              safety measures, as a direct result of Ibrox, one of which
                              grounds was the Bramall Lane Ground.

                           Q. V»hat was, in the short term, the nature of the Ibrox disaster?
                              - A. The crowd, at the end of the match, ha d to go up to the
                              top of the embankment on which they h ad been standing, and
                              then down steps at the other side, and the steps at the other
                   C          side h a d handrails.  A great m a n y people went over the top,
                              became very crowded together.      The handrails, as far as one can
                              tell, were diverted sideways and fell over.       People fell w ith
                              them a n d the crowd coming over the top surged and the bodies
                              piled up and people were suffocated.

                           Q. Following that, did you carry out certain works at Sheffield
                              United Ground? - A. Yes.
                   D
                           0. when was that? - A . In 1971, as I recall. I think that Ibrox
                              was 1st January, 1971, and it was in the following months of
                              that year.

                           Q. In your opinion, is there, following the changes made to the
                              layout at Sheffield United in 1971, any danger of an incident
                              such as the Ibrox incident? - A. No.  Can 1 just explain - on
                   E          the first drawing ....

                           Q. Wou ld you look at the first drawing,to explain.    What is that
                              a drawing of? - A. This is a plan of the whole ground, w h i c h
                              shows in the middle of the plan, of course, the pl ay in g fi el d
         i,.
                              laid out, and then the four buildings round the ground, and
                              nea r the top right-hand corner, that is the area where it m a y
                              have b ee n possible for an Ibrox type disaster to occur, because
                   F          exactly as at Ibrox, a great nu mber of people standing on the
                              ’E o p 1 area at that end have to go up to the top, and then down
                              a slope at the other side, and these steps, staircases, that
                              y ou see drawn at that top right-hand corner, were, in fact,
                              completely remodelled after Ibrox.     You see, for example,
                              where the four steps at the top edge are, and the middle lot
                              for example, y o u have to go forward, turn right, and then go
                   G          down again, that was completely remodelled after Ibrox and
                              handrailings put in - a very considerable amount of mo ney
                              spent, and in m y view it created safer conditions.

                           Q. Gan we turn next to look at drawing no. 2.   Is that an e n l a r g e ­
                              ment showing the situation in the area y ou have just been
                              referring to? - A. That is so.   It shows what is called the
                             " ‘Eop*, and then those staircases and exits wh ich I have just
                   H          bee n outliningo

HARPHAM. LTD.
S h o r th a n d Writer*                                  -   41 -
FFIELD S1 2DX
                          0. Now, in the large area of the ’K o p ’ there are a lot of straight
                             lines w i t h numbers on them - what are they? - A. Those are the
                             crush barriers, to prevent spectators surging forward, and eaci
                  A          line represents, to scale, the po si t i o n of one of the crush
                             barriers, and that is the arrangement of crush barriers - as
                             y o u w i l l see, the date at the b ot to m ri ght -h an d corner of this
                             drawing was July, 1980.

                          Q. A n d un t i l further improvements were made recently,              is that h o w
                             it was? - A. That is h ow it was.
                  BI      Q. Can y o u .tell us, please, are there v arious dangers, or
                             pote nt ia l dangers, in regard to the crush barriers, h o w are
                             they guarded against, and is there a dange r here arising fr o m
                             the configuration of the ground, taken w i t h the location of
                             the crush barriers? - A. The crush barriers, first of all, mus
                             be st rong enough to resist the m a x i m u m force that can be
                             re a s o n a b l y expected to be applied to th e m b y a dense crowd of
                             spectators, a nd these particular barriers have been tested and
                  C          satisfy the criteria of the Green Book.

                          Qo A n d the Green B ook is       ...? - A. It is a Home Office document
                             p u b li sh ed in 1976.  I     do have a copy here if m y lord w i s he d to
                             look at it.       It gives     guidance on the construction of such
                             things as staircases,          crush barriers, emergency lighting, etc.
                             in football grounds.

                  D |     0. Did that Green Book follow on from an expert Committee that
                    t
                    I        considered these matters? - A. It aid inaeea.

                          Q. Chaired by? - A. lord ‘
                                                   W heatley.

                          Q.   The Judge in Scotland? - A. Yes.

                          Q.    And   w i t h representations of the pr o v i s i o n s ? -A.The p r o ­
                  E            visions the Home Office follows and so on.

                          Q.    Did y o u yourself give evidence to that Committee? -A.  Evidenc
                               is the wro ng word.    Three members of the Committee came f or a
                               day a nd spent a day with me in Sheffield discussing safety in
          I.
                               fo otball grounds.

                  F        Q. What is the test that is done to these barriers, and h o w
                                frequently, and what is your opinion as to their stability?
                          .     - A. The test load which is applied, and I will transpose the
                                m et ri c units, m y lord, to ones which m a y be more clearly
                                understood, the test load whic h is applied to the barrier is
                             •..-.400 pounds force for every foot of its length, applied to the
                          ..    rail of the barrier by packing it forward, 400 pounds for
                                every foot of its length.
                   G                   *►- .


                          Q. And has that test been applied to these? - A. That test h a d
                             bee n applied to these barriers, yes.

                          Q. A n d w it h what result? - A. These barriers,            at the time of the
                             test, h a d withstood that load.

                          Q. Did an y of them fail? - A. Some h a d failed and were brought up
                  H          to standard post Ibrox, although I should say of the six
                             grounds I visited post Ibrox, this was easily the best, but
    HARPHAM. LTD.
                             there were still some barriers wh ic h did not stand up to the
i   Short h»r»d Writer*
=T!ELD S1       2DX          requirements of the Green Guide, and the y were brought up to
                             strength at that time.
                                                                - 42 -
                                      Q. When was this? - A. About 1972.

                                      Q. Have they, in more recent years, been tested? - A. Yes, mos t
                      A                  recently, everyone of these barriers, except that I should say
                                         that some of t h e m have been taken out and a n ew pattern of
                                         barriers installed in 1984 and 1985, but three months ago every
                                         barrier on this ground was tested and withstands the Green
                                         Guide load.

                                      Q. Is there significance in the eccentric positioning of them
                                         that we see on the plan? - A. This was the traditional
                      B j                pattern prior to the Green Guide, with the hit and miss
                              |

                              i          pattern, with the hits in the next ro w coinciding w ith the
                              !          misses, and this was chosen by Clubs because it gave greater
                                         freedom for spectators to be able to migrate to a position
                                         where they had a good view.

                                      Q. What is the p os i t i o n in distances, let us say between 99 ana
                      c                  72? - A. That is of the order of about 6 metres - 6? yards.

                                      Q. About 20 feet? - A. 20 feet, yes.

                                      Q. And h o w m an y people do you get within that distance? - A. The
                                         Green Guide says the crowd should not be at a density greater
                                         than 5.4 people per square metre.      If y o u apply that ruling,
                                         and of course the entry to this Ground is controlled at that
                                         figure, if you app ly that ruling it will be something like
                      D                  about six or seven people for every foot length of the barrier.
                              I
                                      0. I am not quite clear.    If they are standing watching the game
                                         and y o u have got them into the maximum that y ou will permit
                                         within that-area, h o w many people are you saying would be
                                  i      between the barriers in rows, as it were? - A. Por every metre
                              i
                                  i
                                  i      wide, which Is more than a yard wide, there will be something
                                         like a pproaching 50 people right up the bank behind, for each
                      E                  metre of width.    It works out at about eight people per foot.

                                      Q. Now, taking that as a possible loading, if that is the right
                                         word, can you give us your opinion as to whether there is any
                                         danger to members of the public from crowd pressure, sway,
          i,      /                      pushing or an yt hi ng else? - A. There is certainly, in m y view,
                                         no danger wh at e v e r of one of these barriers being push ed over
                      F                  or broken, or even grossly deformed.       I say t h a t because one
                                         first division ground which I tested post Ibrox, every barrier
                                         in the ground failed at not more than 150 pounds per foot lengt
                                         These barriers, and none of them h a d ever been p u sh ed over,
                                         these "barriers wil l withstand a test load of two-and-two-
                                         thirds times that load.

                                      Q. I.e.,   400 pounds? - A. 400 pounds.
                      G
                                      Q. So there is no danger of that.   What about the danger of
                                         people, as it were, swaying forwards and crushing the chap
                                         at the front? - A. The danger is obviously very limited.     The
                                         closer the barriers are together the less and less r i s k that
                                         has, but w ith the concentration that there was here, in the
                                         years from Ibrox up to 1984, I was happy enough that this was
                                         a reasonable spacing of barriers, and that the amount of sway
                      H                  you could get of a crowd would be very limited.
 HARPHAM. LTO.
I S h o r t h»r»d W f h t n
                                      Q. And would the amount y o u could get be one likely to cause
FFIELD S i 20X                           danger in y o u r own view, or not? - A. In m y view, n o c I have

                                                                     - 43 -
                                been a regular at te nd er at this Ground for something ap pr o a c h ­
                                ing 30 years, an d have good experience of h o w crowds "behave, an
                                where danger arises, and have not seen for niany years n o w a n y ­
                     A          thing a p pr oa ch in g a dangerous sway within the crowd. In this
                                ground p r e- Ih ro x was the last time I saw a dangerous sway.

                             Q. And p re-Ibrox was pre the alterations y o u made to the "barriers?
                                - A. Yes.     There were not as many "barriers p r e -I hr ox as there
                                ■-■/ere in 1930, as shown by this drawing.

                             Q. Was the design specifically to obviate the danger yo u have
                     B          mentioned? - A. Yes.

                             Q. And talking generally, h o w does this Ground compare in terms
                                of safexj^, from that point of view, with the other first,
                                second, third, fourth d i ^ i c n grounds you have v i s it ed and seen
                                in the course of your professional duty? - A. At the time of
                                Ibrox?
                     C       Q. In 1980? - A. 1980.     A n umber of the other grounds w i t h w h i c h
                                I deal had b e e n designated by 1980 and h ad therefore to f u l l y
                                comply w ith the Green Guide, which is more stringent and w ou ld
                                require more barrie rs than there are here, but of the grounds
                                that were not designated in 1980, I think this is the safest I
                                know.

                             Q. You mentioned y o u are a regular viewer. Do you have seats or
                     D          what? - A. I have two seats but I occasionally stand out of
                                professional interest.

                             Q. Do you have any qualms about that? - A. Kc.

                             Q. Nov;, assuming y ou had got a sway in the crowd, what precautions
                                can be taken to avoid any injury or problem? - A. The only
                                precaution is to have adequate crush barriers.         A sway in the
                     E          crowd is usu al ly not foreseen in any way.       It inevitably
                                happens when there is a large crowd, and therefore dense packir.
                                because if the spectators are well separated the conditions
                                which cause a sway do not apply.       A sway generally occurs -
                                looking, for example, at this drawing no. 2 - the goal is
          v                     roughly where it says ’peak v i e w i n g ’, the goal mouth, and if
                                an exciting incident takes place in the goal mouth, all the
                     F          spectators, because it is right in front of them, stand on
                                tiptoe to look over the m a n in front.       If there is n o t a m a n
                                in front thej7- do not have to stand on tiptoe, if there is
                                they stand on tiptoe, forward they go, and in no time they
                                ar-e" moving down the steps in an uncontrolled way.       If there is
                                a crush barrier there to stop the people going forward, a n d
                                because there is a dense packing of spectators, people can
                                halt before they fall over.    If there- are not crush ba rr ier s
                     G          it can become an exaggerated sway and peoDle can fall and be
                                dragged.

                             Q c With this spacing of 20 feet, is there a danger of the type
                                 you have men ti on ed ? - A. it is very slight indeed. One
                                 cannot say there is no danger whatever, but it is v e r y slight
                                 indeed, and it has to be kept in mind the 20 feet is an
                                 extreme case and I should point out, my Lord, that the
                     H           boundary fence along the front, which is not the dotted line
                                 and is not numbered, that boundary fence is one of those h i g h
 H ARPH AN . LTD.
: S h o r t h*r>d W riter*

AFIELD S I 20X                                               -   44 -
                                 fences w h i c h y o u will have seen on tel ev isi on to stop spectator
                                 climbing over, b u t it is also designed to take the 400 pounds
                                 per foot pressure, so the fence is a barrier.           Half the barrie:
                                 are w i t h i n about two-and-a-half metres of it, and again the
                                 ones n e a r gangways are very much smaller spacing, so you chose
                                 the w o r s t case, but it was not such as to concern me.

                            Q.   If an i nc ident of craning and running a w a y w i t h yourself does
                                 take place what, if anything, can the stewards or Police do
                                 from that time? - A. In m y experience, nothing.         I have never
                                 seen one of these lead to any kind of injury, so I have not
                    B
                                 seen one of the worst ones.    In m y experience, i-f there is one
                                 it occurs once only in the match, and there is nothing which
                                 can be done about it.    In the excitement of the match, the
                                 crowd is there, it is fairlv dense - it has to oe a Dig game
                                 obviously - and if there was excitement it might happen again,
                                 but there does not appear to be any real d anger in it in the
                                 context of this barrier spacing and this strength of barrier.

                            Q. In all the time you have been looking af te r Sheffield United,
                               have there b e e n any injuries from that cause, to y our knowledge
        i       ]              - A. None w h a t e v e r that I k n o w of.

                            Q. And that is since 1962? - A. 1962, yes.

                            Q. You ment io ned on your first drawing that the outside capacitor
                               of the Ground was 44,230 now? - A. Yes.
                    D
                            Q. And you m e nt io ne d when talking about the surge danger, if I
                               mav call it that,9 %vc /         iense uackins? - A. Yes.

                                 To have danger, or potential danger, can y o u tell us, in
                                 relation to the crowd of-44,000, assuming it to be reasonably
                                 evenly distributed, what is the lower threshold, below which
                                 y i can say there is not a danger anyway? - A. If I might be
                                 h ■-itorical about this, this was shown on drawing 2, the *Kop*
                                     oa has re mai ne d unchanged in plan area, at least since 1947,
                                     .a I first attended a game on Boxing Day, and on that
                                  vKi'ticular day I think 63,000 were in the ground, and the
                                            pe rm it te d on that ‘Eop* area was 25,000 in those days -
                                       ;%i:Cbrox I negotiated with the Police a reduced number of
                                  ■ ” --*■^ ....

                            Q.         ;vR. J U S T I C E B O R E H A M : Dr. Eastwood, I think we are
                                 ge:-M-.g a lo n g w a y from the question. - A. No, sir, I am
                                 trying to show we have n ow come down to, and I kn o w that
                                 numl;e :> of people used to go on that area, n o w you w ill see
                                 the capacity permitted is 18,800, sir.

                            Q.        MR. GRIFFITHS:   Dr. Eastwood, can. y o u help us? You say
                                 the number, the total capacity permitted, is 18,000? - A.
                                 Threequarters of what it used to be.

                            Q. Yes.  Out of that 18,000, what capacity wo ul d you except to
                               need before people were at all densely pa cked enough for there
                               to be any ris k? - A. Getting close to that.      P ro ba bl y in the
                               region of 15,000 upwards, but still not n e a r l y so mu c h risk
                               as in the days whe n 25,000, with fewer barriers ....
                    H
                            Q.        MR. J U S TI CE BOREHAM: That really ... I think you will
HARPHAM. LTD.
S h o r th a n d W riter*
                                 help Mr. Griffiths more if you answer his questions.    He is
FFIELO S1 2D X

                                                               -   45 -
     bei ng v e r y frustrated at the moment. He wants to k no w what
     sort of tightness of packing will begin to produce this danger.

Q.        MR. G R I F F I T H S : And I think you r a ns wer was about 15,000.
     44,000 is the ground capacity.         In yes te ry ea r were crowds of
     this sort of size not unusual? - A. It was quite commonplace
     20 years ago.

0. A n d w h e n is the last time that there has b e e n a crowd anything
   approa ch in g that? - A. I think the 80/81 season, when both
   United and Wednesday were in the Third Division, and there was
   a crowd of, I think, 44,000.

Q. An d since then, for the 82/85 season what crowds have there
   been? - A. 20,000 would have been considered a large one.       The
   average was p ro ba bl y - and the Club Secretary can give more
   precise figures - but I think probably 15,000 to 17,000.

Q. If we l oo k at p. 203, which helpfully sets out the figures,
   as I scan it it appears that the largest is 25,000 against
   Barn sl ey ? - A. 23,000 against Stoke.

Q. And the m a j o r i t y of the others under 16,000. With that sort of
   attendance at the Ground, any risk, in y o u r view, of crowd
   trouble fr o m swaying or the like? - A. Miniscule.

Q. Then in drawing no. 3, which I am not going to ask you
   questions about, does it show alterations made to this area in
   the 84/35 period? - A* It does.

0. Drawing 4, is that an enlargement of the part or extension of
   no. 3? - A. An extension, sir.  'Two extensions - each fits
   together to give the full picture.

Q. And then we can move on to drawing 5.  Is that the equivalent
   of drawing 2, i.e., showing the location of the crush barriers
   in the Bramall lane end of the Ground in season 1982?- A. Yes.

Q. Can you, in an omnibus form give us your v i e w as to the
   potential, if any, for crowd danger from swaying in that
   area, b e a ri ng in mind the px*esence and location of barriers
   and so on? - A. It was very small indeed.       It is common
   experience that where the height of the b a n k is smaller the
   dangers of swaying are very much reduced.       It is the very h i g h
   ban k w i t h large numbers on where there is the mai n danger.      It
   will be seen this is quite a n a r r o w strip, only about half the
   width of the one at the other end.       The danger is therefore
   reduced and in addition it h a d quite a good arrangement of
   barriers.

Q. Have y ou ever seen any swaying in that area yourself? - A.
   None ever, no.

Q.   Then no. 6 is the up-to-date of that area,        or rather,   in
 v   July, 1984, is it not? - A. Yes.

"q ... And then no. 7, again is that a plan made in 1980, showing the
       location of the crush barriers and relates to the season we
       are concerned with, 82/83? - A. It is.

                                  -   46 -
                                 Q. Again, what is your comment about that? - A. Again, it is a
                                    na rr ow strip.  M y Lord, it is only the area where there are
                                    lines with numbers against them w h i c h is standing a c c o mm o­
                 A                  dation.    Behind that is all seating.     The standing a c c o m m o ­
                                    dation is quite n a r r o w and there is quite a good sprinkling of
                                    safety barriers and, of course, the fence in front,again
                                    designed as a barrier.

                                 Q. And then no. 8 is the up-to-date of that plan’ in 1985? - A.
                        I
                        \           That is so, w i t h n o w just one line of barriers.
                        i

                  B              Q. Yes, in place of the three there w er e? - A. Yes."

                                 Q. I would like next to ask y o u about the question of gangways
                                    in these various areas we have be e n talking about? - A. Yes.

                                 0. Can y o u h elp us w it h how, at the m at er i a l time, they were
                                    located, by w h i c h I do not mean where on the Ground, but
                                    their depth and so on? - A. My Lord, the wa y in whi ch we
                  C                 try to prevent people standing withi n gangways is to set the
                                    level of the gangway well b e l o w that of the space either a l o n g ­
                                    side it or in front of it.

                                 Q. With the effect ...? - A. That certainly for the lateral
                                    gangway, and b y a lateral one I m e a n one parallel to the edge
                                    of the pitch, in other words at the same level all the w a y
                                    along, setting that about eight inches below the closed side,
                  D                 pitch side, means that only an extremely tall man would be
                                    able to see from there, ana this has the effect of pr ev enting
                                    people blocking that gangway, and in m y experience is com­
                                    pletely effective.

                                 Q. What about the gangways pointing towards the pitch? - A.
                                    Gangways which we call radial gangways, again they are set
                                    approximately the same distance be lo w the steps either side.
                   E                This does not make it quite so difficult to see the pitch,
                                    particularly if the pa rt icular gangway is, say, almost in
                                    line with the goal, because you can then see a fair amount of
                                    the action part of the pitch.

        ^ ';
           V                     Q*: Are these gangways also at a lower level than the stand? - A.
                                     Yes.
                   F                 •   MR. JUSTICE BOREEAM:    But he says it is not quite so
                                    effective for obvious reasons? - A. Yes, sir.    The ones ne a r
                                    to edges, of course,   it is quite effective, but near the
                                    centre of the pitch ....

                                 Q. .And in terms of safety, is it' the lateral, the first sort y o u
                                    describe, or the others that are more important, or is there
                   G                no distinction? - A. I do not think safety really comes into
                                     it.  Obviously it is a nuisance in that it stops spectators
                                    getting in.   In case of emergency it does not matter because
                                     the whole object of   the gangways is that they be full of
                                    people getting out,    but in terms of people getting in it is
                                    obviously a nuisance, and fortunately, in m y experience, w i t h
                                    this k ind of depression that we have, it is a very rare event
                                     to have them obstructed, and it only begins to arise w h e n the
                   H                 Ground is getting full, so that it is difficult to get onto
                                     the steps, so the last fe w spectators in are the ones more
HARPHAM. LTD.
S h o r th a n d W riter*
                                     likely to settle for standing in a gangway.
FFIELD S I 2DX



                            'i                                    - 47 -
                               Q.            MR. G R I F F I T H S : And, of course, it is not relevant to th
                                    seating areas? - A. Not at all to the seated areas, where the
                                    n u m b e r of people is controlled by each ticket having a
                                    nu mb er ed seat.

                               Q. Are y o u fa mi li ar wi t h the arrangements as to stewarding,       in
                                  general terms? - A. Only in general terms.

                               Q. Y o u have at tended yourself in seats? - A. A n d been stewarded,
                                  yes.
                     B
                               Q. And y o u have a tt ended the standing areas? - A. Yes.

                               Q. Was that to take Americans there? - A. To see h o w different
                                  it was f ro m A m e r i c a n football, where no body stands except to
                                  cheer.   E v er yb od y has a seat.

                               Q. "What can you h e l p m y lord about in relation to stewarding?
                                  - A. The stewarding is efficient and I should say that these
                                  are n ot g enerally elderly, incapacitated gentlemen.    The
                                  ma jo ri ty of the ones who are stewarding, as distinct from
                                  being on the turns tile, seem to be reasonably young, agile,
                                  ph ys ically fit people.

                               Q. So far as you r job has be e n concerned, the improvement of
                                  ground safety and amenities over the last period of years, can
                                  you help my Lord with what amounts have been spent by the Club
                      D           on the improvement of safety? - A. Depending on the definition
                                  of safety, n ot less than £ 4 0 0 ,0 0 0 , and approaching half-a-
                                  mii-iion sisce   79.

                                    .in you r arrangements and advice about safety, have there been
                                    anv particular considerations given to that of children? - A.
                                    Yes.                 set aside a family area at the northern end of
                      E             the 'i-Q- *
                                             <   T. n p t is the bie stand, and the Club also has
                                                 that .


                                    family tickets for people -to occupy seats at reduced prices
                                    for families.

                               Q.    The suggestion was made children might be in a crush and so on
                                    What is the pos it io n with regard          to that? - A. The children di
                                    not like us i n g the c h i l d r e n ’s area on their own, and, in fact,
                                    the great m aj o r i t y go w i t h father.

                                                 Cross-Sxamlned b y MR. B E N T 1 E Y :

                               Q. Only a f e w questions, Dr. Eastwood.  First of all, about the
                                  stewards - let us be clear about these stewards, they are on
                                  duty in the stands, that is right, i s n ’t it? - A. Yes.

                               Q.   And the function they perform on     the stands is to tell any
                                    spectator who does not k n o w where his seat is, to direct h i m
                                    to his seat? - A. One of the duties.

                               Q.    What else do they    do? - A. I think I have seen stewards speak
                                    to people who are behaving in an unruly way.

                               Q.    Anyth ing mo r e ? - A. I cannot think of anything more.

                      H        Q.   No.   let us go to    the  -Ground, the terraces. Now, what do y ou
                                    say the stewards do, if anything.on the terraces? - A. There
. HARPHAN, LTD.
i! S h o r th a n d W riter*

EFFIELD S t 30 X                                                    - 48 -
                              are some stewards, generally,       on the terraces, and there are
                              no Police on the terraces.

                         Q. Would y o u deal w i t h m y question?

                         Q.        MR. J U S T I C E BOREHAM:  Her. Eastwood, could I say this?
                              I do not want y o u to spoil your      evidence.  Y o u are here as an
                              expert, not to argue a case.         Do you understand? It would
                              help m u c h more if y o u would answer the question.     Try again.
                 B       Q.        MR. BENTLEY:        What do the stewards do on the terracing?
                              - A. One ca te go ry of steward is in charge of the gates, from
                              one compartment of the ~fcerracing to another, or from the
                              seating areas into the standing area in front, and they have
                              duties to p e r f o r m in the event of an emergency, for opening
                              the gates and so on.        I do not kno w of any other specific ones,

                         Q. The t K o p 1 - does one ever see-.a steward on the     ’Spion K o p ’?
                            - A. I have seen them at the back.

                         Q. Doing w h a t ? - A. Generally being stewards, and w ith the role
                            of as king people to move on.

                         Q. An ything m o r e ? - A. I have not seen them doing anything more.

                         Q. Are these trained men? - A. Yes, but the training is obviously
                 D          such as can be done by getting them along for a few half days.

                         0. Trained to do wh a t ? - A. To steward.
                         A    What does that me an ? - A, It depends on the duties. If the
                              man is guardin g a gate he is well trained as to what he does,
                              and when, w i t h regard to that gate.

                          0. Could y o u h el p me n o w by looking at the bundle of documents we
                              have got.     I want to have your help about a couple of
                              instructions that seem to iappear in the Operational Order.          If
                              you could find p. 87.           This Operation Order was a specimen
                              Operation Order wh ic h the Police issued for a particular ma tc h
                              In this case it is the Order that was issued for a match
                              against P o r t s m o u t h and we see the instructions which the Order
                              says shall be gi ve n to the Officers in the Bramall Lane
                              enclosure, this small standing area beneath the Bramall Lane
                              Stand - do y o u see - if we go through this, at the end of the
                              match this is w ha t Officers are being told to do:         "Encourage
                              an orderly exit and prevent pushing" - is that a sensible
                         .... instruction to give to Police Officers? - A. Yery.

                         0. Because I suppose if there is pushing at the end of the mat ch
                            somebody m a y end up getting pushed to the ground? - A. Yes,

                         Q. And if that hap pe ns it can be very dangerous? - A. Yes.

                         Q. Again, if we go to p. 88, we are moving n o w to the ’Spion K o p ’
                            the largest are a of terracing in the whole ground, where I
                            think y o u can confirm this is where most of the standing
                            supporters g o ? - A. The home supporters, and that is usually
                 H          most.
, HARPHAM. LTD
fti Shorthand W riters
                         Q. Oh, yes, of all the people who stand within the confines of
EFFIELD SI 2 0 X            of the 3ram al l Lane Ground, y ou will have the vast majority

                                                           -   49 -
     found on the ’Spion K o p ’? - A. About a half.      There are two
     other sites, y o u see.

Q.    I k n o w the Ground as wel l as yo u do.  Now, p. 88, the
     in st ru ct io n to the Officers on duty on the fK o p f.  Y o u can see
     para. 2, ”to k e e p the gangways cl ear ” . Is that a    sensible in
     in st ru ct io n to give to the Officers on duty in the fK o p ’?
     - A. Yes.

Q. Because if y o u do not there may be pushing and shoving of
   people w a n t i n g to get lower down for a better view, wanting
   to get out quickly, beginning to push and shove - that is a
   p r o b l e m if the gangways are not kept clear? - A. It would be.

Q. A n d if there is not someone to stop that y o u might have someone
   going to the ground in the push? - A. Yes.

Q. A n d tur ni ng to p. 90, to the John Street Terrace - again quite
   a small a r e a of standing accommodation in front of a stand.
   The Officers are being told, Serials 4 and 5, the Officers in
   those serials        will take up position on the John Street
   Terrace b e t w e e n Bramall Lane and the P l a y e r s ’ Tunnel? - A.
   Yes.

Q. MKeep the entrances to the Terrace clear and assist in packing
  the c r o w d ” - is that a sensible instruction to give Officers?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Because if the crowd is badly packed there may be danger? - A.
   Yes.

Q. A nd again, k e e pi ng the entrances to the Terrace clear - if the
   entrance is b locked people who are anxious to get in,
   pa rt ic u l a r l y as kick-off time approaches, may start pushing
   and shov in g to make sure they are on the terraces when the
   whistle blo ws and the game starts? - A. Yes.

Q. A n d again,   if that happened, someone m ay go down,and then the
   Inspector,     just a little lower down.

          MR. J U S TI CE BOREHAM:   H o w many people in each Serial,
     I forget n o w ?

          MR. BENTLEY:      Ten, m y Lord.

          MR. JUS TI CE BOREHAM:      So that means 2 0 people here?

          MR. BENTLEY:      M y Lord, yes:

Q. A n d the Inspector will ensure that Gate E is opened at the
   end of the match, to allow spectators to leave - again,
   obviously a ve r y sensible and essential instruction? - A.
   Not e ssential in the case of Gate E.         It could just as well
   be h a n d l e d b y one of the stewards, as the gate near to it,
   whi ch divides two pens.        It is not a v e r y critical job. All
   the m a i n doors within the Ground, Mr. Bentley, are controlled
   b y stewards, the b ig doors which let people out, and that
   could be E - E could just as well be operated by a steward.
   It is n o t onto the pitch.
Q.    It leads out into John Street, but towards the end of the
     m a t c h w hen h a v i n g watched the game, spectators n o w want to
     get away, it is v e r y important that the gateways through w h i c h
     they are to lea ve should be open for them i n good time? - A.
     Ve r y important, just as it is for the m a i n gates, wh ic h are
     operated b y stewards.

Q.   So again, if the Police took an interest i n seeing that was
     done that wo ul d be v er y sensible? - A. Yes,

Q. A n d given your gr eat experience of this Ground,-and the
   football matches played there, would y o u feel h ap py i n a t t e n d ­
   ing a football m a t c h at Bramall lane Ground if the Police were
   n o t in at t e n d a n c e ? - A. I think it hi ghly desirable that the
   Police are in attendance.

Q. Can y o u think of anyone else who could do the job w h i c h the
   Police do at B r a m a l l Lane, as well as the Police do it? - A.
   Some of those duties could be done as well, but the d u t y of
   l a w and order it is essential be b y the Police.

          MR. GRIFFITHS:      M a y the witness be released?

          MR. J U S TI CE BOREHAM: Thank you, Dr. Eastwood.       I ha v e
     said any witness m a y be released.

                                       Called (Sworn)

                  Ex am in ed by MR. GRIFFITHS:

0. What is your full, name? - A.

Q. A n d your address and occupation? - A.


Q. A n d are y ou the Chairman of Sheffield United Football Club?
   - A. I am.

Q. Have you, in y o u r time,   served on the Lincolnshire County
   Council? - A. Yes.

Q. A nd as a m e m b e r of the Police Committee of it? - A. Yes.

Q. What is your attitude towards the Police and policing? - A.
   - t ^.o not k n o w h o w we could manage without them. They do a
 / ■ v e r y good job a n d a v e r y difficult job.

,Q. I think y ou were brought in as the Finance Director of
  • Lincoln City Foo tb a l l Club at a time when it was going through
    a financially difficult period? - A. That is correct.

Q. Ar isi ng out of that, were y ou subsequently invited to become
   a Finance D i r e c t o r at Sheffield United? - A. Yes.

Q. When was that? - A.      1980.

Q. And did y ou s u b se qu en tl y become Chairman? - A. Yes, in the 80/
   81 season - June, *1981, w h e n it got relegated to the Fourth
   Division, and the then Chairman resigned.          The Tice Chairman
   was too sick to take the job and it was handed to me.
Q.    Did you     fe e l it your duty      to take it    on? - A. I felt an
      obligation, h a v i n g joined the Board, to take it on at that
      time, yes,

Q. Can y o u just, v e r y shortly, f o r m y i ord *s information, describe
   the f i n a n c i a l situation of the Club f r o m 1980 to date? - A . Yes
   W e w er e in a serious situation, l o s i n g £ 2 ,00 0 a day, seven days
   a week, w h i c h we n t on for three years.

Q.    That is h o w m u c h a year? - A. £700,000, wh i c h we were able to
     correct at the end of the third y e a r to a break-even point,
     b u t the situation today still is serious, insofar as we still
     have substantial borrowings, albeit the Directors have injected
     v a s t sums of m o n e y to enable the Club to continue.

Q. Was i t necessary, in pulling round that financial position, to
   i n t r o d u c e 'financial stringency in all areas of the* life of the
   Club? - A. Oh, yes, every a s pe ct of the costs related to runnin
   the Club were taken into account, f ro m the playing staff right
   thr ou gh to the administrative staff, and the general mainten­
   ance of the Ground, but the latte r h a d a n immense effect on
   the o n g o i n g expenditure because we still h a d to put, as a
   p r i n c i p a l criteria, the ground safety aspect.

Q. Just to give an example that m a y illustrate this - I d o n ’t
   suppose this is in dispute - did y o u cut out hot baths for the
   players a nd change them to showers as a cost saving? - 1. Yes,
   that is right, down to that level.    We even removed light
   bulbs out of corridors - instead of h a v i n g 20 lights, 15 were
   quite sufficient. Yes, we went right through the whole
  system.

Q. Is one of the considerable sums the Club quite rightly has to
   pa y each ye a r rates? - A. Yes.

Q. M a y I put' some figures to y ou ?      M y learned friend can see the
   documents if he wishes to do so.            M y learned friend makes a
   fai r point, South Yorkshire County Council, he says, are a
   p r e c e p t i n g Authority, and thus do no t g et the whole figures.
   What I a m after is the amount the Club pav.            Does that show
   figures, 80/81, £23,283; 81/82, £28,657; 82/33, £54,527;
   83/84, £37,299; 84/85, £46,624; 85/86, £46,110? - A. It is
   about 100 p e r cent, from the 1980 to 1986, increase.

Q. Also, have y o u h a d     prepared a list of     the Police charges      in
   the p e r i o d 1957 to 1985? - A. Yes.

               MR. GRIFFITHS:     And m y lord, m a y we at a convenient
      mo m e n t p u t this before your Lordship as a statistic that will
     - cs available to be used.

           MRo JUSTICE BOREHAM:      For w hat purpose?

             MR. GRIFFITHS:   My Lord, their Lordships* House said
      th a t this is one of the equations your Lordship is entitled
      to l o o k at.

           MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:      Yes.

Q.         MR, GRIFFITHS;     And Mr, Brealey,    does that show figures
   "between the season 79/80 of £22,990; 80/81, £32,260; 81/32,
   £59,369; 82/83, £63,500; 83/84, £47,467; 84/85, £38,672? -
   A. Yes.

Q. A g a i n s t the "background of the C l u b ’s financial position, did
   the size of the Police charges affect y o u in any w ay? - A. I
   th i n k the 50 pe r cent increase in one area sparked off the
   q u es ti on as to h o w it was possible that a n increase not
   "budgeted for could arise so quickly, and it was then realised
   that we h a d no say whatsoever in this particular expenditure,

Q, A n d w o u l d y o u l ook at p, 79, please, of bundle 3? As a result
   of y o u r concern, did y ou write the lette r to be seen there, to
   the t he n Home Secretary? - A, Yes,

Q, Para.    2:

           "The charges for these services over the last
           three seasons have increased b ey on d all reason­
           able proportions and comparative figures with other
           areas as set out b e l o w n o w r epresent the highest
           w i t h i n football."

   - and did you then show two comparisons and some more over­
   leaf on p. 80, and make the statement:

        "These charges have increased at a level at which
         n o w Yorkshire clubs are finding it difficult to
         me e t and it could result in a state whereby we are
         goi ng to have to refuse to pay."

   Yo u r ai se d the possibility of havi ng home .matches with a
   smaller number of Police employed, and y ou make the statement:

           "It appears that in Sheffield football is the only
           sporting activity w he n a charge is imposed by the
           South Yorkshire police authorities.    Demonstrations,
           riots, traffic control and all other major sporting
           events are policed at no charge to those organisations        ...

   Do yo u accept you were wro ng about no other major sporting
   events?_ - A. Yes, I was w ro ng in that latter part.

Q. Did y o u enquire from other sporting organisations, as to charge
   before y o u wrote it? - A. The Secretary was asked at the time
   w h e t h e r he could find other sporting activities that were
   charged and we could not produce any at' the time, hence that
   comment, but since then they have proved otherwise.

Q. Did you-receive a reply at p. 81, f rom a
   ac knowledging your letter on behalf of the             oii-ic o<!ry? — A.
   Yes.

Q. A n d the second paragraph states:

           "The charges derive from Section 15 of the Police Act
           1964, which enables a chief officer of police to pro­
           vide on request special police services.'..".,

 . and goes on to define them, and in the three lines from the
   end:
                                 -   53 -
      "Accordingly, football clubs are required to meet the
      fu l l e c o n o m i c costs of police officers provided, at
     .t h e i r request, f o r duty inside the ground."

Pr i o r to r e c e i v i n g that letter did y o u hav e any knowledge at
all as to the le g a l position with regard to the Police
charging? - A. None whatsoever.

Then in the n e x t paragraph they tell y o u that the number of
Officers is f o r the Chief Officer to decide, and that the
Chief C o n s t a b l e has assured the Home Secretary that this
principle is app li ed to all sporting events, on the same
scale of charges, and they end b y saying:

      "The S a f e t y of Sports Grounds Ac t 1975 has no bearing
      on the char ge s for the provision of police inside the
      g r o u n d a t Bramall lane".

and l a s t l y t h e y assure y o u that football is not be in g singled
out f o r dis cr im in at io n? - A. That is correct.

A f t e r y o u h a d received that letter did y o u reach       any decision
as to p o l i c i n g ? - A. Well, yes.    This m o r nin g we   heard Hr.
Goslin sa y we spoke many times to the Police.               I   think
un fo r t u n a t e l y we did not minute or write letters       to one
another as we ought to have done.

Did y o u r e a c h a n y decision - this was 23rd June, 1982? - A. Th
decision we r e a ch ed was to test reaction to saying that we
would n o t invite the Police.

And h o w did y o u determine to test that? - A. Ve ~ade it clear
that we w o u l d n o t make the request to ccme into the ground.

That was y o u r decision? - A. That was our decision.

Would y o u be k i n d enough to look at p. 103.      This was a letter
to Mr. Ka cFarlane, then the Minister for Sport, dated 4th May,
1983, in w h i c h y o u referred to a m eeting y o u h a d had with hi m
and in the l a s t paragraph on that page, havi ng referred to
Mr. W h i t e l a w * s letter which we have just looked at, y o u make
the statement:

      "I h ave b e e n particularly careful since the date of
      that l e t t e r to make sure we have m ad e requests by
      l e t t e r f o r specific games and are prepared to pay
      for those games only."

- A. That is right.

Ditt y o u do t h a t ? - A. Well, I believe that we did that.           The
l etter was certa in ly drafted by me.

Just describe to m y Lord the circumstances in which the
letter, or letters, came to be written? - A. Well, it arose
sir, that we drafted a letter carefully, specifying the Act,
and the o b l i g a t i o n which we felt we were under, and that the
Police w e r e under, and therefore in accordance with that A ct
we r e q u e s t e d Poli ce attendance, that was the phrase used, not
Special Services, "because I don*t think we had picked that
point Tip at that stage - "Police attendance for the following
game" - a n d then we left a b l a n k space f o r the game and date,
and th a t draft was completed a n d the S e cr et ar y was due to send
those l e t te rs to the Chief Constable a t the appropriate time.

     MR. J U S TI CE BOREHAM:    In res pe ct of w h i c h matches? - A.
There w e r e only three.

■Which w er e they? - A. We can only r e c ol le ct them as being the
three l o c a l *d e r b y ’ matches.

     MR. G R I F F I T H S : Which we r e ? - A. Lincoln, I think,
Chesterfield, Barnsley, or Huddersfield, was it?

        MR. J U S T IC E BOREHAM: This   was the letter for the
S e cr et ar y to complete? - A. That    is right, sir.

      MR; GRIFFITHS:     Did  y o u a ct ua ll y see the letters only, as
it were, i n draft, or had they b ee n typed out awaiting the
inse rt io n of the name of the appropriate Club? - A. I left the
draft w i t h the Secretary and I ne v e r s a w the actual letters.

Have y o u caused a search to be made of Sheffield United* s
doc uments? - A. Yes, we have searched the files at the Club,
and m y files, but I cannot find a single trace, and I had hoped
the Police mi gh t have had them, but t he y too do not have them,
and therefore I think it is fair to assume they were ...I
cannot see h ow they were sent if they do not have them and we
do not have them.

At that time who was the Secretary? - A.         The Secretary was a
Mr. Chester.

Did he depart from Sheffield United? - A. Yes, he left.              He
handed h i s notice in in the autumn of 1983.

And did he         take a competing job as Secretary of Sheffield
W e d n es da y? - A. That is correct.

Did he take w i t h him any documents? - A. I am not sure, but I
would h o p e not.

I wou ld like y o u to look at p. 111, please.        Was that a letter
wri tt en i n October, by you, to Mr. Wright, the Chief Constable,
r e f er ri ng to a telephone conversation?      What had been the
subject of the telephone conversation? - A. I think it was just
one of the m a n y general telephone conversations that we had
wi t h the Police Department.       It was more in line of making
sure that our relationships were n ot deteriorating over the
issue, w h i c h we were both b e g in ni ng to feel was an issue beyond
either of our controls as far as finance was concerned, but it
was discussing, I think, the point about inviting and not
inviting.

What did y o u say to the Chief Constable about inviting or not
inviting? - A. Well, I think that it is ve r y difficult to
recollect word f o r word on these matters, but we had been
speaking to Mr. Goslin, and other members, and it was becoming
increasingly clear to us that they were saying that .if we were
to be, f o r w a n t of a b etter phrase, bloo dy minded is the bes t
w a y of describing it, we could finish up falling out over this,
b y saying, "You cannot play t h e ‘game unless it is b ehind
closed doors", a n d I think .this conversation was a conversation
to .make sure tha t we were n ot getting at loggerheads w i t h one
another.

Was the po si ti on this, Kr. Brealey, that the Police were
caught in the end, because they were not their own p a y m a s te rs ?
- A . Yes, l t h i n k that that is true.          I dc k n o w .that a number
of Clubs who deal w i t h the Chief Constable always seem to
manage to come to a fair and reasonable agreement.                   I th in k
that because it w a s the Authority and not the Chief Constable,
we were m ost p r o b a b l y h a v i n g to fight two fronts.

A n d were y o u anxi ou s n ot to have problems with the Police at
all? - A. Absolutely.

W h y was that? - A. 3ecause we respect w h a t they do and they
co-operate v e r y well.    We have had very good relations w i t h
them.    It is n o t a n easy job being a Policeman, especially
where people are concerned who, the majority, seem to fi n d it
difficult to re late to them, and I think that it is our du t y
to h el p them in every w a y we can.

In this ccnvsr sation with            | what was the attitude
you were taking in regard to paying? - A. We were taking a
firm stance, that we would not pay.   3y refusing to pay it was
going to force the situation into the open, and force the
various aspects of what was becoming more a law and order and
a legal interpretation issue, in“ o the open, which was "beyond
our ability to comprehend I think.

Did yo u have any conversation with h im in relation to the
position with r eg ar d to the specific requests over the past
period? - A. Well, I was quite convinced, even at that stage,
Indeed, right up un ti l the legal people came on the s cene for
this case, that we h ad written these letters, so I wa s quite
oblivious to the fact they had not got any.     It was f o ll ow in g
a letter from h i m later on that that was brought out.

 What attitude about previous requests, or what statement, or
 had anything d ifferent happened, did y ou say to him in that
  conversation w h i c h yo u followed up with y o u r letter? - A. I
 ...said we were only going to pay for those matches w h i c h we
'.had requested attendance for,that was confirmed in m y letter.

¥as there anyth ing said or understood between you, f o l lo win g
 the statement y o u w e r e not going to pay for the past and
■'except specifically requested as to the future from there on?
- A.*I d o n ’t t h i n k " s o . * It is two years or more ago now, but
I think it was b ec oming clear to both Parties we h a d to get a
third party involved.              He ha d a job to do and I must certainly
not prevent h i m f r o m doing it, but must co-operate w it h h i m to
do it, and it w a s important we worked closely together to
ensure both P a r t i e s achieved that.

What was to be the position following the discussion b e t w e e n
y o u and him, as to the future wit h regard to specific re quests
or other allied matters? - A. We said we would not invite
other than for specifics. .We said we would not pay, and in a
sense .threw the hall in his court, which might sound cruel, bu*1
he had to take that responsibility then to make a decision to
put Police into the Ground. '
  if ' •                     -        r



     KR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Did it come to this? You were
saying no payment unless a request, and in future we are not
going to make any requests? - A. That is right, sir.
     MR. GRIFFITHS:And did you then    write a letter which my
Lord has a copy of, arising out of the conversation? - A. Yes,
that is right.
An d f oll o w i n g that, on the 26th, as it appears from the corres­
pondence, were y o u -osited "by Mr. Goslin? - A. I assume it was
the 26th, yes.

           MR.   JUST IC E BOREHAM:       Anyhow, b efore the 27th? - A. Yes.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     If we look at p. 115, the second para­
graph 3iows you had a meeting with Mr. Goslin. What was the
context of that meeting, Mr. Brealey? - A. We had a discussion
along the same lines, really.
Did y o u take the same position you h ad taken w ith the Chief
Constable? - A. Yes, that is right.

And did Mr. Goslin, as he told us, tell you about Section 10
and that he mig ht have tc apply to have the game stopped? - A.
I think he said we would have to have some -form of a test case
here.   I. think that cropped up, and w h e t he r or not the Bolton
game comes in after this I am not sure, but I think we were
both re ach in g the stage where we had to brin g something to a
head, and we still emphasised we m ust remain on the same side
so to speak, b u t he then obviously we n t b ack and wrote this
letter, quoting the various Acts, etc., and demanded he receiv-
a specific request or else.

 He has told m y Lord that wh e n he w ent to see you, he explained
 about Sect io n 10 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, and, as
.he p ut it, the implications to the Club if Police Officers
 were n o t to attend, the legal department could seek the
 inj unction if the safety means were inadequate - did he tell
 y o u t h a t ? - A. Yes.

Would it be acceptable to the Club to play behind closed doors
--.A. No.

      KR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:     There wo ul d not be a lot of point
 in that if y o u needed the money, would there? - A. No, sir.

       ME. GRIFFITHS:         And then at p. 120, did you then go on
 to the question of videos? - A. Yes.         It was that that may
 overcome this problem, as the Police h a d quite a large staff
 outside the Ground, if we put the videos inside the Ground
 and m on i t o r e d the crowd from inside, calling on them from
 outside, but that was turned down, althou gh since then it
has become pretty well conpulsory in every football ground in
the country.
          JUSTICE BOREHAMs 4- Not "calling on the Police from
■outside. That'is the difference ;betweent:ycra, isn't it? This
 seems to me to he a ploy -’you must not think that is an
 offensive word - for you to make use of the people outside
 without have a large force of Policemen brought inside the
 ground, except in the case of trouble?- A. Yes, sir.
     KR. GRIFFITHS:   Then in December arose the. affair of
Bolton Wanderers. Did that take the course we see in the
telexes with, at the end of the day, the agreement to be seen
in telex 137 and 138, that the matter should really be tried
by the Court? - A. Yes. This was the test case, so to speak,
I was referring to, that we had said sooner or later must be
put to the test, we could not go on like this, and this was
the ultimate test.
     MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   If I may say so, you have adopted
a very civilised attitude, both of you, haven*t you - very
few people have achieved it, but you and the Police have agreed
to differ? - A. Yes, sir.
Most people, when they agree to differ, do not do anything of
the sort, they flounce off in a sulk and never speak to each
other again. You have not done that? - A. No, sir.
I think it is highly commendable, if you will allow me to say
sc, whichever side is right. It is one of the civilised things
people can dc, genuinely agree to differ - there is the homily
for today I

     MR. GRIFFITHS:       My lord, I think those are the matters I
wish to ask.
      MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   Well, we can all see the plan, we
 can see each side making its own shifts - I am not being
 offensive - each trying this and the other that, and in the end
 it is stalemate and I have to decide - that is it, isn’t it?
      KR. GRIFFITHS:      It is.
      KR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:   And all done completely honourably,
■both sides keeping their presence of mind. Now, you are
 going to ask questions?
      MR. BENTLEY:     My Lord, if I may.
      MR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:         Will you do it tomorrow morning?
      MR. BENTLEY:     As your Lordship pleases.
      KR. JUSTICE BOREHAM:         Will it be convenient?
      MR. BENTLEY:     My Lord, yes.

               (Overnight A d j o u r n m e n t )
