D.L. S E L L E R S a CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                                                                                   1989.   C. 5925
         IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                                                                   1989.   R. 7039
         (QUEEN *S BENCH DIVISION)


                                                                          Courts of Justice,
                                                                          Crown Square,
                                                                          Manchester, 3 .

                                                                          Wednesday,,   20th December   1989

B
                                                               Before

                                                          MR. JUSTICE STEYN


         Between:

'€       JOAN CHAPMAN (Widow and Administratrix of the
         estate of Raymond Thomas Chapman, deceased) and
         LINDA MARY RIMMER (Widow and Administratrix of
                                                                                           Plaintiffs

                                        and

D        THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                     1st Defendant

         SHEFFIELD WEDN ESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC                                            2nd Defendant

         SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL                                                            3rd Defendant

         EASTWOOD AND PARTNERS                                                             4th Defendant

                                        and

         SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC                                              1st Third Party

                                         and

         EASTWOOD AND PARTNERS                                                             2nd Third Party



         MR.       B.A. H Y T N E R Q.C. and MR.                KING    appeared on behalf of the
                   Plaintiffs.
         MR. R.A.D. PAYNE appeared on behalf of the 1st Defendant
         MR. E. J.               GLASGOW, Q.C.             and MR. R.L. DAVIES appeared on behalf
                   of the 2nd Defendant/1st Third Party.
         The Third Defendants were not represented.
         MR. J.F.Q. FENWICK appeared on behalf of the 4th Defendant/2nd Third Part;.



                Transcript of the shorthand notes of D.L. Sellers & Co.,
H                     (Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)
                     10, High Street, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 8AN.
                                                                                                              4
                                                            PROCEEDINGS
    D.L, S E L L E R S a CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D


                                                                                Wednesday,   20th December 1989


              Mr. HYTNER:  May it please your Lordship, in this case  I appear
                  with my learned friend Mr. King on behalf of the plaintiffs.
    A             The first defendants are represented by my learned friend
                  Mr. Payne;  the second defendants by my learned friends
                  Mr. Glasgow and Mr. Davies;  the third defendants are not
                  represented but the first defendant's solicitors have
                  authority to give indications on their behalf;  and the
                  fourth defendants are represented by my learned friend Mr.
                  Fenwick.

    B                       My Lord, the first matter to be dealt with is that by
                       consent there should be an order that the action by the
                       plaintiffs against the first defendant should be stayed on
                       terms endorsed in a letter dated 15th December 1989 which
                       has been exhibited before your Lordship, and a further
                       letter dated 20th December 1989 which has not been exhibited
                       but which merely relates to a matter of costs.

             Mr.       JUSTICE STEYN:                         Yes.

             Mr. HYTNER:  The costs of the action, which include the costs
                 incurred in suing the second, third and fourth defendants,
                 to be paid by the first defendants.

             Mr.       JUSTICE STEYN:                         Yes.
    D
             Mr. HYTNER:  And the plaintiffs' costs.   The consequential order
                 that I ask for is this:  that the action of the plaintiffs
1                against the second, third and fourth defendants should be
                 discontinued, that I should have leave to discontinue, and
                 I have instructions which'enable m e to give an undertaking
                 that the plaintiffs, that is to say Mrs. Rimmer and Mrs.
                 Chapman, will not bring further proceedings against the
                 second, third and fourth defendants, but I have no such
                 instructions which enable me to give a general undertaking
                 on behalf of all plaintiffs.  The position is that if a


f
                 substantial number of plaintiffs are able to give that
                 undertaking, none of the second, third and fourth defendants
                 will seek costs against the plaintiff.   If not, they will seek
                 an order for costs, and in such circumstances I would then
                 ask for an indemnity of those costs against the first
                 defendant, and in those circumstances I understand that
                 what my learned friends are seeking is that the costs of
                 the discontinued order shall be reserved and dealt with at
                 a future date.

             Mr.        JUSTICE STEYN:                        And you agree with that course, do you?

             Mr.        PAYNE: I am content with that order,                        my Lore.

             Mr.        JUSTICE STEYN:                        Very well.

             Mr.       HYTNER:   My Lord, there are two other matters to be                          dealt
                       with.   One of those matters, namely the question of                          the
                       trust deed, I can deal with when my learned friends                           have
                       gone.   They need not be here for that, and it would                          not be
    H                  fair to keep   them.

I                                                                          1.
                                                                                                              4i
I
    D.L.' S E L L E R S fitC o ./ W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




             Mr.       JUSTICE STEYN:                            Yes.
    A
             Mr.       HYNTER:   The other matter  concerns the date of the L9th
                       June.   It was always anticipated that there would be
                       remoteness of damage test cases heard at the conclusion
                       of the existing actions, and I am now in a position to be
                       able to tell your Lordship that there is an existing case
                       of Stephen Jones v. The Chief Constable, the Writ having
                       been issued yesterday, the 19th December.   That is in
    B                  respect of one test action.   There are, I think, nineteen
                       categories of remoteness of damage cases, and in five of
                       them the first defendant has agreed to compensate, so there
                       is no test case in those categories, but the remaining
                       categories will the subject of test cases.

            Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                   Yes.

C         Mr. HYTNER:  The first   defendant, the only existing defendant
               in those cases, has agreed for it to be said that the only
               issues which will be raised are remoteness of damage and
               proof of injury and quantum and proof of injury.    Quantum
               will not necessarily be heard in the test case; the only
               issue is remoteness of damage, and there will be no need
               for pleadings.  It will be an Order 18 case and there should
               be no difficulty in getting those ready.

            Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                    Will there be any need for oral evidence
                in those cases?

            Mr. HYTNER:                     No, my Lord,                I should not think so.

            Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                   It is really legal argument.

E         Mr. HYTNER:                     Yes.

            Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   It is not strictly a question                                   of remoteness;
                 it is duty of care.

            Mr. HYTNER:                     Yes, my Lord - no duty of care and public policy.

F           Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                   Yes.

            Mr. HYTNER:  I understand that there will be a disagreement
                between the defendants as to what should happen on the 19th
                June, and m y situation is that if the 19th June is vacated
                as a date for the consideration of the issues between the
                defendants, we would like the remoteness of damage cases
                heard on the 19th June.
G
            Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                   Yes.

            Mr. HYTNER:  If, on the other hand, the 19th June is to remain
                as a date for the disposal of the third party proceedings,
                then we would not want to float behind those cases but we
                would then ask your Lordship to fix the remoteness of damage
                cases for the first week of the Michaelmas Term.


                                                                              2.                                  A2
                                                                                                                  A
   D.L. S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




             Mr.       JUSTICE STEYN:  It seems to me that the sensible course is
   A                   to retain the date of the 19th June and deal with the points,
                      and the other proceedings must go to a later date.

             Mr.       HYTNER:   I am wholly neutral on that, my Lord, and I leave
                       it for my learned friends to consider.

             Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              So that is the point that I need to rule on.

   B         Mr. HYTNER:                    Yes, my Lord.

             Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Namely, that the nervous shock cases will
                 go ahead on those dates.  Will there still be a hearing of
                 six weeks?

             Mr. HYTNER:  No, my Lord,                             in the nervous shock cases,   five days
                 at the most.
r.'c         Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  I suppose                             it depends on whether there will
                 be oral evidence.

             Mr. HYTNER:  I anticipate that no oral evidence will be given,
                 my Lord, because the test cases will be taken from known
                 instances of where plaintiffs were and where their relatives
                 were, and where they saw it and heard it.  I doubt whether
   D             oral evidence will be required for  the purpose of the test
                 cases.

             Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  In relation to those nervous shock cases,
                 I do not want to make a suggestion about how the hearing
                 should be presented, but is that something which can be
                 discussed later on today and worked out?  Is there something
                 to be said for the plaintiffs in those cases putting in
   E             a skeleton argument, perhaps?

             Mr. HYTNER:  Yes, we anticipate that the facts on which each
                 case is brought should be in the form of a letter which
                 indicates the issue as well - and that is the sort of Order
                 18 material - and I anticipate that there will be a skeleton
                 argument in the end, which would help.
   F
             Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  It would be helpful to the trial judge                               to
                 have a bundle of photocopies of judgments.

             Mr. HYTNER:                    Yes, my Lord.

             Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              It will no doubt speed it up.

   G         Mr. HYTNER:      I have not yet done the research, and we m ay have
                 to go back, but the leading case at the moment is McLoughlin
                 and O ' B r i e n , and I think everything will start from there.
                 It is a question of how the courts will apply the present
                 known principles to modern circumstances that have not yet
                 come before the courts, namely what happens when you see
                 something on         television, or a re-run on television, and
                 so o n .
   H

                                                                       3.
                                                                                                             43
D.L. S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




        Mr. JUSTICE  STEYN: In a case where there is so much involved,
A           I would  not besurprised if counsel do not look at the
            Australian and American cases.

        Mr.’ HYNTER:  Yes,                         I think there is going to have to be some       legal
             archaeology.

        Mr. JUSTICE                    STEYN:              Yes, I think so.

B      Mr. PAYNE: My Lord, the first defendant     asks you to make an
           order in accordance with your provisional view, that is to
           say, we agree with the plaintiff that the date of the 19th
           June should be kept open, should it become necessary for
           litigation about any of the remoteness of damage cases, and
           so we agree with that.    In relation to the rest of the
           action, the question of the contribution between the
           defendants, we agree and request that the date of the 19th
C          June should be vacated for that trial and that ho further
           order should be made about the date of the trial.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  I am                               not so sure about that.  I do not think
            it would be terribly                               fair.  There is a date for it, and if
            I vacated that date,                               I think I would have to say the
            beginning of October,                               or whatever date turns out to be
            reasonable.

       Mr.       PAYNE:  We ask your Lordship not to fix a date at the moment.
                 I understand that this is contentious, and I put before your
                 Lordship the arguments wh ich we think arrive at the
                 conclusion at the moment that no date should be fixed for
                 the trial of the substantive issues.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                 You are for the first defendants?

       Mr. PAYNE: That is right, my Lord.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                And you want contribution proceedings?

        Mr.      PAYNE:             Yes.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Your client's mind has been concentrated by
            earlier orders, and if I fix a date, your client's mind
            will be concentrated on the contribution proceedings. Why
            do you have an interest in not having a fixed date?

        Mr.      PAYNE.  My Lord, because the position has changed considerably
                 since the matter last came before the court.  The great
                 interest then was that the plaintiffs should be provided
                 for by getting the case on at an early date, but the
                 situation now is that the first defendant has taken what
                 we hope your Lordship will think is a responsible initiative
                 in the case which involves a considerable amount of work in
                 dealing with the very large number of cases which will now
                 be presented to us.  The only thing which now remains to be
                 tried by the court is the question of apportionment of the
                 money between the defendants.  So, with respect, it has
H
                 moved from the position of being a case where it was very
                 much in the public interest and a matter of urgency to put
                 it before the court to the ---                        *                                 44
D.L.- S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D

                                                                              «£>




       Mr. JUSTICE                  STEYN:                 But what is your interest in putting off that
^          date?

       Mr. PAYNE:    The principal reasons are that there are investigations
            proceeding at the moment which will eventually lead to a case
            being put before the Director of Public Prosecutions to decide
            whether there should be criminal proceedings arising out of
            this event, and your Lordship knows that those investigations
            are being directed against various officers employed by the
B          police authority.          This matter was canvassed before Mr. Justice
            Rose on the 26th October, the result being that at the
            moment the first defendant is bereft of any statements or
            means of investigation of the case, because n a t u r a l l y those
            who are under threat of criminal proceedings are not
            disposed to co-operate with those responsible for the civil
            action, and so this serious handicap in the presentation of
            the   Chief C o n s t a b l e ’s case was exercised before Mr. Justice
C          Rose on the last occasion in support of an application for
            a stay of proceedings or that a later date should be fixed.
            It did not work in front of Mr. Justice Rose, quite
            understandably, because of the overriding interests of the
            plaintiffs and the court thought it was better that the
            interests of the plaintiffs should be brought forward.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Can you imagine the position that the club
D          would find itself in if there was an immense delay and an
           enormous claim hanging over them and they went to their
           bank manager asking for an overdraft?  They must have an
           enormous interest in finality.

       Mr. PAYNE:   Yes, my Lord, indeed, and we hope that your Lordship
           will look favourably upon the position of the Chief
£          Constable also, who is making provision for compensation
            to be paid not only to the plaintiffs but to many others
           who have not brought actions.   Your Lordship has seen the
            terms of the letter.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              Yes.

       Mr. PAYNE:    In our respectful submission, the voice of the Chief
p          Constable should be*heard powerfully when he says that he
            should not be forced to conduct his claim for contribution
            against the defendants under the serious handicap that he
            does not have available to him essential evidence to run
            his case. That may not have worked when the court had to
            consider the interests of the plaintiffs, but when it no w
            has to consider the interests of the person who has made
            provision for the plaintiffs, our submission is that the
G          point now has more weight than it may have had before Mr.
            Justice Rose.

                      My Lord, on the merits point, perhaps I may deal with
                 the other matters.  Your Lordship will probably knov that
                 the inquest has not yet been held.  The attitude of the
                 Coroner is that he has not fixed a date and is waiting to
                 hear the result of the investigations into the criminal
^                matter and the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions
                 as to whether there is to be a crininal action.  In the

                                                                       5.                                  4
O.L.* S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                 meantime, the Coroner has selected a significant amount of
                  evidence which is going to be relevant to the question of
A                apportionment between the defendants.   We anticipate,
                  regrettably, that one of the matters which may have to be
                  canvassed in the trial is the whereabouts of the various
                  people who died and who were injured in the pens, and we
                 anticipate that, this may be a matter which will have to be
                  explored on the question of causation, because the barrier
                 which failed is the subject of considerable interest, and
                 we cannot get that evidence at the moment, my Lord, because
B                the Coroner is withholding information.

                       There is a letter here which, as your Lordship can see,
                  is addressed to the Coroner which shows that we are not to
                 be allowed access to that information.   (H a n d e d ) . Will your
                 Lordship also be good enough to look at a letter which we
                 have received from Mr. Mervyn Jones, the Assistant Chief
                 Constable of the Hillsborough Inquiry team, which I can hand
C                up, which deals with the release of statements - it is the
                  11th December - which my learned friends have not seen, but
                  it has been passing between us and Hr. Mervyn Jones.        May
                 I say that it is written in response to our attempts to get
                 hold of evidence in order to get on with the contribution
                 proceedings.   (H a n d e d ) .

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                 Yes.
D
        Mr.        PAYNE:    Your Lordship will see that he says that the decision
                  of the Chief Constable is hoped to be by the spring of next
                  year.   This is why we are in the slightly unusual position
                  that itis we who wish to 'pursue   the contribution proceedings
                  ultimately against the co-defendants but we are significantly
                  hampered by not being able to correspond ---

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Can you give any. predict ion as to the year
            in which those difficulties m ay disappear?

         Mr.      PAYNE:                 We are in the hands of others, as your Lordship can
                  see.

         Mr.       JUSTICE STEYN:                          It could be 1991 or 1993.

         Mr.       PAYNE:              The matter                 is out of our hands, my Lord.

         Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                Yes.

         Mr. PAYNE:  There are perhaps more matters which we think are
             of importance, but since we have agreed to make provision
             for the plaintiffs, it is now we who will be proceeding
             with the claim for contribution, and therefore we wish to
             have the opportunity to present the claim in our own way,
             which is not necessarily the way in which the plaintiffs
             have presented their claim against the various defendants.
             Our understanding of the position between the defendants
             is that there is no live third party action between ourselves
             and the co-defendants.  We did issue a Third Party Notice
             and a Summons for Third Party Directions, which was before
H
             Mr. Justice Rose on the 26th October.  The matter was

                                                                       6.                         46
D.l_- S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                canvassed as to the state of the action and the upshot was
                that Mr. Justice Rose made no order on our application for
A              third party directions.  We understand, therefore, that our
                third party proceedings are described as a nullity and
                therefore there is no issue between us.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                            . A nd what about the contribution proceedings?

        Mr.     PAYNE:    Perhaps I ought to call them contribution proceedings.
                That is what I mean by third party proceedings.   So at the
B              moment there is no contribution action on foot between ourselves
                and the defendants.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                 What about   the third party notice?   Was
            that served?

       Mr.       PAYNE:             Yes, my Lord.

C      Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              An d did Mr. Justice Rose make any order on
           that?

       Mr.       PAYNE:             No, my Lord.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   So it is still extant and I am still                                  in a
            position to make directions on it, if appropriate.
D
       Mr.       PAYNE:  The position is that the matter was before the court
                 on our application at that time, because it was our application
                 for third party directions, and in the result the learned
                 judge made no order.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  But Mr. Justice Rose was focusing on the
           main matter, the interests of the victims.
E
       Mr. PAYNE:   Yes.  We think that the result of the refusal to
            make third party directions is that the third party notice
            is a nullity.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Is there anything in Mr. Justice Rose's order
           about the third party directions?  Does it say, "Third
           party direction refused"?   What does tiie order say?
F
       Mr.       PAYNE:  Mr. Justice Rose made nc order on the third party
                 directions.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              So they are still extant?

       Mr.       PAYNE:  I wonder if your Lordship  would be kind enough to
                 look at this authority - a decision of Judge Noone?  (H a n d e d ) .

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              Yes.     Here there was a refusal - is that
           right?

       Mr. PAYNE:                   Yes.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   There was an application for third party
            directions and the learned judge declined to give directions;
            but until  somebody shows me an order, I assume that Mr.
            Justice Rose did not refuse.  He simply made no order..
O.L. S E L L E R S 8e Co. / W. L L O Y O W O O D L A N D




        Mr. PAYNE:                  Will your Lordship accept                this copy?    (H a n d e d )

A      Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                  Thank you.

        Mr. PAYNE:   That is our position, my Lord, that there is no
             third party action at the moment on foot between ourselves
            and the co-de f e n d a n t s . Now, if your Lordship ---

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  If I am against you on that,                                  you    are not
g          asking to withdraw them?

        Mr.      PAYNE:               Yes, we will.

        Mr. JUSTICE                   STEYN:               Will you?

        Mr. PAYNE:   Yes, my Lord. We would much rather that  the situation
            was observed on its merits and the Chief Constable be given
C          credit for the initiative that he has taken and be allowed
            to conduct the third party action in the wav that he wishes,
            but if that is not so, then we will have to discontinue.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  And there will be an application for costs
           against you for striking out, presumably.

       Mr. PAYNE:   We are anxious not to have to reach that position
D          unless we have to.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              I follow.

       Mr. PAYNE:   The position in re.lation to the third party proceedings
            is that the third party notice is very short in form.     It
            does no more than repeat the terms of the Statement of Claim
            and to ad d one further point whic h it is possible to say is
k          already pleaded in the Statement of Claim.     It was thought
            that the point could be made more precisely, and therefore
            that is w hy it is stated in the third party notice.   No
            defence has been served to any of the third party notices
            and, as we understand the rules, until such a defence is
            served, those proceedings can be discontinued, and this has
         ( no effect on the position of the plaintiffs or in this case
p          the defendants commencing a new action;    but, as I say, we
            are anxious not to reach that stage, anxious not to do that.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   On that point, I appreciate it is in the
            power of those defendants to issue a process asking for
            declarations of non-liability, and you will be in the same
            position.

G       Mr.     PAYNE:  This is why we are anxious that the matter should
                be seen on its merits.    The action as it stands before the
                court at the moment, as your Lordship knows, is in the form
                of two separate actions, one by Mrs. Chapman and one by
                Mrs. Rimraer.   We do not think that within those actions
                all the issues which will arise in the contribution
                proceedings are included.    We think that if those actions
                had to proceed, the result would not be to produce a decision
H              which could    be applied to all the cases which w e have now
                taken the burden to discharge. We think the result would be

                                                                        8.                                  48
D.L.- S E L L E R S & Co. / W. L L O Y O W O O O L A N O




                  a fragmentation of the proceedings, and we think that a
                  lot of the matters will not be covered and adjudicated upon
A                in the present form of the two actions.

                       We agree with the plaintiffs that we should proceed
                 as lead actions, but there is no corresponding agreement
                 between the defendants, and we hope that this point can
                 adequately be explained to your Lordship by me. Although
                  it was agreed w ith the plaintiffs that Chapman and Rimmer
                 should be treated as lead actions, that was an agreement
B                with the plaintiffs, and the other defendants also made
                 similar agreements with the plaintiffs, but when it comes
                 to apportionment, quite different considerations apply.
                 At the moment there is no agreement between the defendants
                 that that should    be the case, and if the co-defendants
                 offer to agree that these two actions should decide certain
                 matters, we would be very glad to talk about it, but we
                 have had no such approach made.    The kind of thing which
^               will be relevant in the contribution proceedings, we
                 anticipate, is what was the cause of one death or batch
                 of deaths or all deaths, because it is not necessarily going
                 to follow that if one party can be blamed for having caused
                 or contributed to a particular death, that would necessarily
                 follow in the case of others.    These are points which we
                 think are going to have to be adjudicated upon in the
p               absence of agreement, and we do not know what our case is
                 going to be, of course, because we do not have access to
                 the information in the hands of the Coroner and the
                 investigating officer, so we ourselves do not know the
                 whereabouts or whether it is possible to establish the
                 whereabouts of significant numbers of people who died.
                 This is going to be a relevant issue in the litigation on
                 the question of the failure of the barrier and the question
E               of provsion of means of escape in the pens, and we are
                 quite sure that the Chapman and Rimmer actions will not
                 provide a sufficient vehicle to enable the points to be
                 decided on the question of apportionment.

        Mr.        JUSITCE STEYN:                          Yes.

        Mr.       PAYNE:  There is one last matter that I would   like to raise,
F                 if I may, and it is a practical matter.   June is a short
                  time away and the Chief Constable has undertaken the
                  burden now of paying compensation to claimants who we
                  understand may run up to about 1,000 in number.   The volume
                  of work in dealing with those claims and in making sure
                  that we are able to arm ourselves   with the evidence whic h
                  we will need in our action for contribution against the
                  co-defendants will be very, very time-consuming, and there
                  is only a certain amount of manpower that can be allocated -
                  to it;  the burden of work is probably going to be
                  insupportable, and in our submission six months will not
                  be sufficient time in which to deal with both aspects of the
                  case.

                       My Lord, it is for those                   reasons that we are taking
                  the position that although we                   want contribution, we also
                  say that we ask for it not to                   proceed in June and that no
                  date should be fixed, for the                   reasons I have sought to explain,
                                                                                           -      45
S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O O L A N O




            namely that matters are largely out of our control and we
            intend to get on with the apportionment proceedings because
            our insurers will be anxious to recover some money from
            the others responsible, and we cannot tell your Lordship
            when we will be in a position to do so, but we have every
            intention of proceeding as soon as reasonably practicable
            with the apportionment actions.

  Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                 Yes.

  Mr. PAYNE:                   My Lord,               that is our position.

  Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                 Yes, thank you.   Mr. Glasgow?

  Mr. GLASGOW:    May it please your Lordship, on behalf of the
      club we have only two concerns.   The first is that nothing
      should be done by us to get in the way of the settlement
      of the victims' claims, and that has been our priority
      throughout.    Our second concern is to proceed to the
      termination of any liability between all the defendants,
      and we recognise that we have no greater interest in this
      than anybody else, and we want to proceed with that as
      expeditiously and as promptly as is fair to all concerned.
      We have in mind that with the co-operation of all concerned
      we have all been working very hard - and that is not simply
      the solicitors but solicitors and counsel - throughout the
      summer in order to meet a timetable which we had all agreed
      to and which we had thought was fair to all parties concerned.

                 My Lord, the club's interest in getting the matter
            determined is two-fold:   first the commercial one;  it is
            a serious commercial matter to have it hanging over us,
            but our primary concern is that we have employees and senior
            officers who for wholly legitimate reasons still have
            hanging over them allegations that they have been negligently
            concerned in the deaths of 95 people, and some of them have
            been under great strain.   Suffice it to say that it is right
            that their fears and nightmares - and I choose the words
            advisedly - should be brought to an end as soon as possible,
            and the issue has been joined between the defendants and we
            have pleaded our 6ases very fully.

  Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                 When were the third party proceedings served?

  Mr. GLASGOW:  The third party notice was served on us by the
      Chief Constable on the 18th October, 1989.

   Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                Yes.

  Mr. GLASGOW;  And it is quite right that Mr. Justice Rose made
      no order on that, let it be said by my encouragement.

   Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   The Summons for Directions was the 3rd November,
       so it was a couple of days after the service that he was
       dealing with it, and before Mr. Justice Rose everybody
       treated them as extant third party proceedings, which the
       order recites, and there is no order on those proceedings;
       it is simply that nothing has happened.
D.L. S E L L E R S 8c Co. / W. L L O Y O W O O D L A N O




          Mr. GLASGOW:   I addressed Hr. Justice Rose on it to the effect
              that it did not serve any useful purpose - and Mr. Justice
A             Rose agreed - because we thought that the matter was
              sufficiently set out and no directions were necessary.
              But it is, with respect, a nonsense to suggest that they
              lapse or become a nullity, and, putting the matter bluntly
              and I hope it does not sound offensive - we do say quite
              firmly on instructions that if the police do not wish to
              proceed with their third party proceedings, we do.

B         Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                               Yes.

         Mr. GLASGOW:  And we have taken the precaution of serving some
             ourselves yesterday in order to provide for that unhappy
             eventuality.

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   In which you would be claiming declaratory
              relief for. non-liability.
C
         Mr. GLASGOW:  Yes, and your Lordship will appreciate that we
             volunteered to pay our c'.n costs, but I stress that it is
             not about money.

         Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  If Mr. Payne says that they will discontinue
             and he says that they do not need leave - and I say nothing
             about the consequences of that discontinuance, whether it
D
             has a divestive effect or not ---

         Mr. GLASGOW:   Those will be matters for me to raise, and I can
             only do it by suggesting an abuse of process if I believe
             that to be right, but we will continue, my Lord, and I say
             that in the light of the fact that nothing which we do will
             get away from the plaintiffs' interests.     If the nervous
             shock is tried first, then we will not get involved in that
             and Mr. Hytner will deal with that, and we have six weeks
             set aside for an action which is not going to take that
             length of time now because the obstructive attitude on the
             part of the police by the refusal to admit facts has n ow
             thankfully evaporated from the scene, but we would like to
             use that time, and we believe that we can do so properly
             and helpfully to all parties concerned.     As far as the
             difficulties about preparing for that trial are concerned,
             that matter was listened to w i t h care by Mr. Justice Rose
             and ruled upon and not appealed.     Mr. Justice Rose was not
              impressed by the argument that the police were without
              instructions - and this is not meant to sound offensive
             b u t ---

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  This is the evidence of the police officers
G             who testified at the inquiry?

          Mr. GLASGOW:                      Yes, my Lord, and cross-examined by me.

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                               Yes.

          Mr. GLASGOW:  And it is unhelpful, with respect, to submit that
              they have not made statements or that there is no access to
H
              them. It is unhelpful to suggest that the first defendant
                                                                                      51
                                                                  11.
    O.L.- S E L L E R S & Co. / W. L L O Y O W O O O L A N O




                       is bereft of statements;   that is not right, my Lord, as those
    ^                 of us w ho participated in the inquiry know.

              Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  If I uphold Mr. Hytner's contention that the
                  nervous shock cases should be determined in a week,
                  administratively it causes difficulty to start your case
                  immediately after, but do you have any objection to my
                  adjourning those to October?

    B          Mr. GLASGOW:                    No, m y Lord.

              Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  May I qualify it in this way:     I had in mind
                  to make a direction that it be heard during that particular
                  term but leaving it for me to discuss the matter with Mr.
                  Justice Rose as to whether  it should be the first   or second
                  half.  How long do you think it will take?

    C          Mr. GLASGOW:                    My Lord, we have always thought about            a month.

             Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  What I have in mind is simply to say that
                 it will be tried in that term and the actual fixing of the
                 date I will do after discussion with Mr. Justice Rose.

              Mr. GLASGOW:   If your Lordship will hear from those of us who
                  are concerned at the time, I would be grateful, for the
    D             simple reason that although I appreciate the interests of
                  Counsel are of no consequence, when people have been in the
                  matter for a long time, it places great strain on the people
                  coming in.

             Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                Of course.

              Mr. GLASGOW:  And, of course, there is another matter, that the
    E             fixing of the Guilfo rd Inquiry, which involves three of the
                  Counsel appearing before your Lordship, is being re-arranged
                  around this matter.
♦
              Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   So it would be of advantage to you if I
                  were to make a decision today one way or another.

              Mr. GLASGOW:  Yes, my Lord, because the people w ho are
                  responsible for the listing of the Guilford Inquiry have
                  said that the Hillsborough matter should take precedence,
                  and I fully appreciate that we all understand ---

              Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                I will decide the issue today and make my
                  peace with Mr.                               Justice Rose.

              Mr. GLASGOW:                     Thank you very much indeed.

              Mr. FENWICK: So far as the fourth defendants are concerned,
                  your Lordship will already have very much in mind the
                  concern of Dr. Eastwood and the firm with this litigation
                  hanging over thea, both as to commercial considerations and,
                  rather more importantly, as to professional reputation, and
                  we would certainly resist the going off into the indefinite
    H             future of any contribution proceedings.
D.L. S E L L E R S & Co. / W. L L O Y D W O O O L A N O




        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Have you also caused proceedings                                       to be
A           initiated for declaratory relief, non-liability?

        Mr.       FENWICK:                No,, my Lord, we have not.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  In the event that there is a discontinuance
            against you, is that a course that you wou ld also be likely
            to adopt?

B       Mr.       FENWICK:   It is certainly a matter that we would have to
                  consider most carefully, my Lord.   We are very worried,
                  of course, because as we read the provisions of the Limitation
                  Act, it would leave it open to the first defendant, at any
                  stage up to two years after he finally agrees an assessment
                  of damages with any plaintiff, to bring proceedings under
                  Section 10(4) of the Act against us, which may be many years
                  hence.   It is not a matter that we have decided, my Lord,
C                 but we would consider it very carefully.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  You would consider the implications of it
            and the possibility of initiating proceedings yourself?

        Mr.      FENWICK:  Certainly, my Lord.  As we see it, the first
                 defendants have stated in a series of letters --- Does
                 your Lordship have the bundle?
D
        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                                Just give me a moment;         yes.

        Mr.      FENWICK:  Can I invite your Lordship's attention to page 26
                 of the bundle, which is the letter accompanying the offer
                 of settlement, and in particular can    I invite  you to look
                 at the last paragraph on the third page, "The plaintiff will
E                pursue action ..."?

        Mr.      JUSTICE STEYN:                           Yes.

        Mr.      FENWICK:   And on page 30, on the 18th December the first
                 defendant's solicitors write to those instructing me, again
                 saying "In due course proceedings against your client will
                 be issued."   So, my Lord, it is not as though there is any
F                doubt;   the police have stated that they intend to issue
                 proceedings against us, and if that remains their position,
                 it is in everybody's interests that the matter is determined
                 quickly.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   It seems to me that there are at the moment
            third party proceedings which have been served on your client.

G       Mr.       FENWICK:               Yes,         that is correct.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Third party proceedings against your client
            served in October.

        Mr .      FENWICK:   Yes. on                             the 18th October, and     they repeated and
                  recited or adopted                             the allegations --
H
                                                                        13.
                                                                                                               -W-*
O.L: S E L L E R S & Cc. / * L L C Y O W O O D L A N D




       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  I assume you make the same submission as Mr.
           Glasgow about the proceedings being extant, about them not
           having lasped and about wanting them tried.  Do you have any
           objection to October?

       Mr. FENWICK:   I do not know whether leading counsel is available
           at that time, but it is quite clearly a matter that should be
           dealt with.

B      Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                            Yes.

       Mr. FENWICK:  My Lord, there is only one more point.  The matter
           before Mr. Justice Rose on the last occasion was a Summons
           for Directions issued on the 19th October, in respect of
           which the first defendant sought a number of directions as
           to service of defence and discovery, which we took the view
           were unnecessary in these kind of proceedings, as the
           plaintiff was saying that he was proposing to amend the
           Statement of Claim to add in the extra allegations in the
           third party notice, and the learned judge dealt with it on
           that day on the basis of the Summons for Directions rather
           than the proceedings themselves;  but, quite apart from that,
           1 entirely endorse what my learned friend Mr. Glasgow says.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                            Thank you.
D
       Mr. FENWICK:  We certainly do not object  and we ask your Lordship
           to make directions with a view to a trial in June or October,
           and we do hope that it would follow on after the nervous
           shock cases, but we clearly understand the administrative
           difficulties that would be involved.  However, what we do
           say - and we have given notice in correspondence to the
           first defendant about it - is that in giving directions today,
E          we would  invite your Lordship to make an order that the
           first defendant provide us with Further and Better Particulars
           which we have requested against the plaintiffs.   It is an
           unusual request, but we do it for this reason ---

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Well, I am not going to get bogged down in
           this at the moment, Mr. Fenwick.  What I suggest is that
p          Counsel should discuss that matter and I will deal with it
           on another occasion.

       Mr. FENWICK:                    Yes, as your Lordship pleases.

       Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  I will not be involved in that at the moment.
           Is that your submission?

G      Mr. FENWICK:                    It is, my Lord.

       Mr.      PAYNE:   My Lord, may I reply shortly?   As to the contribution
                notice issued by the first defendant, it has not in fact
                been issued;   it is not stamped by the court.        I have copies
                which I can hand to your Lordship.   (H a n d e d ) . Your Lordship
                will see that the two actions are in the same form, and they
                are net asking for any declaration but for orders for indemnity
H               o r contribution in the ordinary way, and so those notices are

                                                                  14.             54
O.L: S E L L E R S & Co. / W.   l .OYO   WOODLAND




                 a vehicle which would be appropriate if an award of damages
                 had been made against the second defendant who was trying
                 to recover against us ---

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  It is a mere technicality, because Mr. Glasgow
            can cause his solicitors to issue the necessary process for
            a declaration of non-liability.

        Mr.      PAYNE:             Yes.
B
        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:     And declarations are a discovery matter.
            I s n ’t this shadow boxing?

        Mr.      PAYNE:  I hope your Lordship will not take that view, because
                 we think there are serious points of substance involved here.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Yes. all the points you have made are
            different matters, but I am not terribly impressed with
            your submission that the existing proceeding is a nullity.
            I am against you on that.  It seems to me in any event that
            it is open to Mr. Glasgow to ask for a declaration of non-
            1 iability.

        Mr.      PAYNE:  So far as the vehicle for the case is concerned, on
                 the points of substance, we feel that if these actions
D                proceed w it h a view to trying to get a decision of apportion­
                 ment of liability, the decision will not be achieved because
                 we are making settlement with about a thousand people, which
                 will inevitably cover wider issues.    That is the first point.
                 The second point is that we have not got access to our
                 witnesses, and your Lordship already has that point.    There
                 is then the point about the criminal investigation, and there
                 is no agreement between the defendants as to the significance
                 of any findings of the court in the Chapman and Rimmer case.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                          But on the matters of substance ---

        Mr.      PAYNE:  O n the matters of substance, your Lordship has heard
                 our submissions.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Yes, thank you very much.                          Mr. Hytner,   do
            you want to say anything in reply?

        Mr. HYTNER:  No, m y Lord, but in relation to the remoteness
            cases, at some stage it may well be that your Lordship
            thinks it right to say that there ought to be orders pursuant
            to Order 18. At the moment there is only the case of Jones
            where the Writ was issued yesterday, and I suspect that if
            I ask for an order under Order 18 where the Writ    has not
            been served, your Lordship m a y think it is premature.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  Yes.  When I have given my ruling, can I
            ask you to draw up a Minute of Order so that I can sign it
            and then if there are any outstanding issues on it, the
            matter can be mentioned to me by juniors again tomorrow
            morn ing?
H
                                                                15.
O.L.-SELLERS & Co. / W. L L O Y O   w   OOOLANO

                                                              4«?



        Mr.     HYTNER:  Yes, of course,            and may I at 2.15 deal with the
                Trust Deed?
A
        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:     I was going to ask you if you could do it
            at q u a rter-to-2.

        Mr. HYTNER:                 Certainly, my Lord.

        Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   Then it remains for me to give m y ruling.
             I direct that what I will loosely describe as the nervous
B           shock issues, in relation to the listing of cases, be
             determined as from the 19th June, with an estimated duration
             of five days.

                   There then arises the question of what is to happen in
               relation to the proceedings between the Chief Constable and
               the second and fourth defendants.  A number of arguments
              have been placed before me to the effect that there ought
^             to be no fixed date, some of which I can deal with shortly.

                   It is argued that those proceedings are a nullity.     I
              have been referred to a case of Courtney-Evans -v- Passey
               (1986) 1 All England Reports. 9 3 2 , where there was a refusal
               to make directions, but in this case there was no refusal;
              the learned judge was saying that he made no order on the
Q             third party proceedings and he was treating them as extant
              proceedings, and there has been nothing to convert those
              proceedings into a nullity.   In my judgment, there is no
              merit in that argument whatsoever.

                   I then come to the points of substance.      It is argued
              that the police are under a tremendous handicap in conducting
              their investigations, and the Coroner's documents have not
E             been released, and it is said that there are all sorts of
              matters whi ch are not covered by the existing lead cases.
              As against that, I must bear in mind that the particular
              defendants wit h w h o m I a m concerned, the second and fourth
              defendants, have a real commercial interest in having the
              proceedings terminated, and a very, very real interest in the
              case of the fourth defendants in having allegations of
              professional negligence determined, and in the case of the
F             second defendants in having these allegations against their
              employees determined.

                   Balancing these matters against one another,in my judgment
               they tilt strongly in favour of fixing a date.  I make it
               quite clear that I do not accept that the police are as
               hampered in their investigations in this case as has been
_              suggested.  It seems to me that they have had the benefit
               of a great mass of statements and all the evidence that was
               given at the Taylor Inquiry, and I do not accept the view
               that justice requires that I ought to put off this case
               until some undisclosed date, a date which cannot be indicated
               even in the vaguest terms, whether it be 1991, 1992 or 1993.
               In my view, justice requires that a date be fixed.  On a
               previous occasion a date was fixed and it concentrated the
               mind of the Chief Constable, and I believe that if it is
               fixed now, it will concentrate the mind of the Chief Constable

                                                      16.                             5
D.L. S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D

                                                                             -*S>




                       I fix that date for the beginning of the term in October
                   next year. What will be tried then are the extant third
                   party proceedings which were served on the second and fourth
                   defendants on the 18th October last year.  If, in addition
                   to that, there are any proceedings for declarations of
                   non-liability, I would  apprehend that there will be
                   applications that those proceedings take place at the same
                   time,  and at the moment I cannot see why that should be
                   resisted.
B
                        So, for all those reasons, I make the order which I have
                    indicated, and I will be happy to deal with any consequential
                   orders to be made either later on today, if the time is
                   available, or otherwise tomorrow morning.   What I would like
                   to see is if counsel will work out a form of order today
                    in relation to the third party proceedings which provides
                   for a detailed timetable for the resolution of those
q                  particular disputes and a timetable providing for the service
                   of Defence and Reply and all the other consequential orders
                   which are appropriate in a case like this.   If it turns out
                   that it is impossible for counsel to agree on those matters,
                   I shall be happy for the matter to be mentioned to me
                   tomorrow morning for those orders to be made.

          Mr. PAYNE:  Would your Lordship grant me leave to appeal the
D             order fixing the date?

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  I refuse the application for leave to appeal
              on the basis that it has no merit whatsoever.  Is there
              anything else arising?

          Mr. GLASGOW:   Only to thank your Lordship for fitting us in.
              We hope your Lordship did not get the impression that there
E             was discontent at the bar.   It was disappointment rather
               than discontent.

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              Thank you very much indeed.

                                                                 Later

P         Mr. HYTNER:   May I now revert to the case of Rimmer and Chapman?
              What we are asking your Lordship to do - obviously not
               today, because your Lordship will not have had an opportunity
               to consider the documents fully - is this:   we would like
               in due course to have approval of two specimen forms of
              Trust Deed. The idea is that there is at the moment, as
               your Lordship knows, a very large Trust Deed set up for the
               benefit of the Hillsborough victims and the trustees of that
G             fund only retain money in order to pay it to the beneficiaries,
               and where the beneficiaries are under a disability they
               ensure that trusts are set up.   Now, there are two approved
               forms of trust as set up by the trustees for infants.   One
               form is where there is one child (or alternatively where
               there is more than one child but for some reason the parents
               wish a separate trust to be set up for each child) and the
               second form is where there is more than one child, the
H             difference being that where the benficiaries are more than
               one child and one dies, the money accumulates for the second.
                                                                                        c;7
                                                                                          /
                                                                    17 .
O.L. S E L L E R S 8c CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                         What has happened is that in order that there may be
                    flexibility - because there is never going to be any
                    compulsion about this - in order that the next friends
                    in the Hillsborough actions can consider the advisability
                    of putting children's money into trust, whether the child
                    is a child under the Fatal Accidents Act case or a personal
                    injuries case, ^ h a t has now been done is that amendments
                    (as I would call them as a common lawyer) to powers of
                    appointment have been drawn up in the case of each of the
                    trusts to enable moneys from damages to be paid into the
                    same trust as the Hillsborough trust, but, because of one
                    mat ter which I shall mention, the two funds will be kept
                    separate within the same trust.     The reason for that is
                    that under the Hillsborough form of trust the child only
                    gets the money at the age of 25 and if the child dies at
                    between 18 and 25 years, the trustees will dispose of the
                    money in some other way, and that clearly cannot be approved
                    by a court by way of damages, and there will be a power of
                    appointment to enable the trustee to keep the damages fund
                    separate but the child will have a beneficial interest at the
                    age of 18.

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                               Yes.

          Mr. HYTNER:  When this matter was m entioned before Mr. Justice
D             Rose, his view was that the matter was premature because
              there were no damages to be considered.   In the case of
              Rimmer, which your Lordship  has heard this morning is to
              be stayed and damages paid, there are two infant children
              and we feel that we can now ask your Lordship for the
              approval of the Trust Deed.

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                               You are not actually asking for an order
**            this morning?

          Mr. HYTNER:   No, because I do not k n o w whether the next friend
               will want the m oney to come into    the trust. That is a matter
               that will have to be considered.

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  So there will be another appearance before
p             me in the New Year?           ‘

          Mr. HYTNER:  Yes, and what we would like your Lordship to do is
              to look at the documents to see if, in the event of an
              application being made in this case or any subsequent case
              for the money to be paid into a trust fund, there will be
              no longer any need in an individual case to say that the
              judge has to approve the. trust, because it will have been
G            approved by the court.

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   I find myself an  innocent abroad here.    Is
               there any mechanism whereby I can appoint an amicus c u r i a e ?

          Mr. HYTNER:  With respect, there is an easier way than that.
              These trusts have been drafted by Counsel and what we can
              do - and this was something which was suggested to me before
H             but I said that it should not be done before Mr. Justice
              Rose because it would  be a total waste of money ~ we can
              bring Counsel up who has drafted them.
                                                                       18.
D.L. S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                               Yes, that would be   a useful way of doing   it.

          Mr. HYTNER:    It would be more useful to me, because if your
              Lordship asked any awkward questions, I am not quite sure
              that I could deal with them!

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              I would feel much more comfortable with that.

          Mr. HYTNER:                    May I ask will your Lordship be here next term?
B
          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  For the first half,                               until the end of February.
              It depends when I can slot it in.

          Mr. HYTNER:                    Does your Lordship want to see the documents in
              advance,                   in any event?

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:    Yes, if I may, and if there are any advices
              by counsel, that would be of help, or if the counsel who   has
              advised on it has not prepared an advice which can be shown
              to me, he can write a note which would certainly help me.

          Mr.      HYTNER:   Yes. In the drafts there are two notes explaining
                   two oddities, and it was helpful to me to see those,
                   because otherwise I would have been puzzled.
D
          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:  I am in your hands, Mr. Hytner.  I will
              be here from the 11th January.  It is simply a matter of
              fixing it with the Listing Officer, and I will read the
              documents beforehand.  How long do you think it will take?

          Mr.      HYTNER:   Once your Lordship has read the documents and if
                   counsel is here to deal wi t h any difficult questions which
                   may arise, I would have thought about 20 minutes at the most.

          Mr.       JUSTICE STEYN:   In that case, the Listing Officer can be told
                    that itcan be slotted in on any day.

          Mr.      HYTNER:   I am sorry, I am applying to your Lordship without
                   actually reading the Summons.    In fact, we have instructions
                   in the case of Rim m er that the damages for the minor
                   beneficiaries,        and       should be paid into the trust
                   fund so that that can be dealt with as an application in the
                   New Year.

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              Yes,   I see.

          Mr. HYTNER:  So if your Lordship will simply adjourn the
              Summons ---

          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:   Yes, I will adjourn the Summons and it
              will come before me on the same date as you appear generally.

          Mr. HYTNER:  And I will pass on to those who instruct me your
              Lordship's suggestion that counsel should be asked to write
              an explanatory note to be given to your Lordship.
H
          Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              Yes.
                                                                                                          RQ
                                                                          19
E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    Mr.      HYTNER:              Well before the Summons.

    Mr. JUSTICE                   STEYN:           Yes.

   Mr. HYTNER:   I am obliged.  In relation to the cases which are
       to be heard in June - and I do not think my learned friends
       will mind m y mentioning this in their absence - what we
       propose to do is that when the names of all cases are known,
       we will then seek an order under Order 18, Rule 21, and I
       do not think it should be necessary to seek it from your
       Lordship;   it can be done through the District Registry.

   Mr. JUSTICE                    STEYN:           Yes.   Thank you very much.

   Mr. HYTNER:                    We are           much obliged to your Lordship.

   Mr. JUSTICE STEYN:                              Thank you.
