    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions


Owning                      South Yorkshire Coroner
Organisation:

Title Memo:                 Pre-review of inquest - Cassette No. 2

Description:

This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the digitised version
of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement by BR Consult to reduce noise
and improve audibility of the incoming radio transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
   Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                     101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                  Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
       Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
00:00:14
CORONER:              -- because on the whole one can't have the inquest until the
                      Director of Public Prosecutions has completed his work, I
                      again said, “Get the paperwork done for him. You can take
                      my documents, if you like. They can come later.” Work has
                      been done on these files but it hasn’t been top priority. Now,
                      if we do resume we will have them all done; that is arranged,
                      isn’t it?


                      As I said, each individual case will have a file presented to
                      me with the copy statements in which are relevant to that
                      file, together with a summary by one of the West Midlands
                      Police officers which will summarise factually and
                      non-adversarially, as I’ve already described the evidence of
                      the witnesses. What we intend to do is to present that
                      summary to the court. I will have seen the summary. I will
                      also have seen the statements and it is my intention to read
                      the files of each individual case.


                      We also intend, in order to make it easier and also in order
                      to help both the legal representatives of the family and
                      particularly the families themselves, to circulate the
                      summaries before the actual inquest so that the solicitor,
                      that’s Mr Frazer, will have a copy of it. He will be able to let
                      me know if there’s anything in that summary which he thinks
                      isn’t clear or needs elaboration. If it is possible either we will
                      get the summary officer who will be here and will be giving
                      evidence to elaborate on that particular point, or I might
                      decide that it is possible to call a witness to deal with that
                      point, or we will read either the whole of a part of a witness’



www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                       2
                      statement by way of documentary evidence on that point.


                      One thing I must make absolutely clear, and it follows from
                      what I’ve said already earlier, under no circumstances are
                      we going to call any South Yorkshire Police officers to the
                      hearing which we’re talking about at the moment. It would
                      be an impossible position both for me and for them bearing
                      in mind the limitations which I’ve already outlined to you.


                      The officers will, either themselves or possibly other West
                      Midlands officers, explain to me the identification procedures
                      as far as they have been able to establish them. I am
                      expecting to make use of plans where they will indicate on
                      the plan by suitable markings where any particular person
                      was seen.


                      I do not intend to use the video in the court at this occasion
                      and I’m going to be very reluctant to look at either video stills
                      or photographs, partly because it is logistically very difficult,
                      partly because I don’t think it’s particularly helpful and partly
                      because in many cases the photographs or video stills which
                      I would use have actually already been seen by members of
                      the family because they helped in locating and identifying
                      some of the deceased.


                      There are some families who haven’t seen them. There are
                      some cases where the location evidence is very weak or
                      non-existent, but that’s something which we will have to deal
                      with. We can only do, or have in evidence, what is
                      available. What’s not available we can’t produce.
00:04:58


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      3
                      If I stop here for a moment. Is this reasonably clear to the
                      legal representatives? Do you want to come back at me
                      with anything on the matters that I’ve mentioned up to now?
                      I’m sorry it’s been rather lengthy but in a sense I can
                      summarise it probably in three sentences: we want to have a
                      limited inquest; we want to present the evidence in a
                      particular form and we don’t want to do anything which could
                      possibly be construed as impeding the DPP or could
                      constitute an attack or criticism of any person, persons or
                      body, corporate or incorporate. Mr Frazer?
00:05:50
MR FRAZER:            Sir, the only question which you may come to, and if you
                      intend to please, sorry, is a question of the timing of the
                      issuing of the summaries. The logistics from our end will be,
                      as I anticipate it, that the solicitors will want to go through
                      those summaries in some detail with the families, for those
                      families who want to see them. They will then have to report
                      to yourself and to us, explain whether or not they want to be
                      here and put what questions, if any, they have to put. Those
                      questions will have to be notified to Mr Jones’ officers and
                      answers found if they are available. So the logistics of that
                      may occupy some time.


                      Is it possible, although the summaries aren’t complete, to
                      give an indication as to when they might be issued?


CORONER:              It’s a difficult question to answer Mr Frazer. I’m well aware
                      that the more time I give you, the easier it is. All I can say is
                      that I’ve got to read them first because otherwise you will,
                      quite properly, not be satisfied if I haven’t looked at them.
                      That’s the very minimum I’ve got to do. I’ve got to read them


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                        4
                      and I’ve got to compare them with at least the statements as
                      well.


                      We will try and let you have them as soon as possible and I
                      think that’s the best I can do.


MR FRAZER:            I appreciate that, sir.


CORONER:              I am aware, but please bear in mind the limitations that I’ve
                      put. As I say, the summaries will be designed to give the
                      factual evidence of what happened, where he was and who
                      saw him, if you like, so you will know the names of the
                      witnesses because we intend to name them and you will
                      know what they’re saying with regard to that particular
                      factual bit of evidence.


                      Is there anybody else who has a query on anything up to
                      now? Right, thank you. Yes, Mr Frazer.


MR FRAZER:            One another matter, how far, in terms of time, do you
                      anticipate the summaries will go? To the point of
                      identification or beyond or not as far as that?


CORONER:              Again, it’s slightly difficult for me to answer but I would
                      expect that they would go at least up to the temporary
                      mortuary, and possibly up to the point of identification. Their
                      identification, in a sense, we’ve already dealt with at the
                      opening so we may well stop at that point. If you like the
                      objective, if we can achieve it, is to trace each individual
                      from the moment he left home to the point in time when he
                      was in the temporary mortuary.


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                     5
MR FRAZER:            I’m obliged, sir, thank you.
00:08:56
CORONER:              We may not succeed, of course, and I’m sure you will
                      appreciate that but that is the intention, isn’t it? We feel that
                      that is what you want to know, at least I think you want to
                      know that anyway.
00:09:08
MR FRAZER:            I’m, obliged, sir.


CORONER:              Now, the worst is over you’ll be pleased to hear. We will
                      probably have available, but I don’t think we will circulate,
                      documents called anacapas(?). Mr Frazer has already seen
                      one of these. These are rather nice summary charts which
                      have got clocks and time charts on them. It is relatively
                      easy from that to see where certain things happen. It may
                      not be practical for us to circulate those; it may be difficult
                      but we will certainly have a copy available in court on the
                      relevant day.


                      Now, I have already mentioned that people like Dr Forrest,
                      who did the blood alcohols; it would be unreasonable to
                      expect him to sit here for days on end to get up in each
                      individual inquest and say, “The blood alcohol was X,” or
                      whatever it was.


                      So, what I intend to do with him is to ask him to come along
                      on day one and to prove, if you like - 1presume Mr Frazer
                      will be here and any other solicitors who may feel it
                      appropriate and, indeed, anybody else - formally his
                      evidence and to explain as far as is necessary the basis on


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                        6
                      which he worked it out so that people can understand what
                      he’s done, so to speak. I don’t expect people to become
                      clinical chemists but to have a rough idea of what goes on.


                      We also want to have probably Inspector Layton and maybe
                      one or two others as well - 1don’t know yet - who will explain
                      to me and to the people who are here the anacapas, the
                      codings which are used, so that when we look at documents
                      we’ll understand the conventions which have been
                      employed. I think purely convenience so that we all know
                      we’re speaking the same language.


                      I’m also considering asking probably Professor Usher to give
                      an overview of the pathology of the type of injury which
                      occurred at Hillsborough. Again, so that particular if we
                      have some cases where we don’t have the pathologist
                      present for individual inquests there has been a general
                      explanation of the pathology and what pathologists general
                      find in that sort of situation. There may be one or two other
                      witnesses who I might in the end decide could usefully give
                      this sort of information at the beginning. This is, as I say,
                      intended to make life easier for me, for the witnesses, for the
                      legal representatives and to make sure that we all speak the
                      same language and that we know what we’re doing.


                      Now, I’ve already indicated that, in fact, what we’re going to
                      do is we’ll be doing 95 individual inquests, so we’ll be doing
                      them one after the other. We’re aiming at the moment to do
                      eight inquests a day. We want to have enough time so that
                      each individual family can feel that their particular loved one
                      has been thought about and properly considered. So, we


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      7
                      don’t want to have a mad rush and get it over and done with.
                      On the other hand, if you think about it, if we do eight a day
                      that’s about two and a half to three weeks of sittings.
00:14:00
                      So, we’re talking about a lengthy period of time and clearly
                      one has to take into account that for each individual
                      bereaved it’s relatively short period of time, but for me and
                      for the legal representatives, and for the jury, it’s weeks of
                      stress. I’m not talking about myself but we have to consider
                      that we will have a jury - I’ll come to that in a moment - and it
                      wouldn’t be fair on them to make this longer than it has to
                      be.
00:14:41
                      On the other hand I do want everybody to understand that I
                      don’t intend to rush it. I want to these inquests as
                      thoroughly and as sympathetically as it is possible to do
                      them within the limits which I’ve indicated to you. I want, as
                      far as possible, that people at the end of the day will be able
                      to get up and when they leave will be able to say, “Well, we
                      know we haven’t heard all the answers but we know more
                      than we did when we started.”


                      Now, I said we will be doing 95 individual inquests but we
                      will not be doing them in either numerical or alphabetical
                      order. The listing of the case is actually a very difficult
                      problem and I don’t think we’ve solved it yet. When I first
                      thought about it I made up my mind that we were going to do
                      them in what I call pathologist order. In a sense that is still,
                      if you like, the point at which I want to begin.


                      Of course, it isn’t as simple as all that because in a few


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                       8
                      cases more than one person died in a family. Because of
                      the way the identifications were done, and because of the
                      way the post mortem work was done, it wasn’t always the
                      same pathologist who dealt with family units. So, it may well
                      be for that reason alone we will have to break the general
                      order because one thing I’m certain about I don’t want to
                      deal with individual family units on different days. The
                      families have got to be done sequentially. There are other
                      factors which also come in to play.


                      So, although I appreciate that listing is maybe important to
                      you, I think it’s only fair that I should say that the decision as
                      to which order we’re going to take the cases is going to be
                      mine and my officer’s. Whilst we will certainly not want to
                      inconvenience anybody deliberately, that’s certainly not my
                      intention, I think it will be an impossible task to try and take
                      individual preferences into account. If we do take them into
                      account they would come at the bottom of the list. I think
                      I’ve got to be honest and truthful about this so that you
                      know. You can also be assured that we won’t do it in order -
                      - we are conscious where people live and that they have to
                      come a long way in many cases.


                      Now, I have mentioned jury. This is quite a difficult problem
                      as to what to do about the jury. My initial intention was to do
                      these - presuming that we proceed, of course - limited
                      inquests without the jury being present. I’ve reflected upon it
                      and I think despite the fact that the jury, at this stage, will not
                      have very much to do other than to listen, I fear that we will
                      have to have a jury present for each one of these inquests.
                      Should I change my mind on that, which is unlikely, then of


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      9
                      course I’ll let the lawyers know but I think you should
                      assume we will be dealing with a jury.
00:18:55
                      Whilst I’m on the question of the jury, it might perhaps be
                      worth remembering that even if this were an inquest from
                      start to finish, an inquest is not an adversarial procedure.
                      An inquest is definitely non-adversarial; occasionally you do
                      get a little bit of heat generated - I’m not going to deny that -
                      but it is an important point to remember when one thinks
                      about the function of the jury. Their job is to reach a verdict
                      on the evidence which they hear in the court. I’m quite
                      confident that we’ll be able to find a suitable jury who are
                      capable of doing that.
00:19:43
                      Location. I intend, subject to the reservations I’ve made
                      several times already about actually doing it, to hold these
                      inquests here at the Medico-Legal Centre. W e’ve got
                      facilities here and I think although I’m not going to say we’ll
                      have a lot of room, we will just manage it. Bearing in mind
                      that we’re dealing with individual inquests, we assume that
                      we will have relatively few people in at any particular point in
                      time because each day there will be, say, eight inquests, but
                      there will be eight individual families.


                      I intend to arrange for the proceedings to be transcribed so
                      that transcripts will be available. I don’t think it’s necessary
                      that the transcripts should be available on a next morning
                      basis because, as I’ve already said, we are dealing with
                      individual inquests and the inquest, say for person A, will
                      have been finished on Monday, person B we’ll start on
                      Tuesday. The relevance of the transcript of person A has no


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                     10
                      relevance to person B.


                      So, we do intend to have transcripts and hopefully they will
                      be available within a reasonable time but I don’t think there’s
                      any need for me to arrange for them to be available on a
                      next-day basis. As you will know, gentlemen, copies of the
                      transcripts, I’m afraid, have to be paid for.


                      Now, before I deal with the rest of the matter can anybody,
                      particularly from the lawyers, stand up and tell me whether
                      they think this is a non-starter? I think, Mr Frazer, Mr
                      Devonside wants a word with you. It is Mr Devonside, isn’t
                      it?


MR DEVONSIDE:         It is Mr Devonside but, no, he doesn’t want a word with Mr
                      Frazer.


CORONER:              I see, beg your pardon.


MR FRAZER:            Sir, I think we obviously, in view of your opening remarks,
                      have had an opportunity to discuss these proposals at some
                      length and there is a general warm feeling towards the idea
                      and you are to be commended for putting forward the
                      suggestion to the families.


CORONER:              That is very kind of you to say that, Mr Frazer, and very
                      much appreciated. Thank you very much indeed. Can I just
                      look down ... are there any other legal representatives who
                      have a different view, I don’t mean on the complimentary
                      aspects of the matter but as to whether we should proceed
                      on this basis?


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                    11
                      No? Good. Well, I’m relieved because I felt it was a
                      sensible step forward but I didn’t want you to feel that we
                      were going to either steamroller it through or do it if people
                      had very strong feelings against it.


                      Can I just say three or four more things and then I will give
                      you an opportunity to say anything which you feel I may
                      have omitted which I should be thinking about?
00:23:12
                      I’m very well aware that there is a Hillsborough Support
                      Group and in fact there are some of the representatives here
                      - hello. Although I haven’t been in touch with them and I
                      understand that many of them and the people up here, and
                      maybe others, have been in touch with many of the families,
                      I would want you to feel I wouldn’t do anything to harm or
                      hinder your endeavours.
00:23:47
                      On the other hand I think we’ve got to have correct lines of
                      communications. I think probably the right way of looking at
                      this is to say that the support groups are really, shall we say,
                      mainly family orientated. I know that you have thought of
                      other groups, for example the jury, who may need some
                      support at some point in the future, but I’m not talking about
                      that. I’m merely talking about the families at the moment.


                      What we intend to do is that we will be listing, hopefully,
                      people and giving you dates when we anticipate your own
                      individual inquest will come up. What we’ll probably do is
                      give you a provisionally-warned date and then try and
                      confirm it as soon as we are able. I hope that you will all


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                    12
                      forgive me if, we having provisionally warned you, we find
                      that we can’t make the date and have to change it,
                      particularly in the beginning because we don’t actually know
                      yet how long we’re going to take. It’s a very difficult
                      exercise.


                      What we would intend to do as far as the Hillsborough
                      Support Group is concerned is somebody obviously will
                      have to be nominated - so let me know who our contact
                      point is. I or my officers would endeavour to warn you of the
                      dates when any particular family is likely to come up. Once
                      we’ve done that we would expect the solicitors - and that is
                      probably being Mr Frazer/any who you nominate - to liaise
                      with the support group and for the support group to liaise
                      with them.


                      In other words we want the lines of communication to the
                      support group to be through the solicitor rather than through
                      the Coroner, because I think that that is more correct. Also,
                      because it relieves me of a certain amount of work, shall we
                      say - not to put too finer point on it.


                      We will try and make sure that you are given the dates by us
                      so that you at least know which families are scheduled to
                      come on any particular date and then we expect you to have
                      your own organisational arrangements. It may well be that if
                      we can fit it in we’ll arrange for a meeting with the
                      Hillsborough Support Group - an informal one with me and
                      maybe the officers - so that if there are any things that need
                      ironing out it can be done. As I’ve already said we will
                      endeavour to give as much warning as we possibly can but


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                   13
                      there’s obviously going to be a certain limitation on time.


                      I think I have to say that once having warned somebody, say
                      we warned somebody for Wednesday - whatever date it
                      might be - for 11 o’clock by chance, if he person isn’t here
                      we will proceed with the hearing on the assumption that they
                      are not coming. This is because with the numbers of cases
                      which we have to do we can’t really -- unless we have
                      everybody sitting around waiting so that we can take them
                      out of order, which I don’t think is terribly satisfactory. I
                      would much rather have people come. There’s bound to be
                      a certain amount of waiting; it’s inevitable. I want to reduce
                      it to a minimum.
00:27:42
                      The corollary to that is that if people are warned for certain
                      times, they have to be present. Or, one has to assume that
                      they don’t want to come. There will be, I expect, some
                      families who will say, “No, I don’t want anything to do with it.
                      I’m hurt and I don’t want to hear it.” I respect that; we don’t
                      insist on people coming, but we do want them to have the
                      opportunity of doing so if they wish to.
00:28:13
                      We’re going to try to have coffee and biscuits, and things
                      like that, available in the building so that people can get a
                      cup of tea if they want one or if they need one. Also
                      similarly things - I’m not going to discuss them now - we are
                      doing our best to try and make things go as smoothly and as
                      easily for everybody. In particular of course for the families;
                      obviously for you it would be a hard and difficult time and I
                      understand that.




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      14
                      You will be aware, of course, that the press will - these are
                      not the press by the way; these are some of the West
                      Midland Police officers who have been closely involved with
                      the work and who I commend very highly for the help they’ve
                      given me anyway - be entitled to be present at these
                      inquests. We can’t stop them; it is a public court and they’re
                      entitled --
00:29:26




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                 15
