HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)



     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
            STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before
. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP
          (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                   At
             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.
                   On
          18th December, 1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . Harpha*, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                      INDEX TO TRAN SC RIP T

                                               Page

BRIAN RIDGE Sworn

   By THE CORONER                                1.
   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE                   7.
   Cross-Examined by MR. KING                    9
   Further by THE CORONER                        9.

MALCOLM BAIN Sworn

   By THE CORONER                               10,
   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
   Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING
   Cross-Examined by MR. KING
                                                19.
                                                20
                                                21
                                                     ,
                                                     ,
   Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE              25.
   Further by THE CORONER                       26,
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING           29.
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE          29.
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING           31.
   Further by THE CORONER                       31.
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE      33.
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING           35,
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING        36,

PETER JOSEPH GARRETT Sworn

   By THE CORONER                               38.
   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE                  50.
   Cross-Examined by MR. COUGHLIN               53.
   Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING                53.
   Cross-Examined by MR. KING                   55,
   Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL                55
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE          57,
   Further by THE CORONER                       57,

MALCOLM ADRIAN HURST Sworn

   By THE CORONER                               58,
   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE                  67,
   Cross-Examined by MR. KING                   71,
   Further by THE CORONER                       71,
STUART ROWLAND THORPE Sv^orn

   By THE CORONER                         72.
   Cross-Examined by  HR. PAYNE           89.
   Cross-Examined by  MR. COUGHLIN        93.
   Cross-Examined by  MR. KING            93.
   Cross-Examined by  MR. CATCHPOLE      102.
   Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN        107.
   Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL         107.
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE   110.
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING    111.
   Further by THE CORONER                111.
   Cross-Examined by MR. HALE            114.
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING    114.
                TWENTY SECOND DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                  TUESDAY, 18th DECEMBER 1990


                   BRIAN RIDGE Called (Sworn)

                         By THE CORONER

Q. You are Brian Ridge, that is right, isn' t it? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it still                                    in Sheffield?
   - A. Yes, S3Li. •

Q. You are a woodworking machinist? - A. Yes.

Q. You also have been a steward for quite a few years, I
   think, with Sheffield Wednesday? - A. Yes.

Q.   Are you still a steward? - A.   Yes.

Q.    In 1989 I think you had been there    forabout   20years
     or so? - A. Yes.

Q.   Your position over the last two or three years prior to
     1989 had been as one of the stewards on the inside of
     Gate B, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Was that a permanent posting? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you worked with a couple of other gentlemen,
   Ian Heathcote and Tony Garnam? - A. Yes.

Q.   Your job was to open the gate for Police Officers      and
     other authorised people? - A. Yes.

Q.    To open it at the end of the match    so that people could
     get out? - A. Yes.

Q. And to open it if you heard a coded message to say that
   there was an emergency? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. Basically that is what it was? - A. Yes.

Q. It wasn't intended for ingress of the general public,
   it was intended for people who were authorised to come
   in and out except towards the end of the game, or
   during emergencies? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Can you remember whether you were at the 1988 semi­
   final? - A. Yes.

Q. You were? - A. Yes.
                                                          2


                                                    B. RIDGE



Q. Same gate? - A. Yes.

Q. Just one final point on the gate, it has got a little
   window, hasn't it, you can look out? - A. Yes.

Q. And Gate B is the one that actually overlooks
   turnstiles A-G, doesn't it? - A. Correct, yes.

Q. It is adjacent to A-G, so if you look out you get a
   view of what is happening in that area? - A. That is
   correct, yes.

Q. At about 11 o'clock you turned up for work and having
   been briefed and given your equipment and so on you set
   off for the gate, is that right? - A. That is correct,
   yes.

Q. Were you on this particular occasion given any special
   instructions or was it just what you would normally
   expect? - A. It was just what I would normally expect,
   although we did have a proper briefing by the Police.

Q. When was that? - A. Round about 25-past-ll I believe.

Q. After that? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you just tell me what you remember of that
   briefing? What were you told? - A. Usually to do with
   fire, report on any fires to a Police Officer, or first
   aid to any Police Officer, who can get in touch by
   radio through their radio control room.  I have
   forgotten the other thing.

Q. It is a long time ago, of course. - A. It is, yes.

Q. But you remembered that there were some instructions
   which were given to you? - A. Yes.  Mostly they were
   commonsense.

Q. Were you given, as far as you remember, any indications
   or instructions about the numbers expected, or anything
   like that.  There is no reason why you should have been
   but I am just interested whether you were. - A. We knew
   from the paper that it was rather an uneven split,
   there was more for Nottingham Forest fans than there
   was for Liverpool fans.

Q. But you, of course, were at the Liverpool end, weren't
   you? - A. Well we were only at Liverpool end.

Q. Having taken up your position at about 11.30 or so,
   maybe a little bit later than that, what happened, did
   the gate get unlocked - is the gate unlocked or locked
   in the beginning? - A. There are four bolts on it.
                                                          3


                                                    B. RIDGE



     There are two doors that slide together and there are
     four bolts on, and also there is a little tiny catch in
     the middle with a hook on, which holds them together,
     and on a normal match we usually just leave it on that
     because of quickness, because they are rather heavy
     doors, but on a semi-final we always put the bolts on
     because we know with the sheer weight of numbers that
     sometimes the little catch can open on its own.

Q.   So you do that as a matter of routine with the semi­
     finals, not just this one? - A. Yes, or any big match -
     Man. United and ....

Q. I think I am right in saying until maybe 2, quarter-
   past, things were - what were they like? - A. It was
   just like a normal league match, very quiet.

Q. Did you look out of the window at all to see what it
   was like? - A. As a matter of routine we keep having a
   look through.

Q. Keeps up interest, doesn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. Because presumably, because of the positioning of your
   gate, there isn't very much happening just where you
   are standing, is there? - A. No.

Q.   In a normal situation? - A. Yes.

Q.    Did you pass a comment at that time? -A. Yes, I
     commented to one of my, well, they are friends really.

Q. Mates? - A. Yes, one of my mates that, "You wouldn't
   think it were a semi-final day".  People were just
   coming through steady.  It wouldn't even be quarter
   full.

Q. What time was that about? - A. That would be between
   quarter-past, 20-past 2.

Q. Can you think back at this stage to 1988, and if it is
   too difficult a question please tell me, but comparing
   the situation at that time with 1988, can you make a
   comparison at all or not? - A. 1988 seemed to go a lot
   more smoothly.  I do believe that the Police were
   holding people back without tickets, and there was a
   crush but not on the same scale at this time.

Q. What I am interested in is whether by about quarter or
   20-past-2 in 1988 more people had passed? - A. Yes, I
   should think they would have*  It was a more steady
   flow.
                                                        4


                                                  B. RIDGE



Q. What happened after that as far as you were concerned?
   - A. We just carried on with what we normally had to
   do, keep checking, sometimes we have to go to relieve
   ourselves so other two take over, and it was just a
   normal semi-final, just kept having a look through the
   window, and we could see that it was starting to build
   up.  Of course, people were kicking the door -
   sometimes they do it on purpose, sometimes by accident,
   but we have got used to it over the years so we don't
   particularly pay a lot of attention to it.  We know the
   doors won't open with the bolts on.  It got to around
   5-to-3 and we looked out and it was really then, people
   were starting to climb over the perimeter walls.
   Outside they have put a fence, and what they were doing
   by all accounts, they were standing on one another's
   shoulders and then pulling one another up.

Q. You didn't see that? - A. I didn't see that, no.

Q. I am interested in you telling me what you either saw
   or heard because we have got plenty of people who were
   outside .... - A. Who probably have seen that, yes.

Q. I am interested in what you saw and what you heard? -
   A. I saw people climbing up the outside, over the
   outside perimeter wall and on top of one of them there
   is like pillars with cast-iron work between, and they
   were climbing over these and on top of the pillars
   there was a concrete slab, probably two foot square,
   and it got dislodged and I remember someone handing
   that down, and it was put out of the way for safety's
   sake.  That would be about 5-minutes-to-3.

Q. What happened then as far as you were concerned? - A.
   People were coming in, you could see, there was a lot
   of noise outside and people were getting very agitated.
   The time goes by so quickly that you have no semblance
   of time, after say quarter-to-3.  All the times then
   have got to be approximately because I hadn't got a
   watch on.  There were Policemen outside the turnstiles,
   same as there always are.  It was just impossible for
   them to examine - they probably just pulled one at
   random, but we watched them do it a few times.  Then
   somebody came up and said we had got to open the gate.
   Well that is against all normal procedure, to open
   those big gates once they are shut, except in a real
   emergency or if we get our codeword.



                /Q. Can you remember ....
                                                    B. RIDGE



Can you remember who said you should open the gates? - A.
Well, it was a police constable.    Well, a police
officer I should say.   Whether it was a constable or
not.  The only thing I can remember, he was about my
height and he had a ginger moustache.

I know it is very difficult with regard to timings, but
when that was   said were there still a lot of people in
the area outside turnstiles A to G? - A. Yes.

Are you saying that by guess or did you actually see them
through the window before you opened the gate? - A. Well,
we could hear them.

You could hear them? - A. Yes.

Did you hear them complain about being hurt or being
crushed at all? -A. No, not until some came into the
ground.

Did they tell you then? - A. Yes.

What did they say to you? - A. "We're    getting crushed   out
here."

So a police officer of whatever description came to you
and said something like, "Open the gates," or words to
that effect? - A. Yes.

You understood that? - A. Yes.

Did you in fact do it or not? - A. No.

What did you tell him? - A. I said, "You unlock the doors
and we will pull them back."

Was that because you didn't want to take the
responsibility for that? - A. Yes.

Had you ever been in a situation where you had had to
open the gates to let people in at that stage of the
match? - A. No.

That was your first experience of that? - A. Yes.

As a matter of interest, had you ever opened them because
you got the coded message to say open the gates as an
emergency, except in practises? - A. No, only in
practise.

So he unlocked it.    Did you give him the key? - A. No,
there wasn't a key.    It was held with the bolt and the
little catch in the middle.
                                                            6



                                                   • B. RIDGE


Q. He undid those? - A. Yes, he pulled the bolts down.
   Once he had undid the bolts we were all right, we were
   covered.

Q. When he did that you and your mates... - A. Opened the
   doors.

Q. What happened to the people outside the gate? - A. They
   started to run in.

Q. Them came in? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see where they went? - A. A lot of them went
   straight to the toilets.

Q. If you go in Gate B you come in and the tunnel is
   shielded by a wall? - A. Yes.

Q. You can get to it because there is a gap? - A. Yes.

Q. When you first come in can   you see the tunnel instantly
   or do you have to look for   it? - A. You have to look for
   it.

Q. Are you saying there are toilets visible? - A. Yes, the
   toilets are visible.

Q. So quite a lot of them went to the toilets? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see what happened to them after that? - A. No.

Q. There was no reason why you shouldn't? - A. No.

Q. I think there were some people who lost their   shoes when
   they came in? - A. That is correct.

Q. How many pairs did you pick up in    theend? - A.   I think
   five pairs and umpteen odd ones.

Q. Did people come back for those? - A. Well, as the^
   disaster had happened, people came back and some just
   picked a pair of shoes up and ran   and put them on.
   Whether they fit or not I don't know.

Q. What I meant was not after the disaster happened, but did
   people turn round straight away and say, "Where are my
   shoes?" - A. Oh, no, they just ran straight into the
   ground.

Q. It was only later that people came and started hunting
   around? - A. That is correct.

Q. You didn't go into the terracing area until very much
   later? - A. I didn't go into the terracing area at all.
                                                          7



                                                    •• B. RIDGE


Q.    Apart from the fact there were a lot of people there at
     that time, was  there anything else unusual as far as you
     yourself was concerned, as far as you could see or hear,
     not what other people told you, not what you have heard?
     - A. No, not particularly, except there were more people
     seemed to come a lot later than there has been at
     previous semi-finals.

Q. You did notice that? - A. Yes.
Q. You mentioned ticketless fans.   I don't want to go^into
   what happened away from the ground because you didn t see
   that, but did you yourself see anybody who you can
   positively say did not have a ticket? - A. No, not
   really.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q.   Mr. Ridge, you  did make one comment that in 1988 you said
     the police were holding back people without tickets? - A.
     Yes, I believe is true.

Q. You don't actually know that yourself, do you? - A.
   Well...
Q. From anything you saw? - A. Well, I probably read it in
   the papers, or something like that.

Q. It is not something you know yourself.     Just look at the
   bundle of photographs at C.258.

          THE CORONER:    I don't think, Mr. Payne, you need to
     go into this at great length.    I am not trying to stop
     you.    I am just saying it is fairly clear.

Q.          MR. PAYNE: Just look at this photograph.   We need
     not spend very long on this, Mr. Ridge, because it is •
     fairly obvious, but you can see your gate there just to.
     the left of turnstiles A to G? - A. Yes.

Q. If you look out through your porthole you can just see
   across the mouth of those turnstiles? - A. You can, yes,
   and slightly towards the main gate, very slightly.

Q. You can't see anything that is happening outside the
   other range of turnstiles 1 to 16, can you? - A. Not
   unless we do get a glimpse through the actual turnstiles
   which face us, which are turnstiles, I believe, 1 to 16
   or 1 to 17.

Q.   You are not in a position to get any sort of a view of
     the system which is being operated by the police in the
     reception area at all, are you? - A. Not really, no.
                                                         8



                                                ••   B. RIDGE


Q. When the people came through the gate and they lost their
   shoes, what was it was causing their shoes to come off? -
   A. Quite likely perhaps somebody trod on their heel or
   something like that, or...




                Q. It's not the normal thing
                                                              9




                                      B. RIDGE


         It is not the normal thing for this number of people's
         shoes to come off? - A. No, it isn't, but some of them
         were very down at heel ones, and actually some were
         quite good.
B        I was just wondering why they all came off at this
         particular place? - A. I have no idea.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

         Mr. Ridge, I am interested solely as to your
         impression at 2.15/2.20.  At 2.15/2/20, your clear
         impression was that not as many people had arrived at
         the turnstiles A to G as you were expecting, is that
         right? - A. I would have thought there would have been
         a lot more.

         Did I get the figure right, because I may have got it
         wrong, that you thought that about a quarter had
         arrived by that time, is that right? - A. Yes.

         So at about 2.15/2.20, your impression was that about
         three-quarters of the people had still to come? - A.
D        It looked like a normal league match.

         So your impression was a quarter had come by 2.15/2.20
         and it follows from that --- A. As far as I could see,
         yes.

    Q.   A good three-quarters still had to come? - A. Yes.

    Q.   In the last 45 minutes? - A. Yes.

              THE CORONER: Anything else before we let Mr.
         Ridge go?   (No response) Mr. Ridge, thank you very
         much indeed.   Mr. Bain, I think, is the next witness.
         Is Mr. Ridge still here? Just come back for one
         moment, there is one more question I want to ask.

                      Further by THE CORONER:

    Q.   It is quite a simple question,    You know when the gate
         was opened? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Can you give any idea how many people actually came
         through it, in round terms, I do not mean did you
         count them physically, but in round terms? - A. I
         should have thought around 500, but it is very, very
         difficult to judge when everyone is moving.

         But it certainly was not just 50, or anything like
         that? - A. Oh no.




H
                            B. RIDGE


     THE CORONER: Does anybody want to ask anything
about that?  (No response). Thank you very much.

                MALCOLM BAIN Sworn

                  By THE CORONER:

You are Malcolm Bain, is that right? - A. Yes.

                       is that right? - A.

           in Sheffield, is that right? - A. Yes.

You too are a steward? - A. Yes.

In fact, you are a bill poster by trade, I think? - A.
Yes.

But you are a steward at Sheffield Wednesday? - A.
Yes.

And in 1989 you had been there for about 12 years or
so? - A. Yes.

Have you, for a period, been the gateman at Gate       C, or
one of the gatemen at Gate C? - A. Yes.

How long have you been there? - A. Just one season.

How many matches would that be,     as far as Gate C   is
concerned? - A. About 30.

I see, and did that season include the 1988 semi-final
between --- A. No, I was upstairs on the West Stand.

You were on the West Stand, I see.  Just so that we
can dispose of 1988 then, the semi-final, I am not
interested in what happened up on the West Stand.
What I am interested in is in 1988, before the match
started, did you come down into the concourse area? -
A. I was in the concourse all the time, at the bottom
of the West Stand, at the stairs checking the tickets.

You were at the stairs, I see.  Can we put the plan
up.  I will just show it to you and you can show us
where you were in 1988.  I think it is 274.  The best
thing to do is to walk up to it actually and just show
us.  We are talking about 1988, not 1989. - A. Just
there, at the bottom of the stairs.

So you were what I would call behind turnstiles 1 to
16? - A. Yes.
L *
                                                                  11




                                                     M. BAIN


          Q.   On the right-hand side of the wall, so to speak? - A.
               Yes.

          Q.   Does that mean that you could not actually see the
               tunnel from there, could you? - A. No.
      B
          Q.   Okay, thank you.  I have put that to you that you
               could not see the tunnel, but is that actually
               correct? - A. You know, you have got me.  I don't know
               whether the wall was built then or not.  I can't
               remember.

                    THE CORONER: Mr. Catchpole, I think it was, was
               it not?

                    MR. CATCHPOLE:     Yes sir.

                    THE WITNESS:     Well I couldn't see the tunnel.

          Q.         THE CORONER: You stayed in that location
               virtually the whole time in 1988? - A. Yes, the whole
               time.

      D   Q.   Let us turn to 1989.    - A. Right.

          Q.   On this   occasion you had been re-allocated and you
                were now at Gate C? - A. That is correct.

          Q.   You were there with who else? - A. Ian Marsh and
               Richard - I have forgotten his second name.

          Q.   You signed on, so to speak, and then you went to the
               gate, is that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

          Q.   At about what time? - A. I was a bit late.  I was
               working that morning and I had arranged with the chief
               steward that I would get down as soon as possible and
               it was about quarter-past to half-past 11 when I got
               down to the actual gate itself.

          Q.   Do you know which chief steward it was? - A. Yes,
               Stuart Thorp.

          Q.   You were responsible to him? - A. Yes, that is
               correct.

          Q.   When you got there the gate had already presumably
               been unlocked by your colleagues? - A. Yes.

          Q.   What time did    you say   you got there, I     am sorry? -
               It was about quarter-past 11 when I actually got to
               the ground.  By the time I had signed in and got
               downstairs it was about 25-past, half-past 11.
                                                             12



                                          M. BAIN


    Q.   I think although the gates are normally kept shut and
         they are only used for authorised exit and ingress? -
         A. Yes, that is correct.

    Q.   It is not unusual for the gate in the initial stages
B        to be kept ajar, is that right? - A. No, we usually
         keep ours about a foot apart.  There are two bolts and
         if you put them in the bolt holes it is about just
         over a foot to 18 inches, and we usually keep it there
         on normal matches because our gates were used more
         than any other gate for the Police coming in and out
         and one thing and another.

    Q.   And it saves pulling it? - A. It saves them knocking
         and pulling, and what-have-you.

    Q.   Is your   gate also used to eject fans? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Would I be right in saying that your experience, of
          course, of this gate is limited to 30 matches, but it
          is still limited so far as some of your colleagues are
          concerned.  In the normal run-of-the-mill match does
          it stay in that position? - A. Yes, we keep it there
          until about 3 o'clock and then it is closed
          altogether, because there are Police horses come in
          and one thing and another.

    Q.   Then you open it wide, presumably, at the end of the
         match normally speaking? - A. Yes.

    Q.   In your experience, have you ever had to open it wide
         apart from this last match because of an emergency? -
         A. No, only for test drills, when they have had tests
         and things.

    Q.   I am not concerned about that.  When you got there .1
         think there was a programme seller somewhere close by
         to you as well, was there not?  There was a barrier
         with a programme seller? - A. Yes, that is correct.




                                     /Q. Talking about




H
                     «
                                                             13


                                   M. BAIN


Q. Talking about Gate C. Where was he can you remember? -
   A. Where the gate is, if you look at the gate he was at
   the left-hand side round some barriers.
q . if you look at the gate from the inside? — A. From the
   ground side, he was at the left-hand side.

Q. Did you go outside at all? - A. Yes, we kept moving in
   and out of the gate which we normally do. We either
   stand outside the gate or come inside the gate.

Q. I am not criticising, I am just interested because you
   can tell us what you saw, that is all. Were you wearing
   a yellow .... A. Yes.
Q. Does it actually have anything written on it? - A. Umbro.

Q. It does not say "Steward" or anything? - A. No, not as
   far as I know.
Q. When you were outside how far did you yourself venture
   from the gate at all? — A. Only to the shop and then back
   just once and then I just walked to the end of the turn­
   stiles and back, which is a matter of five yards.

Q. So you did go up and down? - A. Yes.
Q. You weren't just directly outside. Up to what time did
   you do that? In other words what was the last time that
   you yourself ventured out? — A. It would be just before
   2 o'clock because it was very quiet, very quiet.

Q. It was very quiet you say? - A. Yes, I have not known
   a semi-final as quiet.
Q. Yes, of course, because you have been a Steward for some
   years, but you weren't normally at the Leppings Lane end
   were you? - A. I have always been at the Leppings Lane
   end. At the West Stand you can see all what is going on.
   When you are at the bottom of the steps, before they
   built the wall you could see everything that was going
   on so you knew how many was coming in, you know, and
   what the situation was.
Q. But you certainly had the impression that it was quiet?
   - A. Oh very quiet.
Q. I am interested in when you walked towards the shop. Can
   you recollect by chance about what time that might have
   been? - A. Well it would be about ten minutes after I
   got there.

Q. So fairly early on? - A. Yes.
                                M. BAIN


I take it from what you have already said it was even
quieter? - A. Yes.
Do you remember anybody approaching you and asking about
getting in with a Kop ticket? - A. I was approached for
money. A chap came up and offered me £20 if I would let
him in and I said: "No chance".
I am interested in a group of people who had Kop tickets
and who have already told us that they approached somebody
who said: "I can't let you in but try that turnstile"?
- A. No, nobody come to me.

That was not you? - A. No.
I am not trying to catch you in any way, I am just
interested to find out whether we can find the person
who it was and you say it was not you? - A. No.

Apart from that one chap who offered you the £20 which
you turned down did you have any other approaches? - A.
Yes, yes. As it got, well it was not really busy but
as more came there was one or two kept coming up and
offering us money.
Was it in ones and twos? - A. Yes, one chap were there
all the match more or less persistently.

But it was not huge numbers as far as you personally
were concerned? - A. No.
You were walking up and down from time to time? — A. Yes.

There was no reason why you should not have been because
it was quiet as you have already said. Up to that time,
up to 2 o'clock were the perimeter gates, the outer,
the barred gates open or shut. Can you remember? — A.
I can't remember.
Do you remember - let me put the question in a slightly
different way - do you recollect since you have been
on Gate C whether those gates are normally open or shut.
I realise there has not been a semi-final in that period
apart from this one but are they normally open or shut,
can you remember? — A. In that particular season you mean?

Yes? - A. I can't say one way or the other.     I know now
they are closed.
No, I am interested ....     A. I would not like to comment.
I would not like to say.
You have already said when you ate at these staixs you can
actually see but I take it you can't possibly see the
perimeter gates? - A. You can't see outside, no.
                              M. BAIN


We are still early on, were there Police Officers around
at that time? - A. Yes.

Both inside and outside? - A. Yes.

Were they in the sort of normal numbers? - A. Yes.

You didn't notice that there were excessive or fewer?
- A. No about normal, what they normally have.

Did you recognise .... A. I didn't know any of them this
time. We didn't know any of them.

Did you know the Inspector? - A. I know Inspector White,
yes.
But the more junior ones you didn't recognise? - A. I
didn't know.
Now you said the last time you ventured out was around
2 o'clock? - A. Somewhere around there.
You didn't go out again. Why was that? - A. Because just
after that they were starting to build up a bit, there
was one or two more coming and there was a lot trying to
get in.
Get in where? - A. In through the turnstiles and coming
up pestering us wanting to offer us money and they were
told to close the gate and not open them only for the
Police or ejecting fans, which we did. That was around
quarter-past-2, something around there.

I don't want to use the word "pestering" because that
has overtones, but the people who approached the gate at
that time, were they in fact offering you money as well
to get in? - A. Yes, they kept coming up and saying:
"Will you let us in?" You know it was getting a bit
too much.
But there is a difference between somebody saying: "Would
you let us in? Here is my ticket, I just can't get in"?
- A. But they had not got tickets.
How did you know that? - A. I asked them if they had got
tickets and they said "No".
So you were quite satisfied that they did not have tickets?
- A. Yes. They can't come through there anyhow even with
tickets.
I realise in the normal event but what I am trying to
establish is how did you satisfy yourself that these people
didn't .... A. Well I always ask them if they have got
a ticket.
                                                                 16


                                 M. BAIN


Q. I see. And if they say they haven't you believe them?
   - A. I say: "Well fair enough".

Q. How many people would you say were in this class at
   this time between quarter-past and whenever the gates
   were eventually opened? — A. I should say outside there
   would be, I am not very good on figures but there would
   be well over 100 without tickets, well over.

Q. That was your impression? - A. Yes.

Q. How many of those actually approached you personally?
   — A. There was about four or five approached me personally.
   I don't know about the other Stewards on the other gates.

Q. So you made a deduction from that because presumably you
   saw them as a group? - A. Yes.

Q. During this time, once you had shut thegate, I think
   it was a Police Officer probably Inspector White? - A. Yes,
   it was Inspector White.  I went up to him and he told us
   to close the gate because we were being harassed by them
   and they would not stop so he says:  "Close the gate and
   you only open it for the Police".

Q. Did you then have occasion to open it for the ejection of
   fans? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you also open it for any other reason as far as you
   remember? - A. Only for the ejection of fans and to let
   the odd Police Officer in.

Q. Generally speaking did that work satisfactorily in the
   sense that if you wanted a fan ejected you got him out
   and you did not get a load of other people in? - A. Well
   yes it did but there was a lot of people outside.  You
   know, as it went more and more on it was getting very bad.

Q. Were you from where you were standing at this time able
   to see the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

Q. You could see it? - A. I could see the turnstiles in
   front of us.

Q. The A-G ones? - A. Yes.

Q. What was it like as far as you could see? - A. What about
   quarter-past-2 you mean?

Q. Yes, let's take quarter-past-2? - A. Fairly quiet.     They
   were coming through pretty steady at that time.

Q. Then as you went on when did it change? - A. About quarter-
   to-3, it got really hectic.

                                  Q. What was it like ...
                                               N.     BAIN



What was it like? Just describe it to me. - A. It was
ridiculous really, the way the people were pushing,
just pushing their way through.  They just wouldn t
wait, and children were getting squashed.  As people
were pushing from the back children were trying to come
through the turnstiles, they was getting squashed, so
they ended up just lifting them over to get them
through.

Could you actually see the people at the back? - A. No.

So you don't know whether they were pushing, you
presumed? - A. I assumed that they were pushing.

What I am interested in is what you could see? - A. All
I could see was the people coming through the
turnstiles and they were shouting, "Give over pushing
at the back".

You could hear that? - A. Yes, "Give over pushing".

And the ones near the turnstile, I take it, were the
ones who were being squashed? - A. Yes.  There were
women coming through crying and I have never witnessed
anything like it.

You said that children were being lifted through the
turnstiles? - A. Yes, because as they were put down
they were getting squashed against the turnstiles and
they couldn't get through.

Who lifted them over, the operators or the parents? -
A. No, their parents.

What happened then? - A. Then they came banging on the
door.  They started climbing over the wall, as we could
see.  That is all we could see, them climbing over and
jumping down into the forecourt, and they started
banging on the door.  It wouldn t have gone, the door,
because we were stood at the back of it.  It was
swaying but I don't think it would have ever given way,
and we had the order it had got to be opened.

The shorthand writer can't write that down! - A. It was
swaying.

When you say swaying, you mean it was moving in and
out? - A. Yes, just moving gently.

But you weren't worried about the door? - A. I don't
think it would have gone.

Before you tell me about the openings of the door, how
many instances do you remember where the gate was
                                                M,     BAIN



opened where people came in? How many separate
instances can you remember? - A. After quarter-past-2
you mean?

From quarter-to-3 onwards if you wish. - A. I think it
was only opened a couple of times, if that.  It was
opened to eject fans.

Yes, that is what I am trying to find out.   You see, I
am trying to find out how many times you can remember
that the gate was opened, for whatever reason, and
whoever authorised it, and we will deal with that in a
moment, where fans came in - how many separate
occasions was it opened as far as   you remember? - A.
There were no fans came in, but I should say there were
about five or six that were ejected.

Let's take the first opening that   you can remember
where fans came in. - A. Oh, yes.

What happened with regard to that opening? - A. All we
heard was "Open the gate", and then two Police Officers
opened the gate and we moved to one side.   In fact, I
jumped over the barrier where the programme seller was,
and they just all fell in.  The Police Officers were
stuck, and they just fell onto one another, and there
were shoes about and all sorts.

How wide was the gate opened on that occasion? - A.
Fully, right open.

How long did it stay open on that occasion? - A. Five,
ten minutes, I should say.

It was then shut again, wasn't it? - Yes.

In fact, would it be right to say that it was narrowed
before it was shut, or is that wrong? - A. I think it
was closed and then they said "Open it", and they let
the fans in single file, with their tickets.

So it was opened and stayed open for five or ten
minutes as far as you remember, then it was shut? - A.
Yes.

Then it was reopened? - A. Yes.

Then they came through single file? - A. Yes.

That reopening which we are now talking about where
they came through single file, can you recollect
anything in relation to time, when that might have
been? - A. I can't off-hand.
                                                               19



                                                        M.   BAIN



    Q. Did you recollect any roaring from the stadium? - A.
       When they first opened the gates I heard the whistle go
       and there was a big cheer from the stadium, and that is
       when they all headed straight for the tunnel.
B
    Q. Are you saying that you could hear the referee's
       whistle or are you ...? - A. I am sorry, I heard a
       roar, that is correct, yes.

    Q. So you heard whistling? - A. Yes, and then the roar and
       all the fans just dashed for the tunnel.

    Q. Was that in fact at the first opening which you have
       described or the second one? - A. That is the first
       opening.

    Q. We have seen videos - have you see the video at all? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. The compilation video, and on that video we have seen
       what appears to be an opening of the gate where it was
       only opened for a relatively short period of time, when
       it looks from the inside as if a fan was being ejected
       and some people came through.  Can you remember that at
       all? - A. No, I can't remember that.

    Q. Can you remember seeing that video - perhaps you can't
       remember the video? - A. The only part I have seen of
       the video is on the television.

    Q. I beg your pardon, yes.  It wasn't on the television so
       you won't have seen it.  On the second opening which
       you can remember, when they came through, were the
       tickets checked at that point? - A. Yes, they had two
       Police Officers outside checking the tickets and we
       were on the inside.

    Q. I will try this opening from a slightly different tack.
       Can you remember at any point a Police horse coming
       across the gate to assist with the shutting of it? - A.
       No, I can't.

    Q. Were you on the gate the whole time? - A. Yes.

    Q. You did not enter the terracing at all? - A. No.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

    Q. Just help, Mr. Bain please, by looking at the diagram
       on the screen, about your experience over the years
       that you have been working at the ground.  For how long
       before the match in 1989 - I am afraid I did not catch
       this in my note - were you posted at Gate C? For what
       period - was it a whole season? - A. Yes.
                                               M._ BAIN



One season? - A. Yes.

This match was in April so were you there in 1988? - A.
No, I was on the West Stand in 1988, at the bottom of
the stairs.

So when had you started at Gate C - back end of '88? -
A. Yes, something like that.  I can't remember off­
hand.

That same season though that this semi-final came at
the end of the season, is that what you mean? - A. Yes.
I think it was half way through the season the chap
left and they offered me the job, something like that.

Before that, have I got it right, 12 years as a
steward? - A. Yes.

Where were you posted during that 12 years? - A. On the
West Stand.

At the foot of those stairs? - A. Yes.

On the concourse areas? - A. One match you did the
bottom of the stairs, and the next game you went on the
upstairs, directing people to their seats so that you
had an equal basis of downstairs and upstairs.

From your position at the bottom of the stairs then,
were you opposite turnstiles 1-16? - A. At the side of
B gate.

Is that that box at the top of the stand at the top,
where Mr. Griffiths is pointing? - A. Yes, that is
where I stand.

You are on the concourse at the bottom there? - A. Yes.

From there can you look outwards and see through the
turnstiles glimpses of the reception area outside? - A.
No, I can't.

You can't? - A. You can see probably just glimpses, but
you could not make anything out.

When you are up at the top of the stairs can you see
over the turnstiles outwards into Leppings Lane? - A.
No.

            Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

According to what we think we have seen, at about 20-
to-3 or thereabouts a young boy who had been crushed
                                                                 21
                         f




                                                     M.. BAIN



     outside was carried into the ground through Gate C.    Do
     you have any recollection of that? - A. No.

Q.    That would be about eight minutes or thereabouts before
     the incident that the learned Coroner was asking you
     about, when it was suggested that somebody was being
     ejected and some people then used that opportunity to
     come in, but you don t remember that? - A. I can't
     remember.

Q. But you have a very firm recollection, whatever the
   time may have been, of a number of people, one of whom
   continuously tried to persuade you .... - A. I said
   around the times.

Q.   Yes, but you have a clear impression of a number of
     people, one of whom was a continuous attempt to
     persuade you to allow them in through your gate without
     tickets, and upon payment of money? - A. Yes.

Q. And an impression that they were the tip of the iceberg
   and there may have been up to 100 people outside? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Who would have followed suit.     Thank you very much.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Mr. Bain, at 2 o'clock it was obvious to you that it
   was, up to that time, very quiet? - A. Yes.

Q. It was obvious to you at 2 o'clock that most of the
   spectators had yet to arrive? - A. That is correct.

Q. Dealing now with this business of the ticketless fans,
   I just want you if you will to concentrate on what you
   actually know, and what you actually know is that up to
   the time when the Police said, "Close Gate C", which
   was about quarter-past-2, you had been approached, do I
   understand it, by about four or five people? - A. Yes,
   that is correct.

Q. Offering money? - A. Yes.

Q. No more than four or five? - A. No.

Q. So you cannot say, to be fair, what the position was
   with the other people, can you? - A. The only thing was
   that there was a hell of a lot of people stood, just
   stood by the riverbank and we surmised ....

Q. Of course, but surmises can always be very dangerous
   can't they? - A. Yes.
                                                  M.   BAIN



You can only say four or five people? - A. Yes.

Let me move on a bit.  When you said that there was
banging on the gate, that was presumably banging from
outside? - A. Yes.

You have a little porthole, don't you, you can see
outside? - A. Yes.

Did you see any Police Officers outside that gate? - A.
No, there were all fans along the front.

You never saw any Police Officers outside the gate? -
A. No.

And we are talking about Gate C? - A. Yes.

Have you had an opportunity to see any videos or
photographs of the scene on 15th April?  You may not
have? - A. No, only what is on the television.

I see, all right, I can leave that then.  When the fans
entered your recollection of the first entry is a long
entry, five to ten minutes, and a lot of people
entered? - A. Yes.

Can you give an estimate yourself? - A. Probably 300
all at once.

Those fans over that five to ten minutes, they all went
for the tunnel? - A. Yes.

You can confirm that? - A. Well they all went straight
forward towards the tunnel, nobody went left and nobody
went right.

Of course, to go left, if we   look at the little plan,
and Sergeant Griffiths takes   his pointer, you are
talking about coming through   turnstiles A-G and going
left through the entrance in   the wall, the gate in the
wall, isn't it? - A. Yes.

There was no signing or anything to indicate that that
was a way through to the terracing, was there? - A. No.

In fact, that would be leading to the back of the
turnstiles which they had not entered? - A. That is
correct.

That would be leading to the back of the turnstiles     for
people who had seating tickets? - A. That is right.
                                                M.    BAIN



    THE CORONER:     Not quite - seating and ....

     THE WITNESS:  Standing in the corner, yes.      They
could go round the corner to the stand.

     MR. KING:   With respect, sir, anybody who was
entering turnstiles 1-16, anybody who had a ticket for
1-16 had a seating ticket?




      THE CORONER:    Yes, I agree .
                      *                                        24


                                                        M. BAIN



          THE CORONER:   Yes, I agree with that.   In fact if
     they had come through A to G and gone through they could
     have got to a standing area.

          MR. KING:   Undoubtedly, sir.    It is a different
     point I am making, with respect:

Q. If I have a ticket for the terrace, a standing ticket, I
   have to go through turnstiles A to G? - A. I think so on
   that. We don't have much to do on the turnstiles, see.

Q.    Undoubtedly if one knew one could have gone through that
     gap in the wall to go to part of the standing terrace? -
     A. That's correct.

Q. In fact you would be going via the very part which is
   outside the turnstiles for those who had seating tickets?
   - A. That's correct.

Q. You have confirmed that anybody coming through A to G,
   there was nothing to indicate that to get to the far ieft
   corner standing they had to go through that little
   entrance? - A. No.

Q. As regards going to the right, we know there was a small
   sign high up, if you were able to see it? - A. Yes.

Q. But that wasn't in a very conspicuous position, was it? -
   A. If you say so.

Q.    Well, I don't want to put words into your mouth.    We
     will let others decide that who can see it.     However,
     apart from that the main sign was over the tunnel? - A.
     Yes.

Q. Can you also confirm that over that five to ten minutes
   no-one, by which I mean no police officers, for example,
   or stewards - I am not blaming you for this - but no-one
   took any steps to prevent anybody going through the
   tunnel?   You can confirm that? - A. Yes, that's correct.

Q. Over a five to ten minute period.   Can you also confirm
   that you have known - now this would be league matches
   because you have no experience of a semi-final other than
   this year at this terrace end - but can you confirm that
   on league matches you have known the police block the
   entrance of people going through the tunnel, to stop them
   going through? - A. I don't know about league matches.
   They have on semi-finals.

Q. I am sorry, I was assuming it was league matches.      You
   have known semi-final matches? - A. Yes.
                                                      M. BAIN


What has happened on those semi-final matches? - A. When
it has been full they have closed the doors, blocked it
off, had police across the top to stop fans going down.

When what has been full? - A. The standing terrace.

The standing terrace which you get to through the tunnel?
- A. Yes.

You have known in previous semi-finals the police to
block off the tunnels? - A. Yes.

Where do people who want to go into the terracing then
go? - A. Left or right.

I see.    That, of course, didn't happen on this occasion?
-A. No.

            Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Mr. Bain on that last point, I think you can also confirm
the stewards don't take any part in blocking off the
tunnel? - A. No.

That is a police operation? - A. That's up to the police.

The stewards, we have heard from other people, were
deployed in the West Stand, on the stairs, on the gates,
but not on the terraces and not in the concourse? - A.
That's correct.

That is normal? - A. Yes.

Can I just go back from your experience when you are on
Gate C, in every match you have seen I presume people
have always entered through the turnstiles and not
entered by other routes? - A. That's correct.

When people have come through the turnstiles they have
come through fairly slowly?   They stop, t h e y h a v e to
pay, they pick their ticket up and they come in, so it
slows their progress down? - A. Yes.

They enter into the concourse.   They go off and buy
programmes and things like that? - A. That's correct.

Is there a refreshment stand anywhere nearby? - A. That's
correct.

So you get the impression people have time, they wander
around? - A. Yes, correct.

Then they make their decision where they are going to go
and they can go over to the right to the South West pen,
                                                    M. BAIN


they can go into the centre pens if it is open? - A.
That's correct.

The impression of a normal match is when people come
through turnstiles they don't sudden go straight in one
direction? - A. No.

Now on this semi-final day, the time the gate was opened
for the first time that you remember, was that fairly
close to kick-off, as best you can remember, or was it
fairly late on? - A. I think they had kicked-off.

As far as you remember it was around the kick-off time? -
A. Yes.

Did I hear you correctly, you said when the gate was
opened you heard a roar from inside the ground? - A. Yes,
that's correct, and they all rushed.

So your impression was there was a definite straight
beeline to get into the ground? - A. Yes.

It wasn't a case of people milling around buying
programmes? - A. No.

People didn't go and get   refreshments? - A. They went
straight in.

So the impression you are giving is there was a definite
direction for all the fans?   They wanted to get into
that ground straight away? - A. Yes.

Did you see anyone looking for signs or asking people
where to go? - A. No, they just all flocked...

Straight down? - A. Yes.

               Further by THE CORONER:

I want to ask you one or two things further.    First of
all, you were asked when the people were banging on the
door whether you had seen any police officers outside and
in fact you said you hadn't. - A. No.

Would it be right to say that that meant if you didn't
see any police officers outside at that time? - A. That
is correct.

It wasn't as if you were saying there were no
policemen... - A. There might have been some either side
of the gate.

Never mind about where there might have been, you didn't
see any? - A. No, I didn't.
                                                     M. BAIN


I had asked you earlier whether you had seen officers
outside and I thought you had replied that you had at
some earlier time.   Had you seen them? -A. Yes.

The other thing I am interested in is this business about
blocking off the tunnel.   You specifically said that you
recollect or you know that it was blocked at semi-finals?
- A. I am sure it was.

I had asked you very carefully where you were positioned.
- A. Yes.

I had asked you very carefully whether you could see the
tunnel and you said you couldn't? - A. In 1988.

In 1988. - A. But the wall was only built that year.   I
am talking about previous years when there wasn't a wall
there.

Tell me which semi-final you are talking about? - A. I
can't remember.

Tell me which year you are talking about? - A. I can't
remember, just semi-finals.   That's all I can remember
at the moment.   The wall wasn't there, see.   The wall
was only put up...

When do you say the wall was put up? - A. The wall was
put up to segregate the fans at one time.   That is what
the reason was.

You don't know when it was? - A. I can't remember.

I want to establish what you saw.   That is all I am
interested in.   If you saw it that's good enough for me,
but if you didn't then I don't want to get it wrong.
Let's take 1988 first of all.  Did you in 1988 see the
tunnel blocked off? - A. I couldn't see the tunnel in
1988.

Was your position always, until you got the Gate C job,
where you have described it? - A. Yes.

Either upstairs... - A. Or downstairs.

I think there is another stairwell going up, isn't there?
- A. At the other side.

Yes, nearer to C Gate. - A. I haven't been on that one.

Are you saying that you can remember the tunnel being
blocked off prior to the wall being built? - A. Yes.

That is what you are saying? - A. Yes.
                                                    M. BAIN


Because we can find out when this wall was built without
any difficulty.   In fact I know when it was built, but
that's not the point.   When you saw the tunnel being
blocked off at semi-finals, this was before the wall was
in place? - A. Yes, that's correct.

You are absolutely sure of that? - A. Well, I wouldn't
have seen it, would I, if the wall was there?   I can't
see.

Did you ever see it blocked off during league matches? -
A. It might have been, I can't remember.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. King, do you want to come back?

     MR. KING:   Sir, do you have a copy of a statement
of the witness which looks like that?

     THE CORONER:     I am only trying to establish what
the facts are.

     MR. KING:   Indeed, and it came as a surprise to me,
helpful as the evidence was.   Sir, if you look at the
last page of that statement.

     THE CORONER:   I haven't see this particular one but
there is no complaint about that!

     MR. KING:   Sir, if you look at the passage I have
highlighted near the end about a league match.

     I don't know whether you want to deal with that,
sir.   I am very happy to deal with it myself but I am
always reminded it is not adversarial.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I don't know whether you have
a copy of the club statement that Mr. Bain made.   It may
well be the same document.   I am not sure.

     MR. KING:      It is the same one.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is page 5, the bottom paragraph,
and page 6.   If you read from the last paragraph down.

     MR. KING:   That is dealing with league matches,
sir, of course.   This witness has also now given his
evidence as to semi-finals.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   Why don't you deal with it,
Mr. King, and then if I want I can chip in, so to speak.
                                                    M. BAIN


         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING;

Mr. Bain, I want you to understand that no-one is
criticising you.  We are trying to help you jog your
memory.   All right?   Have a look at this statement.
You had better look at the very beginning.   I understand
it was a statement which you made, I think, to Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club in June 1989.   Can you confirm
that is your signature at the end? - A. Yes.

Just read to yourself from the bottom of the page I have
indicated and then the final page.   Just read it to
yourself. - A. Yes.

In those paragraphs you describe your knowledge and
experience of league games? - A. Yes.

Is it right that you explain your knowledge of how at
league games the police take quite a close interest on
the filling of the individual pens which make up the
Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes, they did, before the
wall...

Can we leave the wall for the moment.   Just concentrate
on league games because that is what I understood you
were talking about in that passage.   Can you confirm,
having refreshed your memory, that in league games the
practice of the police on occasion has been to be in
front of the tunnel and say to supporters that the pens,
that is, the pens to which you can gain access through
the tunnel, were full and then they have directed those
supporters to another pen? - A. Yes, that is correct.

You can confirm that?   It is something you have seen? -
A. Yes.

That is how you came to make your statement in describing
it? - A. Yes.

You have also now told us about an experience with a
semi-final? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. Payne.   Do you want to hear
what is in his statement?

     MR. PAYNE:   I think I have got a copy of it

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Mr. Bain, the notes I have got of your evidence are that
when you were first asked by Mr. King you said, "No-one
took steps to prevent anyone going through the tunnel on
league matches.   Police have on semi-finals when it has
been full police have closed the doors."   Then when the
                                                         30


                                                      M. BAIN


   Coroner asked you about this you said that you could not
   see the tunnel in 1988 at all so you don't know what
   happened then at all and you can't remember which years
   the previous semi-finals took place? - A. No.

Q. You confirm to the  Coroner that you didn't know whether
   it had been blocked off at league matches? - A. On the
   terrace, yes.   If I put it on here it will have.

Q. Finally, you have been shown a statement which you made
   in 1989.   That is  only a year ago and you say now that
   it was blocked off   at league matches? - A. Yes, it was.




              Q. I am not going into
V
                                                                   31


                                                 M. BAIN


        Q.   I am not going into what is true and what is not true
             because we will have other evidence about it later on,
             but I am concerned about the state of the accuracy of
             your personal evidence - your evidence - if you have
             given these different accounts.  With your own eyes,
    B        going upon your own memory now, when have you seen the
             tunnel blocked off at a semi-final? - A. I can't
             remember.

        Q.   When have you seen it blocked off at a league match? -
             A. I can't remember league matches.

                    Further Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

        Q.   May I just ask the witness, never mind about when, but
             have you seen it happen? - A. Yes.

        Q.   You are quite sure about that? - A. Yes.

        Q.   That is all I am interested in, not when but whether
             you have seen it happen? - A. I can't remember every
             match and every date that there is a match played.

    D   Q.   Of course not, and I have great sympathy with that,
             but you have seen it happen.  That is the important
             thing. - A. Yes.

                          Further by THE CORONER:

        Q.   I have to ask another question on this because I do
             not expect you to remember the semi-finals, but I am
             interested in the wall.  All we are trying to
             establish is not what people told you, we are not
             interested in that, it is what you yourself saw with
             your own eyes, or what people told you but what people
             told you at the time. - A. Yes.

        Q.   Are you saying that all these events which you are
             describing about league matches and semi-finals, and
             so on, all happened or you saw them before the wall
             was built? - A. Yes.

        Q.   Whenever the wall was built? - A. Yes.

        Q.   Once the wall was built —     A.We couldn't   see.

        Q.   You could not see? - A. No.

        Q.   So you from your own personal knowledge cannot say
             what happened after the wall was built? - A. No, not
             at that side, no.

        Q.   Can you say whether, after the wall was built, you
             have any recollection of any fans coming to you on the
Gl>                                                                    32




                                                    M. BAIN


               day and saying, "Oh, we can't   get through the tunnel
               because it is blocked off"? -   A. No, because nobody
               came through that to our side   because there was the
               gate in the middle and nobody   was allowed backwards or
               forwards.
      B
          Q.   So your recollection then is --- A. It is all before
               the wall was built.  It was open concourse like it is
               now.

          Q.   Your recollection is that this happened at some league
               matches, but you don't know which? - A. Yes.

          Q.   And it also happened, as far as you can remember, at
               semi-finals? - A. Yes.

          Q.   Is that a fair summary? - A. Yes.

                    MR. CATCHPOLE:  I do not want to prolong this
               unnecessarily, but perhaps you would care to look
               again at the statement that Mr. Bain made to the Club.

                    THE CORONER: Can I borrow it?
      D
                    MR. CATCHPOLE:  It is really page 6 and it is the
               second full paragraph.

                    THE CORONER: Is that the last page?

                    MR. CATCHPOLE:  Second full paragraph beginning,
               "For this season ...."

                    THE CORONER: I have got it, yes.

                    MR. CATCHPOLE:  If you read the second sentence,
               it is only fair to put it to Mr. Bain.  It is really
               the last part.

                    THE CORONER: Yes, that is right.  I think that,
               having gone down this road, we have to put this
               paragraph to him actually.

                    MR. CATCHPOLE: With fairness, I think you have
               to, sir, yes.

                    THE CORONER: Can I use your copy?

                    MR. KING:   Of course.

          Q.        THE CORONER:  Can you read what is highlighted on
               that page which I am passing to you.  Read it out
               aloud so that we have got it in. - A. "I have not seen
               police officers shut the doors to the central tunnel




      H
                                    M. BAIN


but I have seen officers in front of this tunnel and
have also heard them say to the supporters ---- "

Actually start that paragraph right from the beginning
of the paragraph because we cannot understand that
sentence without that. - A. "For this season and the
last two seasons the West Stand has been for away fans
only.  For league games the Police keep the north-west
pen empty and the gate to the partition wall is shut
but unlocked.  Usually a steward is deployed on the
gate.  The Police also put up barriers near the snack
bar to prevent access to the south-west pen."

Now read   the next. - A. "I   have not  seen police
officers   shut the doors to   the  central tunnel,butI
have seen police in front of the tunnel and I have
also heard them say to supporters that the pens were
full and they have then directed those supporters to
the south-west pen."

     THE CORONER:  Do you want to ask anything out of
that, Mr. Catchpole?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   No sir.

     THE CORONER: Yes, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, I am   not   sure at the endof the
day how much - I am not saying this with any
disrespect to Mr. Bain but clearly there has been some
difficulty - weight will be placed upon his evidence,
but since a particular part has been read out, then in
relation to the difference between the policy at
league matches and at semi-finals, perhaps you would
ask him also to read the bottom part of page 5.

      THE CORONER: I have got a note actually to do
that.   Page 5.
Can you find it, Mr. Bain? - A. Yes, it is chopped off
at the top.

     "At last y e a r ’s semi-final I was positioned in
     the seated area of the West Stand. I have seen
     the tunnel closed on two or three occasions but
     only in relation to league games and also when
     the West Stand, including the terraces, was
     divided between home and away fans."


         Further Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

I am sorry, Mr. Bain, could I just clarify this and
put it into context.  The terraces and the West Stand
                                  M. BAIN


at some stage were used for both away and home fans? -
A. Yes, that is correct.

We have already had the evidence that for the last now
four seasons it has been exclusively for away fans,
that is correct, is it not? - A. Yes.

Your deployment during that period has largely been in
the West Stand, or down at the bottom of the gates? -
A. That is correct.

At the stairway behind turnstiles 9 to 16? - A. Yes.

Then the last 1989 season you were on Gate C? - A.
Yes.

During that time, obviously you are not going to be
looking at the tunnel or at various parts of the
ground constantly, but you have seen on, I think you
have described, two or three occasions and other
occasions the Police doing this.  That is the evidence
you are giving? - A. Yes.

Now it is not clear what you remember about semi­
finals.  Your evidence today has been that on some
semi-final you have seen it done, but that was before
this partition wall was built? - A. Most of this was
before.  What I have said on here was before the wall
was built.

But it is certainly clear, if you look at the
paragraph on page 6 that you have just read out, you
are referring actually specifically to the partition
wall.  So that was at the time the wall was built.   Do
you see that second sentence there, "The gate to the
partition wall is shut but unlocked"? - A. Yes.

Please understand, no one is suggesting you should
have an absolutely crystal clear recollection. - A. I
don't know, you are not doing so bad. (Laughter) You
have got to have a bit of humour, you know, nowadays.

Actually at this stage of the Inquest, coming up
towards Christmas, it is just what we need.  But you
do have a recollection of seeing this operation? - A.
Might I say a lot of these questions I was asked
before and they were asking me before the wall was
built before this happened and a lot of what happened
and what I have put in here was before, a long few
seasons ago, not just the last two seasons which some
people are trying to make out.  They are things that
have happened over the time I have worked at
Hillsborough.
                                                              35



                                               M. BAIN


    q   .   That is all we are interested in, that is your
            personal experience. - A. Yes.

    Q.      I think I might just leave it there.  I can tell you
            for your own information that the wall has been built
B           for a number of years, about four I think now. - A.
            Has it?

            It has been there for some time,   We are not trying to
            hide anything.

                 MR. KING:  Sir, as some rather pointed remarks
            have been made by my learned friend Mr. Payne about
            the weight to be attached to this witness's evidence,
            could I ask a confirmatory question of this witness?

                 THE CORONER: Yes, by all means ask.

                   Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

    Q.      Mr. Bain, you were at the semi-final in 1989? - A.
            That is correct.

D   Q.      You were by Gate C and you had a clear view of the
            concourse, the tunnel entrances and the means of entry
            to the side pens? - A. Yes.

            You can confirm that from your eyesight no steps were
            taken by the Police in the 1989 semi-final to control
            the numbers going down any particular way onto the
            terraces? - A. No.

    Q.      You did not see any control at all, did you? - A. No,
            not what I could see, the central tunnel.

    Q.      You can confirm that on occasions in the past, never
            mind when, you have seen --- A. Yes, I have.

    Q.      Positive steps being taken to control the numbers
            going into pens when they have become full? - A. That
            is correct.

            And that just did not happen in the 1989 semi-final? -
            A. No, it did not.

                 MR. KING:   Thank you.

                 MR. MANNING:  Excuse me, sir, I have been quiet.
            I cannot even get a laugh out of people like Mr.
            Catchpole did, but can I now, since there seems to be
            an agreement that the wall was built four years ago —
                                   M. BAIN


     THE CORONER: I do not think there is an
agreement.  We will be able to prove when this wall
was built in due course, and then we can put his
evidence into context.

     MR. MANNING:  It would be very helpful to me, who
did not previously have that statement, or the
knowledge, if I could just ask one very simple
question.

     THE CORONER: Yes.

      Further Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

If it be subsequent in the Inquest that the wall is
proven to have been built four years ago, are you
saying that what you saw of the policemen at the end
of a tunnel, or it being closed off, was all more than
four years ago? - A. Yes, before the wall was built.
That is correct.

     MR MANNING:   Thank you very much indeed.

      THE CORONER: Can I just borrow the statement
back.   I am not going into it again, but I just want
to read it for myself.

     I am a little bit concerned because, in a sense,
this witness has had a pretty hard time, and I think
it is partly our fault because we have read bits and
have maybe helped to confuse you a little bit.  I
think what I will do, so that we know what he said in
toto. I am going to read from the bottom of page 5 and
I am going to read the whole of the paragraphs right
to the end, because I think if you read it all it does
actually make slightly better sense than we have got.
So I am just going to read this to you and you can
confirm whether this is a correct reading of this
statement.  You said:




                                  /"At last year's.
                                                           37


                                 M. BAIN




        "At last year's semi-final        this of course
         is a statement which is dated 1989 "At last
         year's semi-final I was positioned in the
         seated area or West Stand.   I have seen the tunnel
         closed on two or three occasions but only in
         relation to League games and also when the West
         Stand including the terrace was divided between
         home and away fans.   There are wooden doors
         to this tunnel and on those occasions I saw
         Police Officers shut the doors and stand in
         front directing fans elsewhere.

        When the West Stand was divided between home
        and away fans, the home fans obtained entry
        to the ground through turnstiles 9-16 for the
        seated area and the North West pen.  The away
        fans gained entry through turnstiles A-G and
        they were allocated the remainder of the terrace
        and a part of the seated area.  The Police, at
        least initially, kept the centre pens open but
        not the South West pen. A barrier was put
        across the South West pen, sometimes both were
        opened for away fans depending upon the size
        of the crowd.  These occasions I have described
        when the tunnel was closed, occurred before
        the partition wall was built.

        For this season and the last two seasons the
        West Stand has been for away fans only.   For
        League games, the Police keep the North West
        pen empty and the gate to the partition wall
        is shut but unlocked.  Usually a steward is
        deployed on the gate.  The Police also put
        up barriers near the snack bar to prevent
        access to the South West pen.  I have not seen
        Police Officers shut the doors to the central
        tunnel, but I have seen Police in front of this
        tunnel and have also heard them say to supporters
        that the pens were full and they have then
        directed those supporters to the South West pen."

  Then the rest deals with something else? - A. Yes.

Q. Unless somebody else desperately wants to ask any more
   questions on this I think we have heard enough.

        Now then Mr. Bain, don't worry, you have done quite
  well.  It is quite a difficult job with me and everybody
  else asking you questions and you made us laugh which is
  very good.  Thank you very much indeed.

         Actually having said that we are going to break for
   coffee now.  Would you mind holding on till after I come
                              M. BAIN



back from coffee because there is one other matter I want
to think about in case I might just ask you about it.
- a . Yes.

                  (Short adjournment)


      THE CORONER:  Mr. Bain, you will be relieved to
hear that I don't want to ask you any more questions, so
as far as I am concerned you are free to go but if you
wish to stay that is of course for you.


               PETER JOSEPH GARRETT Sworn

                    BV THE CORONER;

You are Peter Joseph Garrett, I believe.    Is that right?
- A. That is right, yes.

What is your present address? - A.                   f
Germany.

That is right, that is why we had to have you because you
won't be here for much longer, at least not in England.
I hope you will be here for very much longer.

      Now I am interested in the 15th April 1989 but
before I deal with that, are you a Liverpool supporter?
- A. I am, yes.

Have you been a Liverpool supporter for any length of
time? - A. As long as I can remember, all my life.

Before we deal with 1989, are you a regular attender of
Liverpool matches? - A. Well I was before I joined up.
I obviously can't get to the games now but I used to go
all the time.

That is at Anfield you went? -       I used to go home and
away as well.

Did you go and see the 1988 match? - A. Yes, I went the
year before in 1987 when we played them in the league.

I see. And when you went in 1988 to Hillsborough did
you, where were you on that occasion, were you in the
terraces or in the stands? - A. I was in the terraces.
I was in the same pen.

Let's talk about 1988 first just for a few minutes.
How did you go in 1988 by car, by train.  Can you remember?
- A. We went by coach.
                                                             39

                                 P.J. GARRETT


Q. Do you recollect what time you got to the ground in 1988?
   - A. Between probably quarter-past and half-past-2.

Q. When you got to the ground in 1988, we are not talking about
   1989 get this clear, did you have any problems going through
   the turnstiles that you remember? — A. No, at the front of
   the ground there is big like park gates and there was a lot
   of Policemen in a line across there which were stopping
   people to check their tickets, to make sure they had tickets
   before you actually got to the turnstiles.  Like in 1989
   they weren't there.

Q. Let's stick to 1988 first of all. When you got through
   those "park gates" as you describe them, how close to
   those park gates were that line of Policemen would you
   say in 1988? - A. They just seemed to be just in front of
   it. You could not get through the park gates without
   going through a line of Policemen about five yards or so.

Q. Can you remember whether they checked everybody or did
   they just check selectively? - A. They looked as if they
   were checking the majority of people.

Q. I see. Then having got through the park gates, we call
   them perimeter gates but it does not matter, can you
   remember whether there were any Officers outside the
   turnstiles as well? - A. I think there must have been but
   I am not quite sure because everybody was forming up in
   orderly queues.  I think there might have been a Policeman
   on each turnstile and that.

Q. But you can't remember? - A. I can't really remember.

Q. Anyway you got through without difficulty? - A. Yes, no
   problems.

Q. Can you remember whether there were any Officers on the
   inside of the turnstiles in 1988, remember we are talking
   about 1988? - A. No more or less than usual.

Q. You weren't searched on the inside in 1988, can you
   remember? - A. No, I was not searched on the inside.

Q. Your timing, when you say, what did you say quarter-past/
   half-past-2? - A. About quarter, half-past-2, yes.

Q. You are pretty sure about that? - A. Yes.

Q. And how did you get on to the terracing? - A. We went
   through the tunnel at the front, the middle tunnel, we
   went through that because I had been before and I knew
   where I wanted to go.

Q. So you just went down and then you took the left-hand turn
   in 1988? - A. I took the  left-hand turn and   Iwent in  Pen 4
   I think it was.
                                                                  40


                                      P.J. GARBETT


Q. Did you go right to the front? - A. No, we stood on the
   side.  There is a side fence and there is a little bit
   of a step on the side so I stood on the step and held on
   to the railings so that I could see over everybody.

Q. I see, because you are relatively short? - A. Because I
   am a bit short, yes.

Q. That is no criticism,       just a disadvantage at football
   matches anyway.

         How far down were you in 1988, can you remember,
   halfway down, quarter of the way down? - A. Probably about
   three-quarters of the way down.

Q. Did you have any problems in 1988 you say? - A. Not at
   all.

Q. So we now turn to 1989, okay.  This year you, I think
   you   had a ticket?  -    A.That is right.

Q. And   you got it from       Anfield? - A. Yes.

Q. And  you didn't go          on acoach because you      went with frien
   I think in a car?       -      A.Went with friends   ina  car, yes.

Q. You set off quite early I think, didn't you? - A. Yes,
   because we did not know how busy the roads were going to
   be so we set off about 9 o'clock I think or something.

Q. I think I am right in saying you had no problems at all
   coming to Sheffield? - A. None at all.

Q. You I think arrived in Sheffield at about 10.30.        That
   is right? - A. Something like that, yes.

Q. So that was early, wasn't it.  In fact I think you tried
   to find a pub but you weren't successful? - A. We did
   have a look round.  I knew where there was a few but
   we were told there was not a pub open within three miles
   of the place but we got there half-10 so they obviously
   weren't going to be open then anyway.

Q. You walked about and had something to eat? - A. We bought
   a football from a nearby shop and had a little game
   of football in the pub car park.

Q. So you just enjoyed yourself? - A. Yes.

Q. Then I think you made your way to the ground about 2 o'clock.
   Would that be right? - A. About 2-ish, yes.

Q. And you have already indicated that when you got to the
   ground on this occasion you were able to get through the
   perimeter gates without any checks at this stage?
                              P.J. GARRETT



Is that right? - A. What I call the park gates, the
perimeter gates, we got through them no problem.

At the point when you arrived how busy was it? - A. It
was not all that busy.  I had to queue up for about
five may be ten minutes to get in.

So you got through the park gates, the perimeter gates,
you got to the turnstile area.  You knew where to go
because you had been before? - A. Yes.

Can you remember whether on this occasion there were
Police Officers outside? - A. I think I only saw two.

Were you checked or searched at all by them, you
personally? - A. Me personally, no, not at all.

It is probably right to say that you actually got through
the turnstiles without any real difficulty? - A. Yes, no
sweat.

Was the queueing at that time satisfactory so far as
you were concerned? - A. Yes, it was all right.

When you got through I think you did notice some Police
Officers, didn't you, on the inside? - A. There was a
lot more milling about inside than usual.  They just
seemed to be checking a few people.  Some people had
been checked already outside and as they were coming
through the turnstiles some of them were getting checked
again but there seemed to be quite a few just like
standing about and that.

Were you as it happens checked again? - A. No.

So you managed to get through? - A. So I managed to
get through without getting checked at all.

I am not suggesting you should have been checked but
you managed to get through? - A. Yes.

You were with your friends? - A. That is right, yes.

And you did what you did the previous year you went
down the tunnel? - A. We went down the tunnel but instead
of going to the left we went to the right this time.

Was it a mistake or was it deliberate? - A. No, we just
followed the person in front.  He went to the right so
we thought we would go down to the right.  When we got
into that pen it was not full but it was getting that
way and the pen next to it was empty and I had problems
seeing so wfe climbed over.
                                                           42

                                  P.J. GARRETT


Q. Stop one minute, the pen next to it. Which pen are you
   talking about, on the left-hand side or the right-hand
   side? - A. The left-hand.  We got into the right-hand side
   first and then climbed over into the left-hand side.

Q. I see.   Because there is a dividing wall.    Is that it?
   - A. There is a dividing wall, yes.

Q.   Mot    wall, I mean ....   A. Fence.

Q.   And    that pen seemed empty to you? - A.   That pen was empty.
     It was reasonably empty, yes.

Q. And in fact that was the pen that you were in    in 1988? -
   A. That is right, yes.

Q.   And    you probably preferred it as well?  - A. Well Iwanted
     to climb over that one anyway to get in that one.

Q. So you are saying the pen, the right-hand one we call
   Pen 3, I will just use that because we can all understand
   it.  Pen 3 seemed fullish to you. Were you in any dis­
   comfort? - A. Oh no, not at all, it was just that I could
   not see.

Q. And the other one looked .... A. The other one was empty.
   There was nobody standing at the front and that.

Q. So over the fence and you got into Pen 4. When you got
   into Pen 4 where did you go? - A. Well I went straight
   to the front because it was empty and I knew I would be
   able to see from the front.

Q. Your friends I think went somewhere else? - A. They went
   to the back because they are a bit bigger than me.  Normally
   when we go to football games I stand on my own anyway and
   they stand further back and I stand at the front.

Q. So you go with them and travel with them but at the match ...
   A. They stand further back and I go at the front, yes.

Q. You don't associate with them, not at the match? - A. No.

Q. We are going to show you a plan in a minute and get you
   to put a cross on where you took up your viewing position,
   but actually let's put the little thing up now, the acetate.
   Come over to it.  Can you indicate to the young man which
   is Pen 3 and which is Pen 4 because it makes it a lot
   easier for him.  Now show us where you took up your viewing
   position? Put a cross.   I am interested in where you
   were in Pen 4? - A. As I was standing facing the pitch
   the little gate was to my right.

Q. That's the position you took up, is it? - A. Yes.
                              P.J. GARRETT



     MR. BEECHEYs   That is C325 sir.

      THE CORONER:  So in fact you have marked your
position right on the fence.  Is that right? - A. That
is right, yes.

And not very far from the gate? - A. As I was facing the
pitch the gate was to my right.

This would have been about what time would you say when
you got there? - A. About quarter-past, 20-past-2.

You were quite content with yourself at that stage? — A.
I was quite happy because I knew I would be able to see.

And what happened then over the next period of time? - A.
Well it just like filled up for a while like every normal
football match does and then about 10-to-3 that was it,
there just like seemed to be a surge from everywhere.

So let's get this right.  You are saying that until 10-to-3
it was filling up like any normal football match? -
A. Like any normal game.

And at 10-to-3, are you sure about the time because the
timing is very important in this and I am not trying to
catch you, we are just trying to make sure we know as near
as we can get it the time.  What makes you say about
10-to-3? - A. Well it was about 10-to-3 because normally
at big games like that the teams come out about ten minutes
before the kick-off and before the teams came out I was
in some discomfort and as soon as the teams came out I
only saw one Liverpool player come out and then that was
it then, like the crush came from everywhere.  That is
what makes me say about 10-to-3.

I see, so you are saying you were in some discomfort for
a few minutes? - A. May be two minutes at the most and
then the players came out.  I saw one player and then it
just like, just happened.

Did you see a Liverpool player come out? — A. Yes, I saw
one Liverpool player come out.

Did you see any of the Nottingham Forest players come out?
- A. No, not at all.

 But you are quite sure that it was a Liverpool player
 you saw? - A. Oh definitely, yes.

 You don't know which one? - A. Yes, it was Ronnie Whelan
 because I thought to myself it was Alan Hanson's first
 game back and I thought:  "Oh that is all right because
 Ronnie Whelan is still captain".
                              P.J. GARRETT



I see.  So you actually know who you saw? - A. Oh I know
who I saw.

That is good because we might be able to find this player
you see. We can then look at videos and things.   You
saw him, right? - A. I definitely saw him.

At the point when you saw him what was happening to you
as a person in the pen? - A. I was just getting pushed
further and further into the fence.

At that point or just before you caught sight of him was
that already unusual or had you experienced anything like
that before? - A. I had experienced crushes and shoves
in the ground before but what was unusual about it was
it did not stop.  Normally after your surge goes forward
people like gather themselves back and you get your normal
place again but this didn^t, they just like carried on and
on and by then I knew there was something wrong.




                       Q. So what you are saying .
                                                                45


                                               P. J. -GARRETT



Q. So what you are saying is that it is not unusual for
   people to get crushed, but it releases? - A. It
   normally releases more or less straightaway.

Q. Yes, I understand.  You can time that pretty accurately
   because that is when you saw this player? - A. That is
   when I saw the player, yes.

Q. You are saying once that happened it did not release? -
   A. It did not release at all.

Q. And you were getting squashed up further forward? - A.
   Up, right onto the fence, yes.

Q. Can you remember whether the pressure which you were
   feeling was a steady pressure or was it a sudden
   impulse? - A. If I can remember right, I think the
   first one was a sudden impulse and then it just got
   steady.

Q. So there was a push and then just build up? - A. Then
   just steady.

Q. At that point were you able to shout? - A. Just about,
   yes.

Q. Did   you look around you at all? Were you able to look
   around? - A. I wasn't, I was only able to look the one
   way.   The side of my face was up against the perimeter
   fence so ....

Q. Which was were you looking, to the gate or away from
   it? - A. Away from the gate.

Q. What if anything did you see? - A. There just seemed to .
   be, like there was the Policeman and that walking about
   in front and there was a lot of people shouting,
   "You've got to get something sorted out.  They have got
   to open the gate", and they just like looked straight
   through you.

Q. How   tall are you? - A. 5.4, I think.

Q. How many Officers did you see? - A. About   three, I
   think.

Q. You saw the player come out, that one player. You have
   no other recollection of the match, have you? - A. No,
   none at all.  Somebody told me we hit the bar or
   something, but I don't know.

Q. But you didn't see that? - A. I didn't see that.
                                           P. J. GARRETT



Did you hear the whistle blow or did you see the game
start at all? - A. I heard the whistle go but I didn't
see any of the play that happened.

But you did hear the whistle blow?   -A. Iheard   the
whistle.

By this time you were already squashed up against the
fence, because you have told me that.  What I am
interested in is, I want to relate the timing when you
saw the Officers in relation either to when you saw the
player come out, or when you heard the start of the
match.  When was it in relation to those events? - A.
It was before the game, because I remember thinking
they should never start the game.

I see.   You say there were three? - A. Well I only saw
three.

Yes, that is okay, that is what you saw.  Do you
remember whether they were males or females? - A.
Males, I think.

Were they standing or walking? - A. They were walking
and then they would stop for a while and have a look
into the crowd, and then when they stopped that was
when everybody was shouting to them.

So they would walk and they stopped, they appeared to
be looking into the crowd, then people started
shouting, including you no doubt? - A. Yes.

What did you shout?  Can you remember what you yourself
shouted? - A. "You have got to get me out, get me out,
I'm going to die".

How close would you say the Officers were to you? - A.
A foot and a half, maybe two foot at the most.

When you were looking at them, which part of the
Officer could you actually see? - A. I could see his
face.

Were you looking - you have already said that you were
squashed against the fence. - A. Yes.

But can you remember whether you were looking
horizontally or upward? - A. You have got to look
upwards because the ground is like in a bit of a trench
or something, so the Policemen are always up above you
anyway.

So you had to look - I mean obviously you could move
your eyes? - A. Yes.
                                                          47

                                                P. J. 'GARRETT



Q. You had to look upward to see his face.  What did you
   hear or what happened then? - A. After I shouted he
   just like looked at us as if you say, "Well there's
   nothing 1 can do", but this was before the gate was
   opened because there was people round me shouting,
   "You've got to open the gate .

Q. What happened then? Did you see the gate open? - A. I
   didn't see the gate open, no.

Q. So you don't know when it opened? - A. No.

Q. And indeed there might have been somebody behind you
   who was dealing with the gate who you did not see? - A.
   There might have been.

Q. 1 am not saying there was but there might have been.

Q. Describe a bit more.  Tell me a bit more about what
   happened as far as you are concerned? - A. Well I
   remember thinking if they don't get me out soon I'm
   going to die.  Then I realised that there was no way
   that I could get to the gate I just hoped and prayed
   that enough people would get through the gate so there
   would be enough room at the back, but it was only a
   tiny little gate so the people were slow getting
   through there.

Q. I didn't ask you this but perhaps I ought to. You
   obviously heard people calling for help around you
   because you have told me this already.   Could you hear
   people further back, what they were saying at all? - A.
   Everybody was shouting the same, but in different
   words.   'Come in and get it sorted out", "Get me out,
   I'm crushed, I can't breathe".

Q. What I am trying to find out is whether in addition to
   that you also heard chanting and cheers and so forth? -
   A. No, there was no singing or chanting like in a
   normal football match.

Q. You didn't hear any yourself? - A. No.

Q. How did you, in fact, get relief because fortunately,
   of course, you are here so .... - A. Somebody grabbed
   me, grabbed hold of the back of my shirt or something,
   saw I was in some discomfort, and when enough people
   had gone through the gate he dragged me back into a bit
   of space, then I was helped up to the back of the
   tunnel and that.

Q. So you went out the way you had come in, in fact? - A.
   Yes.
                                          P. J. GARRETT



Do you know approximately how long it took before you
got rescued? - A. It think it was about 20 minutes.

You knew the gate was there which was why you were
hoping that it would be opened and let people .... - A.
Yes, you could tell that it was open or you could see
that something was open because of the amount of people
you saw in front of you.

I see, so you could see people assembling in front of
you? - A. You could see people that had got through the
gates, you could see them in front of you.

How soon after the squash, if I can use that word, did
you begin to notice people outside in front of you?
Are you able to say? - A. Five, six minutes.

When you first were pulled back slightly I think you
noticed that there were other people who seemed in
distress on the floor, is that right? - A. There was
just people lying there.

Can you say - I am not trying to upset you - can you
say how many you think were lying there at that time? -
A. Four, maybe five, that is all I saw.

Throughout this period you said that you were calling
out in the beginning, not very well but you were able
to call out.  Were you able to maintain your shouts? -
A. No, I lost my hearing eventually and then I was
losing my sight.

Sorry? - A. I lost my hearing, I couldn't shout any
more and then my sight was going as well.

Do you know when that happened?  You may not be able to
say. - A. I couldn't - it must have been about half way
through it, or something.  I'm not too sure.

In fact, I think you did finish up in hospital but they
discharged you that evening? - A. They discharged me
that night, yes.

And you are obviously in the Royal Air Force now so you
must be reasonably fit? - A. Not too bad.

That is good.

     MR. PAYNE:   I wonder if I might just enquire what
number photograph it is which shows the ground at
14.59.  My numbers go 317 - that is the terrace at
3.01, 318 ....
                                                                  49


                                                  P. J. GARRETT



     THE CORONER:   I think we have not actually
introduced the 14.59 one yet.  Sergeant Griffiths, I
think we have got them ready now.

     MR. PAYNE:   I am grateful. That was the
photograph which set off the introduction of this
sequence.

     THE CORONER:   That is right.  What we will do if
we may gentlemen, is to reintroduce the whole of this
sequence now and re-number them and we will use them as
a group.  How many have you got, Sergeant Griffiths,
about four?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     Six, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Can you put them up one after
another and we will number them sequentially.   Mr.
King, these are the ones which you very helpfully
produced.  All we have done is had them re-copied from
slightly better quality ones which we were able to find
in our system, so there is no difference.  It will be
easier if we have them as a group and then if we do
need to look at them we can look at them together.
They are not very much better, are they?  Is that ...?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     14.59, sir.

     THE CORONER:     14.59, what number is that?

     MR. BEECHEY:     That will be    326, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Put the next one up, Sergeant
Griffiths.  I want to number them all while we are at
it, and then we will go to the one you want, Mr. Payne.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     15.01, sir.

     MR. BEECHEY:     327.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     15.03, sir.

     MR. BEECHEY:     328.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     I can't make the time out on that
one, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Put it to one side.       We don't want
the ones without a timing.

     MR. KING:   Could I just see if it is this
photograph, sir, because mine has got a timing on it.
I don t know if it is the same one.
                                                   P. J. GARRETT



     THE CORONER:   I think this is the blurred one
actually.  I only want the ones with the times.

        MR. KING:      I agree, sir.   My eyesight is not too
good.

     THE CORONER:   No, neither is mine.  That one
doesn't have a time so I should put it to one side.

        MR. GRIFFITHS:      15.05, sir.

        MR. BEECHEY:      329.

        MR. GRIFFITHS:      15.06, sir.

        MR. BEECHEY:      330, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Can you put up the one Mr. Payne
wanted, which is the first one in the series?

        MR. PAYNE:      326, thank you very much.

     THE CORONER:   I am sorry, Mr. Payne, but it was
convenient to do it in one go.

     MR. PAYNE:         That is quite all right,    thank you
very much.

                Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Unfortunately on that print you can't see the
situation, but perhaps I can deal with it this way ....

     THE CORONER:   Yes, let him have a look at that
one because we will be putting one into the album later
on.

     MR. PAYNE:         Can I just hand you this photograph?
- A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   It is exactly the same photograph,
it is just clearer.

     MR. PAYNE:   That is the one that is on the
screen.  I am afraid the Jury have not got one in front
of them, but can you just look along the front ....

     THE CORONER:   Sergeant  Griffiths, could you hand
the Jury a copy?  (A copy of the photograph was
     handed to the Jury)

     MR. PAYNE:         Thank you very much.   That is very
helpful:
                                          P. J. GARRETT



All I want you to do is to look along the front of the
perimeter fence, behind the goal mouth, and you can see
in about the middle-of it that gate 4, you can actually
see the figure "4" on the gate, and that the gate is
open, do you see that? - A. Yes.




                /Q. So we know .
                                            P.'J. GARRETT



So we know that the gate was opened, and if you look at
the timing of the photograph, which I gather is also
supposed to be one minute out, the timing on the digital
clock up on the display board says 14.59.   I think we
may be told that is about a minute out.

     THE CORONER:   I don't think the clock is.   I think
it is the prints at the bottom of the photograph, but
these are amateur photographs.

     MR. PAYNE:   Quite.  Well, we will hear later
whether that is right or not:

Let's take it for the moment that it is 14.59, that is,
one minute to three.  Do you see that? - A. Yes.

We know from your evidence that at that time, at one
minute to three, the gate just to your right was open
because we can see it in the photograph.   I am not
criticising you at all because you were in a very
desperate situation yourself.   Did you know it was open?
- A. Only because I saw the people in front of me, I knew
it must have been opened.

You saw some people getting out? - A. I didn't see
anybody getting out.   I just saw...   If you look along
the people in the front there, at the front of the
photograph, I figured somewhere must be open for those
people to get there.

Because you saw people on the track? - A. Because I saw
people on the track.

So from what we have looked at then, and from your
evidence, the gate 4 was opened some time after the
Liverpool players came on to the field and sometime
before that photograph was taken? - A. Yes.

There is just one other topic I want to ask you about and
that is to take you back in time to the time you were
arriving and entering the ground. - A. Yes.

You have mentioned that some of the supporters were
searched inside the ground? - A. They were searched
immediately after they went straight through the
turnstiles.

Although some of them had already been searched outside
the turnstiles? - A. They had been searched before they
actually...   As you go into the turnstiles, before you
actually paid your money, you were searched then.   You
paid your money and you got searched again.
                                                           53



                                                  P.' J. GARRgTT


Q.    Whereabouts were the policemen who were doing the
     searching outside?    That is what I am asking you.   - A.
     They were just before the turnstiles.

Q.        THE CORONER:   When you said you paid your money, do
     you mean that, or handed in your ticket? - A. Well, yes.

                Cross-Examined by MR. COUGHLIN:

Q.    Just one short question to make sure I have got my note
     clear.    It was when you saw Ronnie Whelan come out
     first, that is when you felt the main surge behind you? -
     A. That is when the big push seemed to come, yes.    What I
     think happened is when the teams come on everybody starts
     roaring, so everybody from outside must have heard the
     roar and then just pushed their way down the tunnel.
     Well, tried to get into the ground as quickly as possible
     so as not to miss anything.

Q. Was it at that time you felt there was something wrong? -
   A. It was at that time I knew there was something wrong.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. Just going back to what the last question but one was
   about, the searching outside.   Obviously the officers
   were being selective as to who was being searched and who
   wasn't being searched. - A. There were a few of us going
   in, there were four of us going in, and I was the only
   one who wasn't searched.   When I stood at the turnstiles
   there was only me who wasn't searched.

Q. You weren't wearing your RAF uniform? - A. No, I wasn't
   in then.

Q. They obviously decided for whatever reason... - A. For
   whatever reason, yes.

Q. But the other three of them were searched? - A. Everybody
   seemed to be searched, yes.

Q. The year before, when you talk about having gone through
   a line of police officers outside the perimeter gate, of
   course that was a very different time that you were going
   in, wasn't it? - A. It was just a bit later, but the year
   before in 1988 they seemed to have a - it was perfect.
   It was one of the best games, policewise, I had been to
   in 1988.   There were no hassles, there was no bother.

Q. But you can't compare like for like in that it was a
   different time that you were going to the turnstiles
   compared with the subsequent year? - A. Yes, but as you
   go later there are more people milling about.   Like last
   time, the year before in 1988, it was about half past two
                                                         54



                                               P.’J. GARRETT


   when I got there and there were more people about in 1988
   at that time than when I went into the ground in 1989.

Q. Just now into the ground itself.  We have heard from
   quite a number of people who were either in pens 3 or 4
   and some of them, of course, got in there just as things
   were developing, just as the crush was happening at the
   back that was causing you the problem at the front.    It
   seems from some of them that they were completely unaware
   of the problem that was going on down at the front.   Now
   that is what I am telling you.   I am not asking you^
   about that because you don't know what... - A. I don t
   know.

Q. However, it seems as well that being unaware, that they
   were part of the general chanting and cheering that was
   going on as part of a standing crowd.   What I am asking
   you, leading from that, is that the noise that was going
   on around you seems that everybody was shouting for some
   help? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you accept that it may have been possible that,
   although you didn't know it was happening, that in fact
   there was some chanting and cheering going on further up
   the terrace from people who hadn't a clue what was going
   on down at the front fence? - A. No.   I figure as soon as
   people got through, got into the terrace, that they knew
   what was going on at the front because everybody was
   pushing forward and they are shouting.    I have been in
   situations like that before and everybody tries to help
   each other and move back and give them some room, so I do
   think they knew what was going on.

Q. You think they knew what was going on? - A. Yes.

Q. You would hold the contrary view to people who have come
   in here and said they didn't know what was going on, and
   you would find it difficult to accept there were people
   still cheering... - A. Well, yes, because I think if I
   was in that situation I would think there was something
   drastically gone wrong.

Q. We all accept that if that happened they clearly had no
   knowledge of what was going on.

        THE CORONER:   I am sorry, I missed what you said,
   the last few words.

        MR. MANNING:  The point is we would accept that they
   would not cheer and chant if they knew what was going on
   down at the fence.

        THE CORONER:   Yes.
                    •*
                                                        55


                                                 P.'-J. GARRETT


                Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Garrett, we actually know, from watching the video,
   what time the Liverpool team came out.   You don't know it
   exactly but I tell you so that you know it was about six
   minutes to three.    I am interested in your evidence as
   to what it was like in the pen even before the team came
   out at six minutes to three.    The evidence I wrote down
   from you was, "Before the team came out I was in some
   discomfort"? - A. We were in some discomfort before the
   teams came out, yes.

Q. Would you give a bit more detail of what you mean by
   that, even before the team came out? - A. Well, before
   the teams come out, when you stand at the front in normal
   games it is not too bad.    There is normally only
   pushing.   The semi-final in 1986, down at White Hart
   Lane, I stood at the front then and there were a lot of
   people about.  There were arms over your head and people
   was about you all the time.    It was uncomfortable then.

Q. Are you talking now about 1989? - A. I am talking about^
   1989, yes.   It was uncomfortable then, but you accept it
   when you go to football matches.  Whether it is right or
   whether it is wrong, at big games you do accept that when
   you are standing up you are going to be pushed and you
   are going to be in slight discomfort.

Q. Even before the team came out do I understand your
   evidence that pen 4 was so full as to give rise to that
   sort of discomfort which you have described? - A. Pen 4
   was, yes.  There was no room for anybody else to come
   into pen 4 before the teams came out.

Q. That's even before    the teams came out? -   A.   Yes.

Q. What happened when   the team came out was  something which
   you described as unusual because it was the push or the
   surge which came forward and never went back? - A.
   Whether it came forward, it just seemed like it came from
   all around and it just seemed to carry on going forward.

Q. The unusual feature of it was it never went back? - A. It
   never went back.

               Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Q. From what you have told us you have had considerable
   experience of being on football terraces at all sorts of
   matches, including  big matches? - A. Yes, I   have been to
   a lot of big games.

Q. Would you agree from your experience that before the
   kick-off there are moments of heightening excitement
                                                         56



                                                P.’J. GARRETT


   before the game starts? - A. Yes, I would go along with
   that.

Q. One of those moments of excitement is when the team is
   read out and if you are on the terrace behind the
   Liverpool goal, there is particular excitement when the
   Liverpool team is read out? - A. Well, when it is read
   out there is no jumping or cheering, you just shout
   "Hoorah" or "Yes  or whatever name is shouted out.  There
   is no jumping or anything.

Q. There is a reaction to each name that is read out? - A.
   Yes, but it is just like a standing clap.

Q. A stand and clap? - A. Yes, you know like the team...
   Like Kenny Dalgliesh, yes, it's great, and that is when
   the teams are read out.

Q. It is a feature, is it not, for fans sometimes to punch
   the air in saluting each name that is read out? - A. Yes,
   that's right.

Q. I think you have already referred to this that this name
   was the first game back after injury of Alan Hanson? - A.
   That's right, yes.

Q. I wonder if you remember this:  there was a particular
   reception for him when his name was read out? ” A. No
   more than usual when somebody comes back after injury.

Q. Maybe no more than usual when somebody comes back from
   injury, but the jury has seen the video.   Do you
   remember there being a particular ovation for Alan
   Hanson's name? - A. Nothing out of the usual, no.

Q. Nothing out of the usual for somebody coming back after
   injury? - A. Well, nothing out of the usual for getting
   his name read out in general.

Q. A further moment of excitement came when the team came
   out on the field? - A. When the team came out, yes.

Q. You told my   learned friend Mr. King that when the team
   came out on   to the field you felt there was no more room
   in pen 4? -   A. There was none at all.   In fact it was
   overcrowded   then.

Q. You, of course, can only speak about the part of pen 4 in
   which you were? - A. Yes, I couldn't speak for what was
   going on behind me.

Q. Or what was happening in the corner away towards pen 5? -
   A. No, I couldn t see that far.
                                                              57


                                                      P.’J. GARRETT


           THE CORONER:   Mr. King, what time did you say the
      Liverpool team came out?   Was it 15.56 that you said?

            MR. KING:      I said six minutes to, 15:54:08.

           MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I wonder if you are going to ask
B     more about the White Hart Lane match in 1986, and his
      experience, or would you like me to ask that?

            THE CORONER:      Go ahead.

                Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

    Q. What were you going to say?    You were answering
       questions a little while ago and you were going to say
       something about the 1986 match at White Hart Lane? - A.
       Well, what happened in 1986, we walked into the ground.
       I was with more of my mates than usual.    There were
       about eight or nine of us at this time.   As we walked in
       I stood down at the front with another person and
       everybody else stood nearer the back, as they normally
       do.  As the game continued - there wasn't that much
       pushing and shoving around me, but as the game got on
       there must have been a lot of pushing and shoving at the
D      back because by the end of the game all my mates were
       standing at the front with me.

    Q. So you mean they must have been shoved forward from the
       back right the way down to the front? - A. Well, not
       shoved forward, made their way forward.

    Q. Did they mean to make their way forward? - A. Yes.   ^hey
       told me.   I said, "How come you all came down here?
       They said, "Well, there was a bit of pushing and shoving^
       up there and we thought we might as well come down here.'

                        Further bv THE CORONER:

    Q. The only question I want to ask you is that you said that
       in your opinion the people at the back would have known
       what was going on at the front? - A. Well, not so much
       now would have known, they would have known that
       something out of the ordinary was going on.

    Q. Yes, I am not interested, in a sense, in your opinion as
       regards that, what I am interested in is have you ever
       been in a situation where you were at the back... - A.
       And pushing forward, yes.




G
                                                          58



                                       P. J. GARRETT


         And where you realised from the back that things were
         happening in the front.  Have you personally ever been
         in that situation? - A. Yes, once or twice.

         Can you name when that would be?  If you can't .... -
B        A. I can remember one game, 1985 or something,
         Liverpool played Spurs at Anfield, and you know the
         little barriers, I was standing like in front of one
         of them so that the barrier was behind me, and you
         could feel like a push and you knew that these people
         who were standing directly behind the barrier, so that
         the barrier was on their chest, were getting wrapped
         round the barrier, so you would try to hold them off
         as much as possible.

         That is what I was going to ask you.  What did you in
         fact do in that situation? - A. You try and sort of
         keep your ground and anybody who has fallen around
         you, you try and pick them up and that, so it stops
         people from getting crushed.

         Can you recollect whether you shouted to people to
         stop pushing in those situations? - A. I think so,
         yes.

         Did you when you were doing that get any response? -
         A. You get a response because everybody about you is
         shouting exactly the same, so everybody helps each
         other.

    Q.   Is that, in fact, what brings ---   A. That is what
         makes me say that.

    Q.   To a stop? - A. Yes.

              THE CORONER: Does anybody want to ask anything
         arising out of that? Anybody else want to ask this •
         witness anything, because once he has gone we have
         lost him, he has flown.  (No response) Thank you very
         much for being here.  We wish you all the very best.

              I think we will start with Mr. Hurst and see how
         far we get.

                     MALCOLM ADRIAN HURST Sworn

                          By THE CORONER:

    Q.   You are Malcolm Adrian Hurst - right? - A. Correct.

    Q.   What is vour address, Mr. Hurst? - A.
                            Sheffield.

    Q.   You are, I think, a warehouse superintendent? - A.
                                 M. A. HURST


That is right.

It sounds to me as if you are rather keen on football,
would this be right? - A. Just a lot, yes.

Because I think you are the Sheffield Wednesday
Supporters' Club Secretary, I believe? - A. Committee
member.

That is a voluntary activity? - A. Yes.

In addition to that you also sell programmes, I think,
at matches? - A. That is right, yes sir.

You do this at home matches, you do not go with the
Club? - A. I do occasionally travel as a supporter to
away matches.

Yes, but not to sell programmes? - A. No, the
programme selling is purely at Hillsborough.

Normally speaking you sell, I think, to your own
supporters at the Spion Kop, is it not? - A. Yes.

You attend a lot of matches, but you did not attend
the 1988 semi-final? - A. No sir.

But you did come in 1989, 15th April? - A. Yes.

But you came to do a job, which was to sell
programmes? - A. Yes.

On this occasion I think you were selling in the
Leppings Lane end, is that right? - A. I was selling
near Gate A on the corner of the North Stand and
Leppings Lane corner.

Do you want to show us where it is on the model? - A.
Yes.  The seating area, the people going through these
turnstiles here, and there were two portacabins in
this area here facing outwards, as it were, and we
were selling programmes to the people as they were
going through to get into the North Stand, that area.

So you were within what I would call the segregated
area for people going towards the North Stand? - A.
Yes sir.

Where the fencing narrows somewhat? - A. Yes.   It was
actually just before it started narrowing down,
somewhere sort of here.

That is right.  Okay.  In fact, if we drew a
perpendicular line, a straight line, from the corner
                     0
                                                      60



                                        M. A. HURST


       of the West Stand block it would more or less bisect
       the point where you were? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q.    So you had a jolly good view from there of Gate A? -
       A. Yes sir.

Q.    But you could not see Gate C? - A. No.

Q.    I do not think you could see Gate B either, or perhaps
       you could just see it? - A. No.  When I looked out
       towards the turnstiles I could see Gate A and I could
       see I think it is the first six turnstiles.

Q.    What time did you turn up? - A. I got to Hillsborough
       at 10-past 11 on that day.

Q.    What time did you take up your position? - A. I took
      up my position about 10-to 12.

Q.    At that time everything presumably was perfectly quiet
       and normal? - A. Everything was quiet, yes.

Q.    Were the police officers around by then already? - A.
       There were some around, yes.

Q.    Could you see them on the outside of the turnstiles as
      well, or just the inside? - A. I occasionally caught
       glimpses of policemen outside, but very infrequently.
       It was more inside.  I could see the policemen
       straight in front of me.  It wasn't obstructed at all.

Q.     I think things carried on fairly quietly until what
        time? - A. Well, the turnstiles opened about 12 noon,
        I had been there about 10 minutes, and as in previous
        semi-finals, because even though I did not go to the
        one in 1988 I have been attending previous semi­
        finals, like all semi-finals, to start with there were
        a few people milling around, one or two of them came
        in.  The very fact that we were selling programmes to
        the people who had got allocated seats meant that
        there was not the same sort of push, I did not feel.
        It was just all nice and steady until about 2 o'clock.
        It started picking up about 2 o'clock, 2.00 to 2.15,
        and then it started getting quite busy, and as time
        went on - we didn't really notice time really - every
        few minutes it seemed to get a little busier, so at
        about half-past 2 there were four of us selling
        programmes at that stage and as fast as we could get
        them we were selling them.  So it had got as busy as
     . it could get at that stage.

Q.    You had reached your capacity for selling programmes?
       - A. Yes.
                                  M. A. HURST


Did you notice anything else?  Obviously you were
looking down and taking money, and whatever one does?
- A. Yes.

But were you able to see Gate A at all or anything
which was happening outside? - A. Yes, I noticed about
quarter-past 2, I think it was, a number of policemen
suddenly come from behind me.  If I could just refer
back to it, it looked as if they were coming from the
North Stand area, coming out where it widens out.
They came from behind that area and suddenly appeared,
and we sort of said, "Aye, aye, what's happening
here?" Then they - you can't write this down - made, a
sort of walkway from Gate A to the side of where the
portacabin was, there is a little gate that goes
through the fencing.  The next thing I saw was
somebody - and I don't know who it was, whether a
policeman or steward - opened Gate A.  I don't think
it was fully opened, I think it was about three-
quarters open.  As soon as the gate opened, from
behind the gate there was a rush in of people.   Once
the initial sort of 10 or 15 seconds and the rush had
gone, there was a more orderly form of people coming
through, but I would guess that in about 10 to 15
minutes I would think there was about 700 people came
through and they were then fed through the little gate
at the side of us into the Leppings Lane terraces.

1 just want to pick you up on the time of this.  I
think I heard you say quarter-past, but did you mean
quarter-past 2 when these policemen lined up? We know
what time this Gate A opened, you see.  That was
considerably later than that. - A. It may have been
later.

How long were the policemen there before the gate
opened? - A. About 3 or A minutes.

You do not know where they came from? - A. No, they
just came sort of.  I was looking in front of me and
they just came over my shoulder, as it were, into
view. Maybe 5 minutes.  They got themselves sorted out
and assembled and made a walkway through.

Actually I   have not got it on this schedule, at least
not that I   can see. - A. If the policemen came into
view about   quarter-past 2, it could have been 20-past
2 when the   gate opened, something like that.

Are you saying the gate opened well before the match
was ready to play? - A. Yes.
                                  M. A. HURST


Do you remember it opening at any other time? - A. No,
apart from the gate opened slightly to let police
officers in and let other officials in.

I am not talking about that - A. To let the public in
it only opened on that one occasion, as I saw it.

You see, in your statement which you made - and I am
not trying to catch you but I am trying to get the
time right - you said this.  In fact, I will show you
this page.  Have a look.  Ignore the highlighting,
that is just to help me.  Just see what you said about
that. - A. It looks from there as if when I said
quarter-past 2 I have probably got that wrong.   It was
probably after that.  I recognise that that statement
was made 18 months ago and probably time has gone by
and I have lost track of time, you see.

What I am asking you really is in this statement you
say 2.AO? - A. Yes.

Which do you think is more correct now? - A. I would
think that if I have done that statement within three
or four weeks of it happening, the statement is more
likely to be correct, because now it is 20 months ago.

Apart from the time it is the same as what you have
now told me. - A. I have lost track of time a little,
yes.

     MR. KING:  Just to help you, sir, you said you
did not have a schedule of timings, can I just hand
you a schedule I have of timings, which was drawn up
on the earlier occasion.  It may help you, sir.

     THE CORONER: That is very kind of you.  Thank
you.  What I meant was it is not on the exhibit.   That
is what I was trying to say.

     MR. PAYNE:  Sir, if this is going to be done, I
would be grateful if we might have copies.  I do not
know what this document is.

     THE CORONER: It is just for my assistance.

     MR. PAYNE:  Certainly, I am sure it is for your
assistance, but I do not know what the information on
it is and I would be grateful if we might have a sight
of it as well, please.

     MR. KING:   There is nothing sinister in this.
                                    M. A. HURST


     MR. PAYNE:  I am not saying there is anything
sinister.  It is quite unnecessary to use that word.
I am merely asking if I might have a look at it.

     MR. KING:  It is simply the time that Gate A
opened, if that is of any assistance.

     MR. PAYNE:     There is more than that on it.

     THE CORONER: But that is all I am looking at, Mr.
Payne.


     MR. KING:      Sir, Ihave passed a copy to my
learned friend.      It isItem 13.

     MR. PAYNE:     Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER:   We have got all the timings.    They
are all in Inspector Layton's evidence.     It is just
that I have not   got it in front of me now.   That is
all it is.  In fact, if we get the transcript of Day
1, which is downstairs in my office, we can look it up
in that, and then there cannot be any argument about
it at all.

     MR. MANNING:    Was it around 2.54, sir?

     THE CORONER: Yes, 14.54.

Let us move on.  We will come back to this time in a
minute. We have terrible problems with times because
nobody can remember them.  We have got videos which
give us the exact time. - A. One of the problems that
we had is as it was getting busy, you do tend to lose
track of time.

But time is important because it enables you to fix
events. - A. Yes.

Forget the time, let us just deal with the facts. - A.
Right.

You are saying that a number of police officers
appeared from behind you? - A. Yes.

They formed a line from Gate A? - A. They formed two
queues enabling a passageway of people to get between
them.

The gate was opened, people came through? - A. Yes,
that is right.
                                  M. A. HURST


What I am interested in is did these people who came
through then go towards the North Stand, or are you
saying that they were channelled? - A. They were
channelled through a side gate which was adjacent to
where we were selling programmes and, as far as I am
aware, everyone who came through that gate went in
through the side gate.  I didn't see anybody break
rank, as it were, and go out that way.

That little gate which you are mentioning, I don't
know how little it is.  How big is it? - A. I would
think that you could probably get people two abreast
through it.  It is that sort of size.

That would have lead into the concourse area which
would have lead either into the West Stand or into the
north-west terracing? - A. Yes.

Or into Leppings Lane terracing if they came through
the gate in a brick wall? - A. Yes sir.

That is right, is it? - A. Yes.

Did you know about the gate in the brick wall? - A. In
the actual wall?

Yes. - A. No.  I knew about the gate in the fence at
the side of us. I knew about that one.

You did not really know the layout at Leppings Lane
very well? - A. No.

But you knew about that little gate? - A. I knew there
was a wall there and I assumed that there was some way
of getting from one side of the wall to the other, but
I didn't know what that was.

Okay.  As far as you know anyway, all of these people,
however many there may have been and you thought there
could have been anything up to 700-odd, were
channelled into this area and away from the North
Stand? - A. Yes sir.




                              /Q. Before this
                              M.A. HURST



Before this happened, before the gate was opened had you
observed the gate itself, Gate A, had you noticed anything
about it? - A. Yes, I had.  I noticed a lot of banging on
the gate and the gate which is a concertina type gate was
actually doing a considerable amount of toing and froing
and it looked from where I was, it gave the impression
that there were a lot of people putting a lot of pressure
on the other side of the gate.

But you of course could not see that? - A. I could not see
the people.  All I could see was, I could hear the noise
of people and I could see the gate doing a considerable
amount of moving to and fro as though people were pushing
at it from the other side.

The people having come through did you then continue
selling programmes in the normal sort of way? - A. Yes, yes.

Did any of these people who came through speak to you at
all.   Did they say anything about what they had experienced?
- A . I can't remember anyone actually referring to it.

Was there any other event that happened after this which
is significant as far as you can remember? - A. When the
people were led into the Leppings Lane terraces a few
minutes after that - again I have lost track of time -
a few minutes after that we actually finished selling
our programmes because we had sold them all so all we did
then for security reasons we got a bolt on the door where
we were selling, we stayed there, we did not move at all
until about 10-past-3 by which time as far as we were
concerned in our little corner everybody was in the ground
and the game had actually kicked off. We did not know
about any of the problems that were happening behind the
goal or in the tunnel area.

You did not know anything about that? - A. No.

And you never went down? - A. No.

You will have to have lunch like all of us.  Can you come
back at 2 o'clock if you would and we will carry on then.
You are on oath - and you are in the middle of your
evidence - which means that you must not discuss the
evidence or what you are going to say with anybody until
after you have finished, okay? You can talk about anything
else you like.  You don't have to be isolated but just
don't talk about what is happening here until we have
finished.  Okay? - A. Right.

                 (Luncheon adjournment)
                                             M. A*. HURST



I have almost finished, apart from sorting out this
business about when Gate A was opened.

      THE CORONER:    Mr. King, I am most grateful to you
for your schedule.    I have looked through Inspector
Layton's evidence which he gave on Day 1, and in fact
Inspector Layton says that the gate was opened at 14.58
and some seconds.    I have also had a look through a
transcript of Day 15, page 93 - that is LJT's
transcript - where this same time is mentioned by the
Sergeant.    We will be getting to the Sergeant in due
 course, but I am just giving you two references.

The point about all this is that according to our
evidence, video evidence and others, Gate A was
actually opened at 2-minutes-to 3, 14.58.  Now I want
you to think back for a moment.  Does that accord in
any way with what your recollection is of the timing of
events? - A. When we talk about Gate A can I just make
absolutely clear it is the very first gate - there is a
little corner shop there and it is the very first gate?

Yes, you can walk up to the model and show us where it
is. - A. My understanding of Gate A is it is the very
first one in the corner.

Yes, that is the one we are talking about.  It is very
difficult with times and please don't think that I am
complaining.  I would be no better than you or anybody
else if I was in your shoes.  What I am trying to
ascertain is this, if I tell you that the video
evidence indicates that the gate opened at 14.58, can
you reconcile that with your recollection of how long,
for example, you were still selling programmes after
that event? - A. The short answer is I am as convinced
as I can be that the gate was opened 20 minutes before
the kick-off.  If you have video proof that says it was
opened at 14.58 what I would ask is if there was any
video evidence available that says whether it was
opened before that, because as far as I can remember
and as far as I can recollect that gate was opened in
the region of 20 minutes before kick-off.

Can you remember approximately how long you recollect
it being open? - A. I would think for about five or six
minutes.

Okay, well I won't press you any further than that.
The only other thing I want to ask you is if you can
think back to - you said there were a load of Police
Officers turned up? - A. Yes.

Again, they came before the gate was opened, didn't
they? - A. Yes, as though it was a pre-planned idea.
                                                                67


                                                   M. A. HURST



      How many minutes would you say they arrived before the
      gate was opened? - A. Virtually as soon as they got
      there they formed two lines, and then the gate was
      opened almost immediately afterwards, so probably from
B     the moment that I first saw them we are talking two to
      three minutes, before they actually lined up and the
      gate was opened.

    Q. So not a long time? They hadn't been there for ages
       and ages? - A. Oh, no.

    Q. What you are saying is it appeared to you they were
       coming with the intent of making lines? - A. Yes.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYRE

      Whatever time it was that the gate was opened, I am
      going to ask you some questions about the circumstances
      at the time, and for this purpose can you just
      illustrate your answers by looking at some documents
      that we have got, starting with C255?  In that
      photograph can you see the two cabins that you referred
      to earlier? - A. Yes.
D
    Q. In that photograph can you see the two cabins that you
       referred to earlier? - A. Yes.

    Q. We can't quite see Gate A but we can see the position
       of it at the left hand end of the big bank of
       turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

      And also, it is a bit difficult on this photograph to
      see the fence which runs behind the two cabins? - A.
      Right.

      You can see it as it goes towards the North Stand but
      then it is not terribly clear after that, but we know
      from the model that it then extends down to the back of
      the turnstiles, as we can see on the model, right?
      Now, your vantage point as beside those two cabins, was
      it? - A. I was actually inside, as you look at the
      photograph, the right hand one as you look at it, I was
      actually inside there.

    Q. Can you turn to 274?   You have found Gate A on 274? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. Just to the right of it is access gate, you see that? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. And that is obviously in that fence which we could not
       quite make out on the photograph? - A. Yes.




H
                                             M. A*. HORST



Is that the access gate through which you saw the fans
being diverted? - A. Yes, sir.

You told the Coroner that Gate A was banging, you could
hear the noise and see the gate moving to and fro? - A.
Yes, sir, that is correct.

Was that before the Officers arrived and took up this
position? - A. Yes, sir.

Whatever time this was and there is obviously some
scope for further evidence about that, but whatever
time it was there were some people outside the gate at
that time who were causing the gate to move about? - A.
That is the impression that I got.  I couldn't actually
see the people, but it has got to have been caused by
something.

Okay, well something was causing it to move about? - A.
I would have assumed that it was a large number of
people behind the gate, yes, sir.

The Jury have heard evidence   about when the large
number of people assembled outside, so this may be
sorted out by that evidence or by other evidence    yet to
come, but at that stage from   inside the gate you  could
not really tell how many people there were outside? -
A. I could not tell through the gate, because of course
it is a straight up gate.  The only idea I had got is
that through the turnstiles you do get a little bit of
a glimpse of people but it is not very much at all.

You also presumably could not tell whether the people
outside the gate had tickets? - A. No, no idea, sir.

If they did have tickets, whether they were tickets for
the North Stand,you have just got no idea?  - A. I have
no idea.  I had no idea whether they had all got the
correct tickets or nobody had got tickets, or what
combination.

Nobody actually inside the gate could have any idea
whether the people who were outside had tickets or not?
- A. That is correct.

Gate A only leads in the normal way tothe North   Stand,
doesn't it? - A.   That is right, yes.

And that is a completely all-seater area? - A. Yes.

And the tickets which had been sold and given out
before the match all had numbers on, did they? - A.
Yes, as far as I am aware.
                                            M. A. HURST



So each person who had got a ticket for the North Stand
had got a particular seat for himself? - A. Yes.

Somebody or other had decided, you don't know who or
the circumstances, but it is obvious that somebody had
decided to open Gate A? - A. Yes.

And it looked to you as if the arrival of these Police
Officers was in preparation for that? - A. Yes.

And you don't know, because you had not got the view
outside the ground, you don't know why it was being
opened? - A. That is right.  I could hazard a guess but
that is all.  I did not know for certain why it was
being opened.




             /Q. Yes, quite
                                                          70


                                                   M. A. HURST



Q. Yes, quite.   When it was opened in rushed a big crowd of
   people? - A. Immediately the gate was opened there seemed
   to be a sudden surge forward of people, which after a
   minute perhaps went down to an orderly inrush of people -
   not an inrush...    Certainly for about thirty seconds or
   so, once the gate was opened, it was as though people had
   spilled inside.   After that people carried on coming in
   but in a more orderly fashion.

Q. From the point of view of the people inside, when they
   opened the gate there could be no way of telling how many
   people were going to come pouring through? - A. No idea
   at all.

Q. Nobody could have known? - A. No.

Q. Likewise, nobody could have known whether they had
   tickets or not and whether they had tickets for the North
   Stand or not?

          THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne. I think I have allowed you
     to go on long enough.    I don t think that is right.
     You can ask him whether he knows but you can't say that
     nobody could have known.

          MR. PAYNE:   I'm sorry:

Q. Did you know whether any of the people who came pouring^
   through the gate had tickets or not? - A. For anywhere in
   the ground?

Q.   Yes, for anywhere? - A. No, I don't know.

Q.   Or for the North Stand? - A. I don't know.

Q. Was there any way you could know that? - A. No, sir.

Q. Suppose the access gate had been left shut and the
   policeman had just stood to one side,where would those
   people have gone? - A. That's a difficult one to answer
   because I am assuming again, but I would have assumed the
   only way they could go...   There are only two ways they
   can go if the gate is shut, is either back out again
   which is highly unlikely, or behind the North Stand,
   which is a seating area.

Q. Into the North Stand? - A. Yes, or in the area behind the
   North Stand where the catering area is and the bar.

Q.   What, and just stand around do you mean? - A.Just stand
     around.   It is the only place they could have gone.
                                                                  71


                                                     M. A. HURST


    Q. If they wanted to see the match...? - A. They would have
       actually had to physically go into the North Stand.

                    Cross-Examined by Mr. KING:

    Q. Clearly your impression was that as regards the people
       coming through Gate A, some preparation had been made to
       receive them? - A. Certainly.

    Q. The preparation was to divert them from the North Stand
       seating? - A. No.   As I understood it, when they opened
       the little side gate at the side of us the preparation
       was to direct them into the Leppings Lane standing area.

    Q. Exactly.   In other words it was to prevent them going
       into the seating area? - A. Sorry, yes.

    Q. I'm sorry, it was my word "divert".   However, once that
       reception line of police had directed them through that
       access gate there was no-one to greet them on the other
       side, was there? - A. Not that I could see but that was
       out of my vision.

    Q. From what you could see there was no-one to greet them? -
       A. No.

    Q. In other words, it looks from you were that they were
       left to their own devices once they got through the
       access gate? - A. Yes.

    Q. That, of course, would mean anywhere on the West Stand
       terrace? - A. Yes.

                      Further by THE CORONER:

    Q. Yes, the jury has a couple of questions.   I will ask the
       second question first if I may.   When Gate A was opened,
       which you have described to us, can you remember whether
       fans were still coming through turnstiles 1 to 8?   I
       know you couldn't see them all but you could see some of
       the turnstiles, couldn't you?   I think you said about
       the first six you could see? - A. About six I could see.

    Q. Could you see fans coming through those turnstiles at
       that time? - A. I think they were still coming through.
       I would not swear to it absolutely certainly, but I am
       almost certain they were still coming through the
       turnstiles.

    Q. Would it also be right that before the gate was opened,
       as near to the opening as you can remember, were people
       coming through the turnstiles that you could see? -
       A. Yes.




\
                                              •M. A. HURST


The other question I want to ask you is this:^ you have
explained to us about these police officers diverting and
the crowds coming down, was any attempt made to sort out
the people with North Stand tickets because there might
well have been some, or were they all diverted through
the gate? - A. From what I saw, everyone that came
through the opened gate was diverted through and went
into the West standing terrace.

What about the people who were coming through the
turnstiles, because they would be mingling with this
crowd? - A. As best I can describe it, what happened was
that they carried on coming through the turnstiles.    Now
some of them waited there and one or two of them pushed
past the first row of police and past the second row of
police and, if you like, crossed the people who were
being diverted, so they carried on.    Certainly there was
a backlog of people immediately through the turnstiles of
- it's hard to say, but it built up, obviously as time
by, probably a couple of hundred people just let this
happen.   When it finished they then carried on their^
way, but a few actually did go across the line of police
and went along behind the North Stand.

What you are saying is that the people who came in
through Gate A were the ones who were channelled? - A.
Yes.

In effect there is a block on the ones who had been
coming through the turnstiles? - A. For the most part,
yes.

Who were damming up to a large extent.   Once the crowd
from Gate A had cleared, the others then carried on in
the normal way? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed.   I am
much obliged.     Mr. Thorpe.

             STUART ROWLAND THORPE Sworn

                    By THE CORONER

You are Stuart Rowland Thorpe? - A. That's right, sir.

                                      Sheffield? - A. That
is quite correct.

Your job is a fork lift truck driver? - A. That is quite
correct, sir.

What we are interested in is your stewarding.   I think
in 1989 you had already been a steward for 22 years? - A.
that is quite correct.
                                                           73

                                                   SV R. THORPE



Q.   At Sheffield Wednesday? - A. That is quite correct.

Q.   There are several Chief Stewards? - A. Yes.

Q. You were one of the Chief Stewards? - A. That is quite
   correct.

Q.   You patch was the West Stand? - A. That's right.

Q.   You had held that appointment for about 15 years?     - A.
     Yes.

Q. Are you still there? - A. Yes, sir.

0. The West Stand as far as you were concerned comprised the
   seating area, despite its name? - A. Yes.

Q. Also the gatemen at Gates C and B?     - A. That's right,
   sir.

Q. Gate A had nothing to do with you? - A. Nothing
   whatsoever to do with me, sir.

Q. As far as you were concerned the terracing had nothing to
   do with you? - A. That is quite correct.

Q. Whether that is right or wrong is neither here nor there,
   but you... - A. I had nothing to do with the terracing
   whatsoever.

Q. You have been a Chief Steward for many years.   Did you
   know whether there was a Chief Steward, or, indeed, any
   steward who had responsibilities similar to yours in
   respect of the terracing? - A. No.

Q. You mean you didn't know or there wasn't one? - A. Thete
   wasn't one, sir.




                  Q. So that was
                                                        74



                                     S. R. THORPE


Q.   So that was a part of the ground which, as far as you
     were concerned, you had nothing to do with? - A. That
     is quite correct.

Q.   And, as far as you knew, there wasn't anybody else who
     had responsibility for it either? - A. No.

Q.   Were you as chief steward - I might say the chief
      steward but we know that you have got a limited role
      and there are other chief stewards dotted all around
      the stadium? - A. Yes.

Q.   As the chief steward in that area, you did not
      normally take up a fixed position, did you? - A. No..

Q.   Your job was to wander round and check up on your men,
     so to speak? - A. Yes, see if they were all right and
     check on if they had had any trouble or anything like
     that with tickets.

Q.   In a nutshell, how would you describe what you
      perceive to be the role of your stewards on the stand?
      Actually I am not too concerned with the stand, but
      let us start with the gates.  What do you perceive
      them as doing, what is their job? - A. It is to keep
      them closed, only open in emergency, such as for the
      Police, Fire.  They have always got to keep them gates
      closed.  For emergency, such as the ambulance, the
      Police, they have got to open, but they should always
      keep them closed until they are told to open them,
      that is the end of the match, about quarter-of-an-hour
      from the end so people can flow out.  That is their
      job to keep it closed all the time, but if a policeman
      comes, you open it for the Police to come in and for
      some officials to come in, but they have got to keep
      them closed.

Q.   It was not intended that they should be used to allow
     ordinary fans to come in, in other words? - A. No.

Q.   The   stewards at the foot of the stairs leading up to
      the West Stand, how many stairwells were there? - A.
      There were six at the bottom of the stairs, stewards,
      to check on the tickets.

Q.   Where were they positioned?  If you would walk up to
      the model, if you do not mind, it might be easier if
     you walk up to it and just show us. - A. There and
      there.

Q.   Was there a stairwell anywhere near the tunnel
      entrance? - A. No sir.
                                                             75
                    »




                                     S. R. THORPE


Q.   Just point where the tunnel is.  I see, okay.  So it
     is those what look from this distance like little
     outbuildings from here which are actually the
     stairwells which lead up into the stand? - A. Yes.

Q.   You had how many stewards again? - A. Six.

Q.   On each? - A. On each, yes, because it is a very tough
     job watching for the tickets, because they are nearly
     the same colour as standing, you know.  If a lot come
     in they have got to look and you have got to have some
     good strong lads there to hold them, to check on the
     tickets.  Because a lot, they have just torn their
     tickets and they make a rush because you can hear them
     saying at the back, when we get a good crowd, "We're
     going to get up there for nowt", "We're going to get
     up there with standing tickets".  My stewards always
     say, "You will not come up here without a seat ticket.

Q.   Okay, because obviously the seats are numbered, are
     they not? - A. That is quite correct.

Q.   If you get two people on one seat you have got
      trouble? - A. That is quite correct.

Q.   Or potential trouble anyway? - A. Yes.

Q.   Am I right in thinking that what, in fact, happens is
      in a normal sort of situation - I am not talking about
      emergencies - if you get through the turnstiles it
      means you have got a ticket? - A. That is quite
      correct.

Q.   But it does not necessarily mean you have got a seated
      ticket; you could have a seated ticket or a standing
      ticket? - A. That is correct.

Q.   And that does not matter whether you come through
      turnstiles A to G - you know which ones they are, do
     you not? - A. Yes.

Q.   Nor, for that matter, whether you come through 9 to
      16? - A. That is quite correct.

Q.   So you get people with tickets for terracing and
      standing all in the same concourse area? - A. That is
      quite correct, sir.

Q.   And the second filter, if you like, is on these
      stairwells where your stewards are, and you show your
      tickets, if you have got a seat up you go and if you
      haven't, "Scram"? - A. Yes.
                               S. R. THORPE


They do not throw them out of the ground, of course? -
A. No.

Did you give your stewards any direction at any time -
I am not talking about this match, the 1989 match, I
am just talking about generally - what the stewards
were to say to the people who came with their terrace
tickets, who wanted to get up? What were they to tell
them? - A. "Turn to your right, standing area is to
your right or under the tunnel".

So they were supposed to say, "To the right ..."  Is
it the right from both of them? - A. It is to the left
from the left-hand side onto the south side.

Were they actually given instructions to say that, or
did you just assume that the stewards with a modicum
of common sense would say it? - A. It was all common
sense of the stewards.  I used to tell them, like, but
it was more or less the common sense of the stewards.

But it was not a formal direction? You did not say to
them, "This is the sentence that you are supposed to
use"? - A. No.

You have already explained to me that   it was not
uncommon in matches that people tried   to get up? - A.
That is quite correct.

This, I am afraid, just happens at biggish matches,
does it? - A. Yes, big matches.

Small matches it does not really matter that much,
does it? - A. No.

But if you have got a lot of people then it might
present you with problems? - A. Yes.

Perhaps you could just also quickly deal with this.       I
think I am right in saying that there used to be
annual meetings of the stewards? - A. Yes.

And the object of those was to give them a little bit
of a chat and a talk, is that right? - A. Yes, with
the Police, the Fire Brigade and everything like that.

What sort of things were they told, briefly? Was it
at the beginning of each season? - A. That is quite
correct, also the fire drill.  At a call for Mr.
Meadows, every steward knew what it was.  They all
stood to their posts, all the gates were opened and
everything.
                    I
                                                          77



                                     S. R. THORPE


Q.   Was that, in fact, the totality of the stewards*
     activity when Mr. Meadows's name was mentioned, that
     they went and opened gates and stood at their posts? -
     A. That is quite correct.

Q.   Were they given any other instructions as to whether
     to get the people out, or what were they supposed to
     do? Were they told what to do, or were they left to
     look at the situation and then act? - A. Look at the
     situation and then act.

Q.   As I say, I am most interested in the gatemen.  Their
     job was just to open the gate and stand out of the
     way, would that be right? - A. That is quite correct,
     sir.

Q.   This is a bit of general background information for
     me.  Let us turn to 1989, okay, 15th April.  You had,
     I think, quite a lot of stewards up there, about 36, I
     think, was it not? - A. Somewhere round about that,
     sir.

Q.    Anyway in the 30s? - A. Yes.

Q.   The bulk of them, I presume, were up in the stands? -
     A. Yes sir.

Q.   How many did you have on the gates, can you remember?
     - A. It was the same amount on the gates, sir, as we
     have always had on the gates.

Q.   We have heard that there were three on Gate    C, would
     you agree with that? - A. Yes.

Q.   I think it was one   or two on Gate B, but I am not too
      worried about Gate B anyway. No additional
      instructions were given to the gatemen or the stewards
      on that day, were there? - A. No, not to my knowledge,
      sir.

Q.   And you did not do anything? - A. No.

Q.    I am not criticising you. - A. No.

Q.    Do not feel threatened in any way. What time did you
     turn up at the ground and position your men? - A.
     About 10 o'clock, sir, just after 10 o'clock.

Q.   What time did they go to the gates? - A. As soon as
      they came, straight onto the job they went, all the
      stewards.

Q.   Did you have much contact with the Police, generally
     speaking, in the concourse area around the gates? - A.




\
                               S. R. THORPE


Yes, a lot of them came to talk to me because they
know me very well, you know.

On the day in question, 15th April 1989, did you speak
to any of the officers? When I say officers I mean
any policemen? - A. Yes.

Were they the same as usual, or were they different? -
A. There were one or two different policemen I
noticed, and a lot of the old policemen.

There were some of the normals as well, so to speak? -
A. Yes.




                           /Q. Were the more.
                                                           79


                                   S.R. THORPE



Q. Were the more senior ones different or were they the
   ones who were normally there? - A. There was some of
   them normal but there was some new ones amongst them.

Q. Did you have the impression that the numbers of Police
   Officers who were on duty when you first began was about
   the same as for a normal semi-final? - A. No.

Q. What impression did you have? - A. My impression was
   more Policemen.

Q. You thought there were more? - A. Yes.

Q. Compared with 1988 would you say there were more or the
   same, the 1988 semi-final? - A. There was about the same.
   I always get kidded on like because "Oh you are in with
   foundation".   Every Policeman what comes: "You still
   he re", you know .

Q. You pass the time of day because it makes for better
   relationships? - A. That is quite correct.

Q. Did you actually go outside the ground at any point on
   that day? - A. I went outside the ground to have a word
   with my Stewards on C gate.  That was about say half-past-10.
   There was quite a few mingling about.  I asked if they
   were all right.  There were one or two mingling around.
   We were getting verbal from some of them sayings  "We will
   get in here for nothing. We will get in here for nothing".

Q. That was at 10.30 you say? - A. Yes sir.   They were
   carrying cans of beer in their pockets because I said to
   an Officer:   "Look at him, he has got cans of beer".
   He said:   "We can't do nothing about it because they are
   not in the street, they are on Wednesday land." That is
   the roadway that leads at the back, leading to the South
   Stand.   He says:  "We can't touch them there".  I think
   it is silly carrying cans of beer in their pockets like
   that.

Q. It was a lovely day of course, wasn't it? - A. Oh yes,
   beautiful, day sir.

Q.   And    it was very early on? - A. Yes.

Q.   And    they weren't making   any attempt to enter the ground?
     - A. Oh no.

Q.   And     as far as you could tell at that stage although they
     had their cans in their pockets they were all perfectly
     well behaved apart from saying:   "We will get in here for
     nothing" some of them said? - A. That is quite correct.
                                 S.R. THORPE


Q. Did you take that seriously or was it a bit of ribbing?
   - A. No, we have jokes like that.

Q. So nothing sinister about it? - A. That is quite correct
   sir.
Q. What I am interested in is when you were outside, you
   know outside the gate? - A. Yes.

Q. How far from the gate did you go? - A. I went to the
   bridge.
Q. You went up to the bridge? - A. Yes, to have a look.

Q. At that time I take it things were as you have described?
   - A. Pretty normal for a semi-final.

Q. Can you remember whether you were approached by anybody?
   Were you wearing a bib first of all? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you recollect whilst you were outside you were
   approached by anybody who said:  "I have got a Kop ticket
   but I would like to get in. What should I do, I have
   been sent to speak to you by a Police Officer . Can you
   remember anything like that happening? - A. No.

Q. You don't recollect anything? - A. No, I don't.

Q. Is it that you don't remember it or that it did not
   happen? - A. Well I don't remember sir. You see I carry
   a radio about with me and I have got an arm band on.

Q. But as far as you remember nobody approached you? — A.
   N o , nobody.
Q. Did you see any other people with Stewards' bibs outside
   when you were outside? - A. My Stewards were stood outside
   because there was nothing about.

Q. The gatemen you mean? - A. Yes, the gatemen were stood
   outside with the gates open.

Q. Do you remember which one it was or was     it all of them?
   — A. There was two of them. A gate and      C gate was open,
   because there was nobody about and they     leave it open
   for officials coming in at that time in     a morning.

Q. And then you came back inside? - A. Yes.

 Q. Did you then stay within the concourse area or did you
    go away and upstairs? - A. I went upstairs to have a
    word with all my Stewards where they were stood.

 Q. I think I had better just dispose of this because it is
    bound to come up sooner or later. I think you alsomet
    a few Liverpool Stewards didn't you? - A. Yes.
                      «
                                                          81

                                  S.R. THORPE



Q. Did you know they were Liverpool Stewards? - A. Yes.

Q. Did they introduce themselves or did you recognise them?
   - A. I recognised them from years before.

Q. About how many of them were there? - A. About six of them.

Q. Did they offer to help? - A. They offered some help to me
   like and I told them I says:  "Well you can go on the
   terracing amongst your lads if you want because I don't
   want to put my Stewards amongst away supporters because
   I would not put my worst enemy amongst away supporters".
   Anywhere in football today you have got to segregate them.

Q. Okay, let's just get this clear. You weren't saying
   these particular away supporters, you were saying any
   away supporters, it does not matter which team it would
   have been you would have said exactly the same? - A. Yes,
   I would.

Q. You just did not think you wanted to put your lads down
   there. You didn't mind their own Stewards going amongst
   them? - A. No.

Q. Was it because you thought it does not really matter
   if the Liverpool Stewards get roughed up or was it that
   you didn't think that they would be hurt? - A. The trouble
   is they know their own Stewards because I got a comment
   the year before I was stood with one of their Stewards,
   one of their Chief Stewards and there was some of them
   coming past: "Oh you are working here are you?" because
   he was a Chief Steward.  I said "Some of your lads".
   He said:  "Oh they all know me" and that is why I like
   to put them together. They could get the family
   atmosphere with their lads, they will do as they are
   told.

Q. So what you are saying is if you can put your own Stewards
   with your own crowds that is a different proposition to
   putting strange Stewards ... A.That is correct.

Q. That is what you are saying? - A. Yes.

Q. And this would apply to any teams. If it had been some
   other teams you would have done the same? - A. Yes.

Q. You have already told me it was not your responsibility
   the terracing? - A. That is quite correct.

Q. So would I be right in assuming you don't know whether
   or not they went on the terracing? - A. I have no idea
   sir to tell you the truth.
                     0
                                                            82

                                 S.R. THORPE



Q. And the only other question I want to ask you about these
   Stewards is did they wear bibs? - A. They brought their
   own bibs.

Q. Did they have them on, can you remember that? - A. One or
   two of them put their jackets on.

Q. But you don't know whether or not they went on.   You have
   no idea? - A. I have no idea at all.

Q. Let's now turn to the gate, Gate C. Were you down in the
   concourse area at about 2.30 or so? - A. I was on the top.
   I was in the canteen part upstairs.  I can see through
   the window.

Q. Which bit of the concourse area can you see from there,
   can you see the A-G part or what? - A. I can see all the
   lot.

Q. Could you see Gate C clearly from where you were? - A.
   Yes, I can.

Q. Could you also see out into Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, that
   is quite correct.

Q. I have said 2.30 but of course you must not fall into
   the trap of agreeing with me. Did you at any time look
   at your watch so that you have got a fixed point that
   you begin your story from? - A. No, not really sir.

Q. When you were up in the canteen what did you see? - A. Well
   they seemed to be all pushing and some supporters were
   climbing over the wall and I said to my assistant I said:
   "I am going downstairs to see if my lads are all right
   at the bottom because they are climbing over, over the
   barbed w i r e " .

Q. Which wall was that, the wall near Gate C? - A. Yes, Gate C
   all along the turnstiles, all the way along.

Q. Along that wall, yes. - A. And the Police were trying to
   catch them because they were running along the top of the
   turnstiles and jumping down.  The Police were very employed
   and climbing over the walls.

Q. So they were trying to catch them as they were coming over?
   - A. Yes.

Q. As they jumped down they caught them and what did they
   do with them if they did catch them? - A. Some of them
   they were trying to put them through C gate and eject them.

Q. Did you at that point see a Police Inspector on top of
   the turnstile area at all? - A. No, I don't remember.
                                                           83

                                 S.R. THORPE



Q. Did you see a Police Inspector on top of the turnstile
   area at all? - A. No.
Q. You didn't notice? - A. I didn't notice him sir.

Q. I don't know how far you can see it depends on the slope
   and also your vision, I don't know about that either,
   but how far down Leppings Lane could you see when all
   this was going on? - A. I can't see very far down.

Q. So you could not really say what was going on outside?
   - A. No, I can't sir.
Q. So when you were saying they all seemed to be pushing
   on what did you base that? - A. The back. We can see
   at the back where the bridge is. They seemed to be
   pushing from there and I noticed the gates, the gates
   were swinging.
Q. Which gates are we talking about? - A. C gate.  I can
   only see C gate because B gate is more or less round
   the corner.  There is a big wall what blocks that.

Q. I see, so you had a good view of C gate but the other
   gate you could not see? - A. No.

Q. And what you are saying is C gate was moving in and
   out? - A. Yes.
Q. And you thought the people were pushing from far back?
   - A. Yes.
Q. But your vision is not that good? - A. No, I agree with
   you there sir.
Q. And it is quite a long way that, isn't it? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. You decided to come down because you wanted to see whether
   your lads were okay? - A. Yes.
Q. And you came down, I take it, down the stairwell which
   you have shown me? - A. Yes.
 Q. Were your stewards at the bottom of the stairwell okay,
    can you remember? - A. Yes.
 Q. Did you then go over to Gate C? - A. I went over to Gate C
    and asked them if they were all right.

 Q. What was the position like? - A. They said: "It is a bit
    dangerous here".  I got thatimpression. There was some
    Policemen there.    Me said: "These gates are a bit
    dangerous".




      \
                     «
                                                           84

                                    S.R. THORPE



Q. You said? - A. No, the lad said it was a bit dangerous
   and he is at the back of the gates.   I said:  "Are you
   all right lads?" and they said:   "We are coping".  I
   went to B gate to see if they were all right and they
   said:  "We are coping all right".

Q. At that point the gates were shut, is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Having been to C gate and B gate what did you do after
   that? - A. I went back upstairs to see to the rest of
   my Stewards to tell them, see that they were all right.

Q. Do you know about what time that might have been? - A.
   It would be about 20-to-3 sir.

Q. That is after you had done this tour? - A. Yes.

Q. How long did you stay out looking after your Stewards?
   - A. I went all the way along the turnstiles to check
   on the Stewards.

Q. Turnstiles? - A. The gangways.     I beg your pardon sir.

Q. Did you go along the gangways at the back or the front
   or in the middle, I don't quite follow? - A.  I have only
   got them at the back, more or less in the middle of it.

Q. Is it right from that position you can't see the terraces
   at all? - A. No.

Q. I mean the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. No, you can't.

Q. So you have got no idea what was happening? - A. No, I
   have no idea whatsoever.

Q. Having done that and I take it your Stewards were okay?
   - A. Yes.

Q. What did you do then? - A. We have two fire escapes at
   each side of m y Stand and I go down there to check on the
   fire escapes and the gates.   There were a couple of
   Stewards in there with the Police.

Q. Where are those fire escapes? - A. To the right and left
   of my Stand.

Q. Just show us on the model? - A. There and there.

Q. On the side edges? - A. Yes, down the side there.

Q. I take it that from those positions you still can't see
   the terraces? - A. I can see the terracing.
                                                         85

                                  S.R. THORPE



Q. You could see the terracing from there? - A. Yes, at the
   bottom of the Stand I can see the terracing.

Q. All of it or just ....   A. I can see all along the bottom
   there is terracing.

Q. How long were you in that position? - A. About three or
   four minutes sir.

Q. Did you notice anything at that time? - A. No, I did not
   notice anything.

Q. There was no reason why you should, I am just asking.
   Did you then come back into the concourse area, or what?
   - A. Yes.

Q. So this would be now what time, about quarter-to, 10-to?
   - A. About 10-to-3 sir.

Q. Had the position changed in any way? - A. Well not then
   sir.  I went back upstairs to talk to one of my Stewards
   who was standing at the top of the stairs to direct him
   to the different gangways upstairs.  I was chatting to
   him and he says:  "All hell let loose here, all hell is
   let loose here".  I went to the window to look and the
   next minute they all started coming in.




                       Q. Through? - A. Through C gate
                                           S. R. THORPE



Through? - A. Through C gate, and I went downstairs
then straightaway, and all ray stewards, they were
rushing all over the place, coming up the steps.   I
said to my stewards,  Don't check if they have got any
tickets, let them come.  You can't stop these", there
was that many coming up the steps.   They were running
up the steps and they were knocking each other about as
they were running up the steps.   "Try and get out of
the way", I said, and I said, "Give them time, let them
come up, don't stop them".

Were you hoping to sort it out later on? - A. Yes, once
they got upstairs we could have sorted it out with the
Police and the stewards.

It sounds as if there were people coming up the stairs?
- A. Yes, sir.

Did you see them going anywhere else as well? - A. They
were going all over the place, sir.

Did you see them go down the tunnel?  - A. They were
going down the tunnel, there were just droves going
down the tunnel.

You had not actually seen the gate open, had you? - A.
No.

You just saw that it was open .... - A. Yes.

Or opening, and people were coming through? - A. That
is quite correct.

As soon as you saw that you came down? - A. Yes.

Do you recollect how long it stayed open? - A. I have
no idea, sir.

Are you saying that when these people were coming up
the stair-wells, it would have been impossible for your
stewards to give them directions or to check  the
tickets? - A. No chance, sir.

I am just interested in one other thing.  You obviously
were walking around your West Stand? - A. Yes.

Keeping an eye on it, so to speak, and keeping an eye
on the stewards? - A. Yes.

Did it appear to you to be lessfull than   it normally
would have been for a semi-final? - A. No,  sir, it was
just about the same to me.
                                                                87
                         «




                                                 S. R. THORPE



Q.    You did not have the impression early on, say at 2
     o'clock when you were up there, did you think, "It
     doesn't look right"? - A. Well, in a way, sir, one of
     my stewards said to me, my own son, he said, "It's not
     filling up like it reckons to do, like last year.   Last
     year they seemed to come in earlier" - fill up, because
     we had no trouble the year before, and of course I had
     temporary stewards, I had two of my sons doing it -
     they do it every year, temporary - he says, "It's not
     filling up", one of my sons.

Q. So they did notice that there was a difference? - A.
   They did notice it wasn't filling like it reckons to
   do, sir.

Q. I want to turn now to another aspect and that is the
   1988 match. - A. Yes.

Q. If you were to compare the '88 match with the '89 match
   what would you pick out as a significant difference
   that you saw, and if there isn't anything then say
   nothing. - A. Nothing really, sir.

Q. Nothing struck you? - A. Nothing struck me, sir.

Q. The next question I want to ask you about is this, I am
   talking about the '88 semi-final now, okay? - A. Yes.

Q. Nothing else, just the '88 semi-final so think about
   that. - A. Yes.

Q. Can you recollect whether or not you saw with your own
   eyes, and if you didn't then you must not say so, the
   tunnel barriered off for the '88 semi-final? - A. No,
   it wasn't, sir.

Q. It wasn't? - A. No.

Q. You are sure about that? - A. I am sure about it.

Q. Of course, you weren't in the concourse area the whole
   time? - A. No, I wasn't, sir.

Q. So it might have been when you weren't there? - A. That
   is quite correct, sir.

Q. But at the times when you were there you did not see it
   barriered off? - A. No.

Q. When I say barriered off, I don't mean wooden doors
   shut but I mean temporary barriers or Policemen across
   it, you never saw anything like that? - A. There is
   always about four Policemen at each side, two at each
   side, some of them come to the middle.
                                                                88


                                                S. R.- THORPE



Q. The toilets are on each side, aren't they? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you saying that the Policemen stand around in that
   area? - A. Standing round that area.

Q. Were they there in 1988, as far as you remember? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Can you recollect whether there were any there in 1989
   when you ...? - A. Yes, there was, sir.

Q. In that .... - A. Same place, because when I walk out,
   outside the turnstiles as they are coming through they
   search them.  There is always a load there, also there
   is one or two, I think they are more or less on
   standby, sir, if they want any help, to come to them.

Q. So there are Police Officers on the inside of the
   concourse.  Is there a row of them behind the
   turnstiles as far as you remember? - A. Yes.

Q. What do they do? - A. They search some of the
   supporters when they are coming in to see if they have
   got anything in their pockets or anything like that.

Q. Then in addition to those you say there are a few more
   standing around? - A. Yes.

Q. And you recollect that they stand near the tunnel
   entrances? - A. Sometimes, yes.

Q. Can you remember, I want you to try and think really
   hard, whether there were any standing near the tunnel
   entrances in 1989 as far as you can remember, '89 now?
   - A. Yes, sir.   I can't remember myself.

Q. Go back to '88 then? - A. Yes.

Q. And think just as hard.  For the times that you were in
   the concourse area can you remember any Officers
   standing around the tunnel at that time? - A. No, I
   can't recall it, sir.

Q.   '88, we are still on 1988, all right? - A. Yes.

Q. How much time did you spend in the concourse area as
   opposed to wandering  up and down your stand, because
   obviously you had to  divide your time, didn t you? - A.
   Yes, I do, sir.

Q. Have you any idea .... - A. No, I have no idea
   whatsoever, sir.
                                                                 89


                                                  S. R..THORPE



    Q. You don't know whether you were down there at any
       particular point in time - you can't say? - A. I can't
       say, sir.

B   Q. Can you now think about league matches, not semi­
       finals? - A. Yes.

    Q. Of course, you have been there for a long time, haven't
       you? - A. Yes.

    Q. Can you recollect any league matches where the tunnel
       might have been blocked off by Police Officers or
       railings or anything like that? - A. No.

    Q. You can't remember that? - A. I can't remember, sir.

    Q. Can you remember any semi-final at any time where it
       was blocked off as far as you know? - A. No, I can't
       remember, sir.

    Q. Your boss, if I can use that word, is Mr. Locke, is
       that right? - A. That is quite correct, yes.
D   Q. Then above him, is Mr. Mackrell as well? - A. That is
       quite correct.

    Q. And beyond that are the directors, is that right? - A.
       Yes, that is right.

    Q. But you would not normally have much to do with the
       directors? - A. No.

    Q. It is Mr. Locke and Mr. Mackrell, isn't it? - A. That
       is quite correct.

    Q. And if you have to use your radio you would be speaking
       to Mr. Locke, would you? - A. That is quite correct.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

    Q. On the question of putting stewards on the terrace
       amongst the visiting supporters, you have used a very
       graphic expression, saying that you wouldn't put your
       worst enemy in that position? - A. That is quite
       correct, sir.

    Q. Has it always been like that? - A. It has always been
       like it, sir.

    Q. Yes. - A. Well, I don't believe --- like this, sir, I
       don't believe in putting Sheffield people amongst any
       visiting fans, sir.




H
                                           S. R...THORPE



No, I am not talking about this particular match .... -
A. Any match, sir.

What is the problem? - A. I have no idea, sir, but if
you get the away fans, they are losing, some of them
they look round to pick on someone.  If it is any
Sheffielders anywhere, if they belong to Sheffield,
"Oh, there's one there".  I have been away with my son
and I have heard it, "There's some Sheffielders here".
In my opinion, I think they ought to put their own
stewards in. You get Chelsea, they come up, they bring
their own stewards in to mingle with them.

Is that the normal practice, for teams to take their
own stewards to marshall their own people? - A. I have
known one or two clubs, sir, do that.  Liverpool do it,
when they travel away onto the Continent, sir, because
I have spoken to the chief stewards.  They have their
own stewards on the coaches.  Sheffield do when they go
away.

Is this the reason then that stewards are not put on
the terrace with away fans? - A. I think it is, sir,
myself.

Because of the danger to them? - A. It is dangerous,
sir.

I will now come to this particular event.  I wonder if
you would look at the bundle of photographs which you
have got in front of you, at 255 please?  Can you see
the place where the canteen looks out on to the
concourse area on that photograph? - A. Yes, sir.

Can you show it to us so we know where that is? - A.
About where his stick is now, sir, there is a row of
windows there.

Thank you very much, so when you went to have a look
out? - A. Yes.

You were looking from that second storey part? - A.
Yes.

Through a window? - A. Yes.

Over the turnstiles? - A. That is right.

And you could see the crowd beyond? - A. At the  back of
it, near the bridge. You can't see them at the back of
the turnstiles because they are too high, you only can
see at the back.
                                                              91


                                              S. R.. THORPE



Q. You can't see them immediately close to the turnstiles?
   - A. No.

Q. But you can see them where they are further back? - A.
   Yes.

Q. What time was this? Have we got a time for that? - A.
   About half-past-2, sir. Somewhere round about then,
   sir.

Q. Did you notice anything particular about the crowd at
   that time, about the behaviour of the crowd? - A. No,
   not really, sir.

Q. Were you at the same position when you saw Gate C open
   and the crowd come in? - A. Yes, I was.

Q. You went straight to your stewards and your evidence is
   that you say that there was no chance for the stewards
   to give directions or check the tickets? - A. No, there
   wasn't, sir.

Q. This is the people who were coming up the stairs into
   the stands? - A. That is quite correct.

Q. So they have got to go uphill towards the stewards? -
   A. No, they come up to the bottom of the steps.

Q. Then they are going up some steps? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you explain why there was no chance for the
   stewards to stop them or give directions? - A. Well
   when there is about 100 of them running, I can't see
   anyone trying to stop them, "Have you got a ticket",
   because if you had stopped them the people from the
   back are going to knock them down, sir - in my opinion.
   We have got two gates at the bottom and one said, "Shut
   those".  I said, "Don't do that for God's sake".  I
   said, "Let them come".

Q. If there had been some stewards on the concourse, on
   the area between the turnstiles and the tunnel, would
   they have been able to stop the fans? - A. No, sir, not
   whatsoever.

Q. Would you have told them to try and stop the fans? - A.
   No, I wouldn't, sir.

Q. If there had been some there what would you have said
   to^those stewards? - A. I would have said "Let them
   go", because you can't stop them.  The people coming
   from the back, in my opinion, if you are going to stop
   them they are going to knock each other over.   It is
   best to let the thing flow, to my opinion, sir.
                                            S. R. THORPE



You had a good view of this, didn't you, from the
window? - A. Yes, I did.

You are looking right down onto the crowd and you could
see just how they were coming through?- A. Yes, for
that split second I did, until I went downstairs.

Then you saw them coming up the stairs? - A. That's
right.




           Cross-Examined by MR. COUGHLIN
                                                 S'.' R. THORPE



           Cross-Examined by MR. COUGHLIN:

Just one question which you may not be able to answer.
I think you said that when Sheffield go away they take
some of their own stewards? - A. That is quite correct,
sir.

I understand what the functions of the stewards are at
the home venue - at least I think I do.  What is the
function of the stewards when they travel away, at least
so far as the Sheffield stewards are concerned? - A.
Well, they are on the coaches, things like that.    They
like to have stewards on the coaches, keeping them all
right and things like that, and go with them to see if. ^
there is any trouble.   If there is any trouble they will
not travel again.   They watch out for trouble amongst
the supporters.   That is more or less what they are
there for.   Like they are policing our supporters.    I
think that is what they do.   If there is any trouble
they report it back to the club and say, "We had some
trouble from one or two of the fans."

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING :

Mr. Thorpe, it appears that on the day of the 1989 semi­
final there was a system for filtering fans between those
who had seating tickets and those who had terrace
standing tickets because you told us there were stewards
at the bottom of the staircases to see whether they had
tickets for the stand or tickets for the terraces? - A.
Yes.

However, as regards the terraces themselves, that is to
say, the six pens making up the terraces themselves, your
evidence is there was nobody as far as the stewards went
who had responsibility for filtering the fans across the
terraces? - A. No.

That is correct? - A. That   is quite correct.

Did you know yourself what the duties of the stewards
were?   In other words, were you yourself briefed on the
duties of stewards? - A. No.

Did no-one brief you? - A.   I got briefed on my   own
stewards, sir.

Who briefed you? - A. Mr. Locke.

Did Mr. Locke tell you it was one of the duties of
stewards to deal with the safe dispersal of fans across
the terraces? - A. No.
                                                 S': R. THORPE


Have you yourself ever heard of something called the
Green Guide? - A. I heard about it at the Inquest, sir.

     THE CORONER:     I think he means the Inquiry.

     THE WITNESS:     Sorry, sir, the Inquiry.

      MR. KING:   Sir, I ought to have given warning of
this.    It is my fault completely and it was only as the
witness was giving his evidence that I realised the
significance of this.   Sir, I understand we have copies
of the Green Guide and at least the witness ought to have
one and I know not, sir, whether you want the jury at
this stage to have them.    It is a matter I would like to
draw to his attention.

     THE CORONER:     He has said he did not know about it
until the Inquiry.

     THE WITNESS:     I heard about it at the Inquiry.

     THE CORONER:   If he didn't know about it before...
You see, he knows about it now, we know that, but he
didn't know about it at the time.

     MR. KING:   Let me put it more graphically this way,
sir, and deal with it:

Before the Inquiry of Lord Justice Taylor, if I had said
to you that a basic duty of the steward was first of all
to help disperse spectators in such a way as to reduce
crowd pressure, would you agree with that or not? - A. I
don't agree with it.   I never heard anything like that
at all.

If I were to say to you at the time that stewarding
should be in part to prevent over crowding in sections of
the ground, you would disagree with that too? - A. No, it
depends on the steward.   My job was the West Stand, to
see they all sat in their seats, their proper seats - my
stewards - sit in their seats.   I have nothing to do
whatsoever with standing areas.

Let me ask you this question then:   who, as far as you
know, be it stewards, be it the police, but who had the
responsibility for ensuring that the pens across the West
terrace where the standing people stood, did not become
over crowded?

     THE CORONER:   May I put the question in a slightly
different form, Mr. King?

     MR. KING:      Certainly.
                                                S'.- R. THORPE


     THE CORONER:   Did you know whether anybody had any
responsibility for looking after the terracing?   You
said it wasn't your responsibility? - A. No.

You have said you didn't know of any steward... - A. I
didn't know if there was anybody...

Did you know whether anybody else had specific
responsibility? - A. I didn't, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is, from ray point of
view, a better way of putting that question.

     MR. KING:    Did you, for example, understand it was
the police's duty to deal with the filling of the
terraces? - A. Well, they seem to do it to me, sir, when
they have come in.    The police have directed them, "Go
that way.    Go that way."    In some semi-finals years
ago the police used to walk on the ground with a loud
speaker shouting to some of them, "Come down.    Come
down."    I have noticed that happening.

In the 1979 semi-final it is your evidence that as far as
you know anybody who had a standing ticket - to stand -
were just left to their own devices where they went on
the terraces? - A. Well, anybody with any commonsense
when they come in with a ticket, they can see which way
to go.   There are arrows pointing as they come in
through the turnstiles.   It says, "Standing Area."

Tell me where the arrows are as you enter through
turnstiles A to G?         Perhaps if you can use the model or
the plan. - A. T h e r e .   Here as well.   Also on a
concrete stanchion.

Let's use the model.   Let us say you are somebody coming
through turnstiles A to G? - A. Yes.   There was one on
there.

How would anybody coming through turnstiles A to G see
that? - A. They see them coming through these turnstiles.
There would be one on there pointing that way to the
left.

Bear with me, Mr. Thorpe.   If somebody came through
turnstiles A to G, if you point those out.      Perhaps the
Detective Sergeant would help.      They come through those
turnstiles, how would they be able to see any sign which
was on the other side of that dividing wall to the left?
- A. There is one at the top h e r e .  There is one over
the tunnel.

There is one over the tunnel.    What does that say? - A.
"Standing."
                                              SV R. THORPE


That is a clear, large sign, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Anybody coming through turnstiles A to G would clearly
see that? - A. Yes.

Coming through turnstiles A to G, how would anybody see
any sign which was on the left hand side beyond that
dividing wall? - A. There is one h e r e .

I understand that.   That is on the other side of the
dividing wall. - A. Yes, there is one h e r e .

We will come to that one in a moment.   Let me deal with
it stage by stage.   Let me deal with the one which you
say was on the far left side.   If somebody comes through
turnstiles A to G, how can they see over that dividing
wall to see that sign? - A. There is a gateway here.

They would have to go through the gateway first? - A.
That's right.

If they don't go through the gateway they can't see it,
can they? - A. No.

As regards the other sign which   you pointed out.   Point
out where that was. - A. Yes.     There is one on this
corner.

That's on the corner? - A. Yes.

The far right hand corner? - A.   That's right.

It is over 3.9 metres high off the ground? - A. That's
right.

It is not a conspicuous sign, is it? - A. Well, not
really, sir.

For whatever reason, which we need not go into with you,
there was no stewarding, therefore, specifically directed
to where the fans went on the terraces?   That is right,
isn't it? - A. That is quite correct.

Can I deal then with the experiences you have had in the
past about the police dealing with people on the terraces
and where they go?   You have told the learned Coroner
that you apparently have no knowledge of the police
closing off, for example, the tunnel and directing fans
to the side pens at previous matches.   Is that still
your evidence? - A. That is still my evidence, sir.

I am very puzzled about that and I am afraid I am going
to have to show you at least four pieces of paper.
                           0
                                                                     97


                                                           S': R. THORPE


          MR. KING:   Sir, I am sorry for this, but it is a
     great puzzle to me.

          THE   CORONER:       Is it the transcript?

          MR. KING:   Not only the transcript.    The first
     document I have is the statement I suspect he gave to the
     club, which you may not have, sir.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:    Perhaps I can hand up the relevant
     pages.    It is pages 10 to 11.

        MR. KING:   Sir, I don't know if you would like to
read yourself page 9 first of all.

          THE CORONER:         Starting at "At last year's...."

          MR. KING:      Yes, sir.

          THE CORONER:   It is two paragraphs. _ Let the
     witness have a look at it.   We will read it out aloud in
     due course if he agrees it.

          MR. KING:      Well,      sir,   even ifhe doesn't      agree it!

          THE CORONER:         We   will   probably read it out!

Q.        MR. KING:   First of all, Mr. Thorpe, just go to the
     front page and you will see your name at the very front
     of that statement.

          THE CORONER:         He   has only got page 9.

          MR. KING:      I     beg your    pardon. He ought to see   the
     last page:

Q. That is your signature at the end? - A. That is quite •
   correct.

Q.   If you want to just read the paragraph beginning, "At
     last year's semi-final..." to yourself for the moment and
     the next two paragraphs. - A. Right.

Q.   That is your statement, isn't         it? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you want to tell us again about what you actually
   witnessed at last year's semi-final, by that I mean the
   1988 semi-final, as regards police officers dealing with
   shutting off the tunnel?   What was it that you
   witnessed?

          THE CORONER:   I think you ought to ask him first of
     all, with great respect, whether he accepts that that is
                         t                                  98


                                                  SV R. THORPE


     a correct record.   Whether he admits that is true,
     having now read it.

          MR. KING:   Let me do it in stages:

Q. First of all do you admit that that is in your statement?
   - A. That is quite correct.

Q. Is it correct? - A. Yes.

Q. Since you say it is correct I wonder, therefore, if you
   can read out from, "At last year's semi-final..."?   Do
   you see that paragraph there and read over to the top of
   page 10, the top paragraph of page 10? - A. Yes:

          "At last year's semi-final, I saw Police on the
          terraces.   I cannot remember how many.    They were
          underneath the West stand.   I noticed these Police
          Officers as I leant over the front of the seated
          area.   These Police Officers were in position well
          before kick-off and indeed were in position shortly
          after the turnstiles opened at midday.    I also saw
          three or four Police Officers at the entrance to the
          tunnel.   There were also Police Officers checking
          fans as they came through the turnstiles.    All the
          pens were open for the 1988 semi-final.

          I witnessed the Police Officers at the entrance to
          the tunnel stopping fans from gaining access to the
          centre pens.   This occurred at about 2.50 pm.   The
          Police shut the doors to the tunnel, the Police were
          then directing the fans to the wing pens or the
          South West and North West pens.   The doors were
          kept closed for about 10 minutes.   I saw the doors
          closed and opened by Police.

          THE CORONER:       Page 10 is coming.

Q.        MR. KING:   You have to read the bottom of page 9, I
     think, first, Mr. Thorpe. - A. Yes:

          "The Police were not letting any fans down the
          tunnel even when the doors were opened again.   The
          police at the doors went to the end of the tunnel to
          join the rest of the officers who were deployed on
          the terrace side of the tunnel."




                 Q. Just to be fair
                                 S. R. THORPE


Just to be fair to you, do you want to complete the
paragraph?

     THE CORONER: Page 10.

     THE WITNESS:  "I am responsible to look after the
seating areas.  This is the first season ..... "

     MR. KING:   No, I am sorry.

     THE WITNESS:   Oh, sorry.     At the top of page 10,
do you mean?

     MR. KING:  Do you want to start at the bottom of
page 9 and continue onto page 10? Start again at the
paragraph beginning, "The Police were not letting any
fans down the tunnel". - A.  "The Police were not
letting fans down the tunnel even when the doors were
opened again.  The Police at the doors went to the end
of the tunnel to join the rest of the officers who
were deployed on the terrace side of the tunnel.   I
could see this as I was chatting to the gateman on
Gate C.  I also saw Police turning back fans who tried
to go down the tunnel.  The Police only allowed fans
back in who had been to the toilets."

Stop there then.  In the light of that, therefore,
what was happening from what you witnessed at the 1988
semi-final is that positive steps were taken to
prevent people getting into the two centre pens behind
the goal? - A. That is quite correct, sir.

Those positive steps were so that the people would
then go to the side pens where there would be more
room for them? - A. That is right.

Can I also draw your attention on page 10 to not the
next paragraph but the opening sentence of the
paragraph after that.   Do not read it out yet, just
read it to yourself.   It begins, "It is important to
note ..."  Have you read that? - A. Yes.

Does that help your recollection, to go back to the
question I asked you before, as to who you understood
had the responsibility for looking after the terraces?
Who was it? - A. The Police according to this.

I know it says the Police there.   Do you accept that
is right? - A. Well, in some of these matches I have
noticed Police did it, but the biggest majority of the
matches, no, they filter themselves.

Is it correct to say in that paragraph that you have
put down in your statement, "It is important to note
                               S. R. THORPE


that the Police accept responsibility for the
terraces"?  Is that in your statement? - A. That is in
my statement, sir.

Are you saying that is right or wrong? - A. I think it
would be wrong, sir.

Are you saying, therefore, that no one had
responsibility? - A. I don't think anybody had
responsibility.

I think you said that people were just expected to
filter for themselves? - A. That is quite correct,
yes.

Does that include filtering through radial fences?

     MR. KING:  I am sorry, sir.  That is me being
carried away, and I apologise for that.  Despite
suspicions, that was not deliberate, I apologise.

     THE CORONER: No, no, it is quite all right.

     MR. KING:  I would not object to Mr. Payne, for
example, standing to his feet there.  I apologise.
The Liverpool stewards you have spoken about, you have
no knowledge at all whether they were true authorised
Liverpool stewards or not, have you, you just do not
know? - A. Well, they had got the jackets.

I appreciate that. - A. Yes.

But you know of no arrangement prior to the 1989 semi­
final between the Sheffield Wednesday Club and the
Liverpool Football Club arranging for stewards to come
from Liverpool, do you? - A. No.  One of our chief
stewards spoke to some of the stewards up there, and
they told them that they could come down and help -
Ken Catchley.

These people who you understood to be Liverpool
stewards, they were not given any specific
instructions as to what they should do? - A. No.

They were not given any specific duties as to what
they should do on the terraces? - A. No.

You have not any idea at all whether   they carried   out
any duties or not? - A. No.

Let me go to the opening of Gate C.   You, I
understood, only saw people coming through Gate C for
a matter of moments? - A. That is quite correct.
                                                         101

                                    S. R. THORPE


Q.   Have you yourself seen the video evidence of the
     people coming through Gate C? - A. No.

Q.   Those who have will have seen it but, as far as you
     are concerned, all you can say is that the ones you
     saw went in a number of directions, but you said, I
     think, droves went down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q.   Would you say that it was the majority of people who
     went down the tunnel? - A. Two-thirds, about a third
      of them.  They seemed to split up, seemed to spread
      out, as they were coming through the tunnel.  They
      seemed to spread out.

Q.   Where were most of them going of the people you saw? -
      A. Well, I think they were going down the tunnel.

Q.   You yourself had not a clue that the gate was about to
     be opened, had you? - A. No.

Q.   You had been given no warning by anybody that   it was
      about to happen? - A. That is quite correct.

Q.   You cannot comment upon what might or might not have
     been done to close off the tunnel before they were
      allowed through because you had no knowledge of what
     was going on? - A. That is quite correct.

Q.   You would say it was a Police responsibility, would
     you not? - A. That is right.

Q.   But as a steward with vast experience of terraces, it
      is obvious, I am sure, to you that a great mass of
      people ---

          THE CORONER: Excuse me, I think my understanding
     is that his experience is of stands.

           MR. KING:  I beg your pardon, sir.
Q.   Who of the chief stewards has experience of standing
     areas? - A. There is one of us on the Kop.  We have
      got a chief steward on the Kop.

Q.   Who is that? - A. John Catchley.

Q.   It may be that it is my own fault for putting it in
      the way I did, but I do not actually know that you
      need experience of the terraces as such.   Let me put
      it this way to you.  Those people who you saw going
      through Gate C had to go somewhere, did they not? - A.
      That is right.

Q.   You have already told us in evidence about what
      somebody coming through turnstiles A to G can see when




                                         X,
                                                           102

                                     S. R. THORPE


     they come through turnstiles A to G? - A. That is
     right.

Q.   You have told us that the large sign is over the
     tunnel, is it not? - A. Yes. that is right.

Q.   You would agree with me that the most obvious way onto
     the terraces for anybody coming into that ground who
     does not know it is down the tunnel, is it not? - A.
     That is right.

Q.   As an ordinary steward, you would know that it would
     be important that too many people do not get into the
     particular section of the terracing, by which I mean
     too many for safety purposes, you would agree with
     that? - A. Quite correct.

              Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Q.   Mr. Thorpe, can I just go back over a few things.     In
     your experience, have there ever been stewards on
     Leppings Lane terraces? - A. No.

Q.   There is a Police Inspector who regularly works at
     that end of the ground, is that right? - A. That is
     quite correct, sir.

Q.   Do you know the identity of that Police Inspector? Do
     you know his name? - A. I have forgotten his name now,
     sir.

Q.   Can you describe him?   Had he got anything ---   A. He
      had a beard.

Q.   It would be Inspector White? - A. I will not be
      certain if it is White.

Q.   He had a big beard.   Did he have a nick-name?  Did
      some of the stewards call him Captain Bird's Eye? - A.
      That is quite correct, sir.

Q.   He had been working at that end of the ground for a
      number of seasons, had he not? - A. That is quite
      correct, sir.

Q.   You knew him quite well, did you not? - A. That is
      right.

Q.   Did he give you a briefing on normal matches before
      the match started? Did he talk to the stewards? - A.
     Yes, he did, sir.

Q.   Did he talk to the stewards on the day of the semi­
      final? - A. Quite correct, sir.
                                                            103




                                    S. R. THORPE


Q.   I believe afterwards did he come and talk to you and
      ask you whether all your stewards were in place? - A.
      That is quite correct.

Q.   Would he know where they were? - A. That is right.

Q.   And he knew there were none, presumably, on the
      terraces? - A. That is quite correct, sir.

Q.   And he knew there were none directing any fans in the
      concourse? - A. That is right.

Q.   They were never there, were they? - A. That is quite
      correct, sir.

Q.   Did he express any surprise about that to you?   Did he
     say, "That's surprising, why aren't there any there?"
     - A. Not really.   I can't remember, sir, if he did.

Q.   Did he ever say anything to you about it? Did he say,
      "I want some stewards there"? - A. One day he did say.

Q.   So on one occasion? - A. On one occasion he did say.

Q.   He asked you to put someone there? - A. I hadn't got
      enough stewards to go down there, sir.

Q.   That is fine, but generally he knew where everyone
      was? - A. That is quite correct, sir.

Q.   You have told us why you think, very sensibly,
      stewards should not go onto the away terraces? - A.
      That is quite correct.

Q.   Would it be fair to say that you do not know whether
      there is any other additional reason that has been -
     discussed, or decided upon, or drawn up, between the
      Club's more senior officers and the senior police
      officers? You do not know what they may have
     discussed or agreed? - A. No sir.

Q.   So what you were saying is a very commonsense reason
      for not having stewards on those terraces is the
      danger you are exposed to as a Sheffield man in
      amongst away supporters? - A. That is quite correct,
      sir.

Q.   I just want to deal with this.  Your first knowledge
      of when Gate C was opened was seeing these people
      coming across the concourse and trying to get up the
      stairs? - A. That is right.

Q.   No one had discussed that with you before? - A. No.
                              S. R. THORPE


No one had asked you whether that was a sensible thing
to do? - A. No.

Inspector White, or anybody else, did not come up and
say, "We need some stewards here because this is what
we are going to do"?  No one had said that to you? -
A. I can't remember if anybody did, sir.

If they had have done, you would have done something
about it? - A. That is quite correct, sir.

And nothing of that sort was done on the day? - A. No.

Can you look again on page 10 of the statement you
have there.   Would you read it to yourself.  You have
read the first sentence of a paragraph.   A gentleman
who asked some questions before me asked you to read
the first sentence, "It is important to note ...."
Can you read slowly and carefully to yourself the next
paragraph and the following two paragraphs? - A. On
page 10, sir?

Page 10 going over to page 11.  Just read it very
carefully, Mr. Thorpe. - A. Right, yes.

That is a statement you signed and is that an accurate
account of the system that you have seen in operation
at league matches? - A. That is quite correct, sir.

I do not want to push this too far, but you have been
asked a lot of questions about who you thought was
responsible for things, and that is a difficult
question to answer.  What I want to know is what you
have seen, and that is an accurate description in your
experience of what goes on at league matches every
week? - A. That is quite correct, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, I do not know whether it is
more convenient for me to take this line by line, or
whether you want to read that out.

     THE CORONER: I think it is easier for everybody
to understand if you read it in toto, so to speak,
because we know if you just do it line by line, the
Jury have not seen it, I have not actually read it
all, so it is easier to read the whole lot.  I do not
mind who reads it, whether it is you or the witness
who reads it.  It would be easier for it to be the
witness.
                                S.R. THORPE



       MR. CATCHPOLEs   I am quite happy to read it.

       THE CORONER:  Why don't you read it and then    just
say:   "Is that what you have just read"?

       MR. CATCHPOLE:   It says:

       "It is important to note that the Police
       accept responsibility for the terraces.
       I have never deployed Sheffield Wednesday
       stewards on the terraces as I could not
       expect any of my stewards to run the risk
       of injury or the threat of injury and the
       Police have made it clear that they are
       responsible for the terraces. The Police
       system I have described for last year's
       semi-final is also similar to that used for
       league matches. However, I have never
       seen Police Officers shut the doors to the
       tunnel.  I know that I have seen Police
       Officers at league matches in positions
       at the entrance and to the rear of the
       tunnel, as I have often chatted to them on
       occasion by walking through the tunnel.

       The system is different in the sense that
       the Police normally seal off the South
       West pen by putting metal barriers in
       place near the snack bar. A number of
       Police Officers, about 4 in number, are
       put in position around the barriers.
       The gate to the partition wall is kept
       shut, and Police Officers are put
       behind it. The fans are then channelled
       into the centre pens.

        The ground Police Inspector then tells me
        when he is about to remove the barrier
        to the South West pen so as to warn the
        stewards in case of any rush by fans for
        the steps leading up to the seated area.
        The Police on the entrance to the tunnel
        and the gate to the partition wall then
        direct fans to the South West pen.
        Occasionally at big league games the
        South West pen fills up. On those
        occasions, the ground Inspector would
        then tell me that he was about to open
        the North West pen."

Now just to be absolutely clear, who is the Ground
Inspector that you are referring to? - A. Inspector
White.
                              S.R. THORPE



The gentleman we are talking about with the big bushy
beard? - A. Yes, that is quite correct sir.

The impression given by that is that from what you have
seen on normal league matches there is actually some
kind of system that is operated by the Police for filling
the pens depending on .... A. That is quite correct sir.

Please understand, I know how difficult it is to give
evidence.  It is much easier when you are on this side of
the line asking the questions, but you did give an answer
to a question in which you said that normally everyone is
just left, they fill themselves up.   Now you have described
this system.  Is that the system that is employed or are
people left to find their own way in in normal league
matches? - A. That is the system.   Well it is not the
system now because ....

That is what you have seen being done? - A. Yes, quite
correct.

And you have seen that being done on league matches? - A.
That is quite correct.

And you are sure about that in your evidence? ~ A. That
is quite correct.

There is one further point.  It was mentioned to you there
was the existence of a book called the Green Guide   which
you had not heard about? - A. That is right.

Now I can tell you for your own sake this is actually aimed
at, I go from the very first sentence in the books "Guidance
to ground management, local authorities and technical
specialists such as engineers on measures for improving
various matters at a ground".  Now you don't fall into .
any of those categories, do you? - A. That is quite correct.

Do you really think that a booklet that runs to 73-odd
pages that contains fairly detailed information about
the tensile strengths of crush barriers; the construction
of ramps; the construction of walls for fire regulations,
things like that, does that have any bearing on what you
do as a Steward? - A. No sir.

There is however a booklet isn't there you are handed out
with instructions for matchday staff? - A. That is quite
correct.

As far as you are concerned does that summarise succinctly
the job that you and your Stewards have to do on aweekly
basis at this match? - A. That is quite correct.
                      t                                        107


                                   S.R. THORPE



Q. Just one final question, you may have answered this already.
   Did you at any stage on the day of the semi-final notice
   how the pens. Pens 3 and 4 were filling up as opposed to
   the pens on the outside or the inside? - A. No, I didn't
   notice anything sir.

Q. That was because you would not be in the area      to see
   those pens? - A. That is quite correct sir.

         MR. CATCHPOLEs   Thank you very much.

         MR. KING: Sir, I take my learned friend's point
   as to whether this witness ought to have seen the Green.
   Guide as such.  I think it would be only fair to point
   out and if necessary I will ask it through the witness,
   that in fact there is a section specifically directed
   to stewarding and the duties of stewards.

         MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir can I, since it is in front
   of the jury, I quite accept there is a section in that.
   It runs to I think about three, no two pages out of the
   whole book.  That is aimed at management but it is a
   guide and no doubt there will be evidence as to whether
   they can have different systems in operation.

         The question before you is what was the system
   if any that is actually being operated.

         THE CORONER:  The question before me as far as
   this witness is concerned is did he know about this
   guide at the time and the answer was "No". Now whether
   he should have known or shouldn't have known is a matter
   which we can come to when we get to the more senior
   levels of people.  I allowed you to do it and I accept
   your point but I don't think we need to explore that.
   He has given us a clear answer as to what he knew at
   the time.  Mrs. McBrien?


                Cross-Examined by MRS. McB R IE N :

Q. Mr. Thorpe, do you know where the Liverpool stewards went
   in 1989? - A. No idea whatsoever.

Q. And would you say it  was impossible to filter or direct
   the fans in 1989 because of the way the fans entered the
   ground? - A. That is   quite correct, yes.

         MRS. McBRIEN:     Thank you very much.


                Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:
Q. Can I just touch on the last point that was dealt with
   by my learned friend Mr. Catchpole.




                                       \
                                                                108

                                   S.R. THORPE




           He was asking you about what you saw or didn't see
     or what you could or could not see from the fire escapes?
     - A. That is right.

Q. First of all the time.  I think you told the learned Coroner
   earlier that you inspected the fire escapes about 10-to-3?
   - A. Somewhere round about that sir.  I can't remember
   properly but somewhere round about then sir.

Q. And the fire escapes are at either end of the West Stand,
   aren't they? - A. That is right sir.  One leads into the
   upper section on the left-hand side of the ground and the
   other one has got steps down.

Q.   The direct route from one fire escape to the other is
     along the front of the West Stand, isn't it? - A. That    is
     quite correct sir.

Q. Is that the route that you took from one to the other?
   - A. No sir.

Q.   Which way did you go? - A. I went back up the steps and
     along the snack bar and up the gangway because I could not
     walk along the front because everybody was stood.

Q. I appreciate that,  but you said and is this the case,
   that from each fire escape you were able to see the
   terracing all along the bottom? - A. Part of it sir.

Q. Well how much of the terracing could you see from each
   fire escape? - A. About to the middle from each fire
   escape.  You have got to bend right over.   There were
   that many stood there we can see the bottom where the
   fencing was and also at the left-hand side.

Q. I am wondering whether it would help if you looked at
   the plan.  I think you will have it in front of you more
   conveniently.  Looking at that exhibit, C274, can you
   identify on that plan where these two fire escapes are?
   - A. Yes, I can.

Q. They are not marked as such on this plan are they? - A.
   No.

Q. Could you please go to the overhead projector and identify
   where they are for us?

           THE CORONER:  Mr. Russell,   I think we have got
     some spares of this on acetates,   haven't we? Shall we
     allow this gentleman to mark one   and we will give you
     the number and then we will know   for the future.

           MR. JONES:   Give that C331 sir.
                        t
                                                             109

                                   S.R. THORPE



Q.         MR. RUSSELLs  If you turn in the bundle of photographs
     in front of you to C267, do you have that? - A. Yes.

Q. If you follow the line of the front of the West Stand from
   left to right across the picture one goes through a series
   of advertising hoardings? - A. That is quite correct.

Q. Sugg Sports; Sugg; Howarth Timber and then Henry Boot is it?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You see the hoarding with Henry Boot on it at the far end
   of the Stand.  Is it in that corner that there is one of
   the fire escapes? - A. That is quite correct.

Q. Turn if you would to C318.  Sir, this is the one that has
   been renumbered.  It has got two C numbers. - A. I have
   got it.




                       Q. That is the same Stand
                                              S. R. THORPE



That is the same stand   looking   in the other direction,
isn't it? - A. That is   right.

If one follows the same line of advertising hoardings
one can see the orange one, "Presto", and then one that
is indistinguishable, and then a blue one with writing
on it? - A. That is right.

And that brings us to the far corner of that stand, and
that is the position of the other fire escape? - A.
That is quite correct.

From those fire escapes you could look down onto the
terracing? - A. I can do when there is no supporters
there.

When t h ere are not supporters there? - A. When there
are no supporters stood at the bottom of the Stand.
There were a lot of supporters stood at the bottom of
the Stand, looking down, and I just went down there to
see if my steward was all right, because there were two
Policemen standing there as well.    I can't push myself
through and have a look down because it is not my
responsibility.    I just want to see that my stewards
are all right.

You described being at the fire escapes for some three
to four minutes? - A. Yes.

During that time you did not notice anything untoward
down on the terraces? - A. No, I didn't notice
anything.   I didn't look down there, to tell you the
truth, sir.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

I am asking these questions because of your long
experience as a senior steward, and in the light of
some other questions which you have been asked.  You
have explained that at league matches you have seen the
Police closing off some pens, so that the fans go into
others? - A. That is quite correct, sir.

Right, that is at league matches? - A. Yes.

At semi-finals a different system is used? - A. To my
knowledge it is, sir.

And all the pens are left open? - A. That is quite
correct, sir.

As happened at this match we are talking about now? -
A. Yes, nearly every semi-final we have had at
                                                                111.
                                                 S. R. THORPE



   Hillsborough,   they have always been left like that,
   sir.

Q. So that the fans can go into any pen? - A. That is
   quite correct, sir.

Q. Here, as you have said earlier, there was an in-rush
   through Gate C? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. This is not something that is covered by any system? -
   A. No.

Q. And it is an exceptional event? - A. That is quite
   correct, sir.

Q. Is it correct to say that you have never seen anything
   like that before? - A. That is quite correct.

Q. Whatever system then was being used by the Police,
   whether it was the one at league matches or the one at
   semi-final matches, nothing catered for that? - A. No,
   sir.

Q. Is it your evidence that judging from your experience
   and what you saw in the situation that happened, that
   actually happened, when Gate C was opened, it was
   impossible to direct the fans because of the way they
   entered the ground? - A. That is quite correct, sir.

        MR. KING:      Sir, just arising out of that, because
   I was careful to    ask the Witness not to speculate about
   what steps might    have been taken, but in the light of
   that, sir, can I    just ask one question if I may?

        THE CORONER:      Yes.

            Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. You can't say what the position would have been in the
   tunnel had been closed off, could you, the doors shut?
   - A. That is quite correct, sir.

                    Further by THE CORONER

Q. The Jury have one or two questions which they have
   given to me, so I am going to ask them now.  First of
   all about the Liverpool stewards, can you remember
   whether they had anything written on the back of their
   bibs and jackets? - A. Yes, they had got the initials,
   "Liverpool Stewards".

Q. Do you remember whether they used the word "Steward"? -
   A. Yes.
                                                                 112
                                                  S. R. THORPE



Q. Because your bib doesn't have the word "Steward" on,
   does it? - A. No, that is quite correct, sir.

Q.    Was it only on the back or was it also   on the front? -
     A. Some was on the back, sir, and some    was on the
     front.

Q. They had the word "Steward" on? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you know whether any of the Liverpool stewards went
   outside the ground in the turnstile area wearing their
   bibs? - A. I didn't see any, sir, if any went outside,
   sir.

Q.   You don't know? - A. I don't know.

Q.   Are you a football supporter apart from being   a
     steward? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you go to away matches yourself? - A. I don't now,
   sir.  I used to do.

Q. When you used to go, how long ago was that? When was
   the last time you went to an away match? - A. About
   eight years ago, sir.

Q. So quite sometime ago? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you recollect whether there were any stewards on
   the terracing where you were when you were at an away
   match? - A. No, sir.  I went to a semi-final about four
   years ago, the two semi-finals Sheffield Wednesday was
   in, and I didn't see no stewards whatsoever.  I passed
   comment, I says, "Not stewards, nothing".  That was at
   Highbury and Aston Villa's ground - there was no
   stewards.

Q. Were you in the terraces or in the stands? - A. We went
   in the terrace, sir.

Q. And there were no stewards? - A. There were no stewards
   whatsoever, sir.

Q. Neither home, away or anything else? - A. That is quite
   correct, sir.

Q. And it would be right that Sheffield Wednesday did not
   send their own stewards on that occasion? - A. They
   sent them on the coaches, sir, to marshall them.

Q. But not to steward on the .... - A. No, sir.

Q. You mentioned that you had a radio, do you remember?      -
   A. That is quite correct.
                                                                113


                                                 S. R. THORPE



Q. What was the purpose of that? - A. If there are any
   tickets that are double - to get two people in one
   seat, we have got to check it, and if they have got the
   same ticket, to get to the office, and if there is any
   trouble, the turnstiles, if they run short of money,
   run short of change, things like that, sir.

Q. Is your radio linked to the Police control or to the
   office? - A. The office only.

Q. So you can't get through to the Police direct? - A. No,
   sir.

Q. Did you use it on that day? - A. Yes, I did, sir.

Q. How often? - A. I used it three or four times, sir.

Q. Can you remember what for? - A. I asked for help.

Q.   What sort of help? - A.  I asked for some first aid help
     because Iwas seeing toa chap who had fainted.

Q. Was this before or after the disaster? - A. When the
   disaster was on, sir.

Q. I see, so you didn't use it before the disaster? - A.
   No, sir.

Q. When I say disaster, I mean after the match had
   commenced? - A. That is right.

Q. I just want to ask you one more final question to do
   with this business of the tunnel and so on, which we
   have been round two or three times now.  What I want to
   ask you is this, when I was questioning you about this
   initially, do you remember? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   The sense of your reply, I am not saying  the words but
     the sense of your reply was that you had no
     recollection of that tunnel ever being sealed off, and
     I took you through semi-finals .... - A. Yes.

Q. League and so on.  In a little while we showed you
   these statements? - A. I remember that, sir.

Q. What I want you to tell me is which is correct, what is
   written in here or what you told me initially? - A.
   What is written in there.

Q. Okay.




                                  \
                                               S. R. THORPE



             Cross-Examined by MR. HALE

We have heard about experienced stewards, and various
Policemen and so on.  Is it in your experience that
football fans are experienced?  Do you find people just
come to one match and never to another, or do you find
that they come to many matches? - A. Some of them do,
sir.  About 50 percent of them do, sir.

Come regularly? - A. Come regularly, sir.

And get to know the way round the pens? - A. That is
quite correct, sir.

Does it need a mechanical or engineering genius to
understand how pens work when you walk into them? - A.
No, sir.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

I am sure you are not suggesting, are you, Mr. Thorpe,
that a Liverpool fan whose normal home is Anfield has
any particular knowledge of how the pens are organised
at the Sheffield Wednesday ground? - A. Well, every
time they have played there they have always come.

If they have been before they may have discovered
something.  If they have not been before they won't
will they? - A. Nearly all the supporters, the year
before, it was the same semi-final, the same crowd, the
same two teams, and there was no trouble whatsoever to
my knowledge.  They knew the way to go in then.

How would they know how to get into the side pens as
opposed to the centre pens? - A. With the arrows.

We are back to the arrows.    Thank you.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. Thorpe, thank you very much
indeed for coming.

     Ladies and gentlemen, we are not listening to our
last witness but we will start tomorrow at 10, okay,
and tomorrow is our last day before we meet again in
the New Year.  I don't know what time we will finish
but hopefully not too late.

            (In the absence of the J u r y )

     THE CORONER:   Tomorrow we will have Mr. Beadsley,
who dropped off the list today.  We have got Police
Constable Cobb; there is another mounted Officer whom I
had forgotten about when I said we had finished with
our mounted Officers.  He is another Nottingham man, so
                                           S. R. '
                                                 \THORPE
                                                  .



we will try and squeeze him in - P.S. Watson.   Then we
are going to have two West Midlands Officers who will
be very brief because they are only giving technical
evidence about the tape recordings and so on, so that
we have got all that sorted out for the future.   Then
finally, if all goes well, we are going to show a
video.  It will be about five minutes long and it is
our best effort at 1988/1989.  You aren't going to get
anything better than what we have got on that video, it
isn't very long and it is not split screen but it is
the best we can do in all the circumstances.

     I do intend if at all possible to finish tomorrow
as near to 3.30 as I can because I certainly don't want
to finish late tomorrow.

     MR. MANNING:   As late as that?

     THE CORONER:   You want me to finish earlier?

     MR. MANNING:   It was rumoured that head teacher
was going to declare for good behaviour, and declare
tomorrow to be a Friday or something like that.

     THE CORONER:   Well, I had thought about it.   I
might drop Mr. Watson, the mounted Officer and just
take the others, and maybe we can finish earlier, we
will see.  I certainly don6t want to go on too late, I
agree.

     MR. COUGHLIN:    Sir, this is just an
administrative point.   I expect tomorrow Mr. Robert
Chapman of my firm will be in the hot seat, just
because myself and Mr. Isaacs are otherwise engaged.

     THE CORONER:   It is perfectly all right.  You
must do whatever is most convenient for yourselves but
it is nice of you to let me know.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, one other administrative
point.  There are various rumours floating around that
there may be an indication coming from the Listing
Officer that they are putting witnesses through to the
beginning of March.  Have you a time estimate yourself,
which may be helpful for all our respective clerks.

     THE CORONER:   I do find this exceedingly
difficult, because I had expected to be at least 70
witnesses further on, maybe 100, than I am, but it is
still my view that we will be going a lot faster in
January.  This is partly because we will be dealing
with quite a lot of supporter evidence, and the few
supporters whom we have had, they take time but they
don t take quite as long as some of the others because
                                                            116


                                             S. R. THORPE



they are talking about their experience.  So I don't
think we will be finished with this Inquest until well
into February.  I am sorry about that, but that is the
way it seems to be going.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is simply to give the
information to other people so they can organise back
at home, so to speak.

     THE CORONER:   I agree, I have heard the rumours
and I have sometimes thought that it looks like March,
but that is not what I want.  I would like to think
that we will finish in February.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Thank you very much.

     MR. MANNING:   Are there any days in January, sir,
that you know in advance we are not sitting?

     THE CORONER:   The plan is to carry on because as
I say I want to finish, everybody wants to finish, I
think.  I don't mean that unkindly but I think it is a
very stressful event for everybody, including me, and I
want to see it done properly but as soon as possible.
I know in some ways it would be easier for you if I
were to say we have got a few days, but I think I want
to just press on and get on with it and do it.  Is
there anything else that we need to say?  In that case
we will adjourn until 10 tomorrow.

         (The Inquests were adjourned until
          10 o ’clock the following morning)’




                           \
