HER MAJESTY'S COROWER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At
             The Town Hall,
               Shef field.
                   On

            16th January, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . Harphan, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



     R. MARSHALL Recalled

          Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs
          Further Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale
          Further by The Coroner

     T. HICKS Sworn

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Payne
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Isaacs
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Manning
          Cross-Examined    by M r s . McBrien
          Cross-Examined    by Mr, Russell
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. King
          Further by The    Coroner

SUBMISSION BY MR. ISAACS

     T. HICK Recalled

          Further by The Coroner

     P . HAND Sworn

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien
          Further By The Coroner

     S.M. FORTUNE Sworn

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien
          Further by The Coroner
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King
          Cross-Examined by Miss Addleman
          Further by The Coroner
          Further Cross-Examined by M r s . McBrien
          Further By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne
                   INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT (Cont)

                                                Page
J .R . REX Sworn

     By The Coroner                              116
     Cross-Examined      by Mr. Payne            122
     Cross-Examined      by Mr. Isaacs           123
     Cross-Examined      by Mr. King             123
     Cross-Examined      Mrs. McBrien            124
     Further by The      Coroner                 125
                                                             1


                                                      R.   MARSHALL




                    THIRTY FIRST DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                     WEDNESDAY,   lPth JANUARY 1991
B             THE CORONER:   Good morning.  I think my
         recollection is that we got to Mr. Isaacs, is that
         right?

              MR. ISAACS:   I think that is right, sir, and all
         being well I won't be very long at all, but I feel it
         is right, having regard to the way in which questions
         were asked further down to my left, that I should have
         an opportunity to ask those questions which seem to me
         to be pertinent.

              THE CORONER:    I am not stopping you, Mr. Isaacs.

              MR. ISAACS:    I am obliged.

                        ROGER MARSHALL Recalled

D                    Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS

    Q. Superintendent, you were asked about anticipating last
       minute arrivals, and of course one does always
       anticipate that there will be some last minute
       arrivals, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

    0.    What you were not asked by Mr. King was the question of
         degree, and so I ask you about it so the Jury can try
         and put this in some sort of perspective.    Would you
         agree that in normal circumstances last minute arrivals
         would be a very small proportion of an overall crowd? -
         A. Yes.

    Q. On this particular occasion did you foresee that last
       minute arrivals would form such a large proportion of
       the overall crowd? - A. No.

    Q.   Was the largeness of the proportion something which was
         outside your experience? - A. Yes.

    Q. The second point is this - you were asked, again in
       very general terms, whether as time approached the
       kick-off that fact influenced the behaviour of people,
       and of course it must be right, and you agreed that
       that was right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Let me ask you then again to try and put all this in
       perspective, it being a question of degree would your
       experience over over 20 years have forewarned you that
       the closeness to the kick-off would have influenced the
       majority of the fans to behave in the way that you saw
       them behave? - A. Can you just say that again, sir.




H
                                                            2

                                                     R.   MARSHALL




    0. Would your experience have forewarned you that the
       closeness to the kick-off that you found yourself, or
       they found themselves to be, would have influenced them
       to behave in the way that they behaved?  It is all a
B      question of degree, isn't it? - A. Yes.

    0. So would your experience have forewarned you that they
      .would have behaved in that way, merely because the
       kick-off was coming close? - A. As the time for kick-
       off approaches it is common to see - I am looking for
       the right word ....

    Q. People become anxious? - A. Anxiety I think is the
       right word, that they are not going to get into the
       ground in time for kick-off.

    Q. But that does not prevent them in normal circumstances
       from remaining patient? - A. Yes.

    Q. Would I be right then in saying that your experience
       then had not forewarned you that rather than just being
       anxious, the majority of fans would behave in the way
D      that you saw them behave? - A. No.

    Q. You were also asked a number of very hypothetical
       questions about what may or may not have been obvious
       to people within the ground, and to a degree Mr. Payne
       has asked you some questions about that, but may I just
       ask you one or two more?  First of all, and this is no
       criticism at all because the events that were unfolding
       before your eyes, as I understand it, must have first
       of all taken you very much by surprise, that is right,
       isn't it? - A.  Yes.

    Q. Were wholly outside your experience of policing a
       football match outside the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q. This after all was not an occasion when it was going to
       be a demonstration of some sort against something or
       another? - A. No.

    Q. But you do not know what Ground Control, and by that I
       mean the people in the box, could actually see on their
       video screens? - A. No.

    Q. Have you had any experience of being in such a box
       during a semi-final   game? - A. No.

    Q. Is it within your knowledge that in fact what can^be
       seen from any particular camera changes.     You don't get
       any continuous flow   of picture from a particular site.
       Is that within your    knowledge? - A. That is not
       strictly correct.   In the Police Control Post at
       Hillsborough I think there are six cameras ....




H
7



                                                            R.   MARSHALL




        Q. When you say six cameras, do you mean six screens? - A.
            There are six monitor screens which are linked to
            particular video cameras at strategic locations both
    _      inside and outside the ground, and those cameras relay
    B      a picture   and are controllable in the pan and tilt mode
            with a focussing device which either brings the image
            closer or takes it further out, and these feed a
          .constant series of pictures into match control.

        0. Have you ever had this experience though of looking
           during the course of a semi-final at any of these
           screens? - A. No.

        Q. So you are not able to give any account to the Jury of
           what actually can be seen at any particular moment? -
           A. No.

                     THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, we have anticipated you
                and put a picture of control on the screen:

        0. Are those      the screens? - A. Those are the screens, sir.

    D   q.           m k . ISAACS: The picture that we can see does not
                clearly show how small these screens are, does it, Mr.
                Marshall? - A. I think they are about 12 inch, 12 or 14
                inch screens.

                     MR. JONES:   The photograph is C273, sir.

        q   .        M R . ISAACS: Of course, the screens as they are
                showing what is on them, are snowing scenes from
                different parts of the ground? - A. Yes, inside and
                outside.

        Q. You are not aware of the view that, for example, the
           camera onto the Leppings Lane area in general shows? -
           A. I know from my own experience of being in there at
           league games what it shows.

        0. It has a limited view? - A. It is a limited view, yes.

        0* You were not aware as to the information that was being
           given by others to the Control Room? - A. No.

        Q. Apart from what you have told us, namely asking for
           reinforcements and asking for the gates to be opened,
           you never gave a full description to Ground Control as
           to what was actually happening outside the Leppings
           Lane terraces? - A. That is right.

        0. As I understand it you never suggested to Control that
           the numbers were so great that the numbers outside
           would not g"et in on time? - A. No.




    H
                                                            4

                                                     R.   MARSHALL




    Q.     And indeed you never actually gave an assessment to
         Ground Control of your view of the numbers outside? -
         A. Ho.

B   Q. As to your assessment of the numbers, it is only a very
       rough assessment? - A. Yes.

    Q.-As I think you    told the Coroner, could be less than you
       were saying? -    A. Yes.

    0. And that assessment included all the people that were
       coming down Leppings Lane, not just those within the
       Leppings Lane turnstile area? - A. Yes.

    Q. From your experience, having been inside the ground the
       year before, and indeed on other occasions, and again
       this is a matter of degree, terraces can be crowded and
       still quite safe, particularly behind the goal? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. It is the nature of a crowd behind the goal to be
       relatively packed together? - A. Yes.
D
    Q. So to the observer can appear to have room for many
       others? - A. That is a difficult question to answer.  I
       think I have told the Inquest already I have the
       greatest of difficulty in estimating the numbers that
       would be in a pen, or indeed when that pen was crowded.

    Q. Let me ask you this then Superintendent, if gate B had
       opened first, as Mr. Payne was asking you, it would not
       have been obvious that the fans would have gone tnrough
       the tunnel? - A. No.

    0. Even so far as fans might have gone down the tunnel, it
       would not have been obvious would it, even to you
       outside, that the fans would have behaved, if they did
       - it is a matter for the.Jury - with disregard for the
       safety of other fans in the way that they approached
       the terraces? - A. No.




                        /0. Of course, whether




H
                             R. MARSHALL


Of course, whether there is a risk to people on the
terraces depends very largely upon how fans do enter
the terraces? - A. Yes.

When you gave your various messages through to Control
you first of all tried to do that on the talk-through
radio? - A. Yes.

The basis of that, as I understand it, is that as one
talks through that message goes to everybody who has
his set turned on at the time? - A. Yes, if the talk-
through has been switched on by the controller.
Messages can be discreet or they can be on talk-
through, but if they are discreet then the message is
passed to the controller and is not audible by all
other persons in possession of a radio, but if it is
on talk-through then everybody can hear what is being
said, both transmissions from the base station and
from the individual out on the ground.

Were the ones that you sent through to Control on
talk-through? - A. Yes.

If the message came back to open the gates on talk-
through you should have been able to hear it? - A.
Yes.

So should others who had their radios with them? - A.
Yes.

Of course, you would not be able to hear it if, in
fact, your radio was not working at the time? - A. No.

One final matter, if I may, and that is in relation to
diverting the fans at the tunnel.  You said to Mr.
King again, when he was asking you in general terms,
"Well, it would not have been difficult to divert fans
at the tunnel", but of course the ease of any exercise
depends upon the behaviour of those who you are
seeking to divert? - A. That is right.

If fans walk up casually, not pushing, not in a rush,
they may be easy to divert? - A. Yes.

It would not be the case, would it, that it would be
easy to carry out that function if you were trying to
deal with a moving body of people who, if it be right,
were acting with disregard to the safety of other
people? - A. No.

     MR. ISAACS:   Thank you very much indeed.

      Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:
                             R. MARSHALL


Superintendent, in reply to Mr. Isaacs on points that
he made this morning, I would like to go over some of
those with you.  He mentioned that fans arrived late
at the turnstile area.  You told us yesterday that at
2.15 there were between 6,000 and 8,000 fans in that
area altogether and you did say that the numbers
remained the same when they moved down to the
turnstiles, but the turnstiles were operating properly
up to 2.35 so a lot of those people who were there at
2.15 presumably did go in through the turnstiles.   You
also said that the numbers that you saw were about the
right numbers at that time of the day. So would you
agree that there weren't very many late arrivals at
all, it was just the way they were held up because the
turnstiles had been slowed down, one had broken down,
I believe, and the congestion was causing the slowing
down of the fans, it was not that they were arriving
later? - A. I think the video gives fairly graphic
testimony of the extent to which people were arriving
in the turnstile area in the last 20 minutes before
kick-off.

You did say yesterday though that the numbers were the
same.  When I asked you about the closing of the road,
you actually said the numbers remained constant, but
they were more congested at the main gates and the
turnstile area.   This is what you said yesterday. - A.
I am sorry, Mrs. McBrien, I am not sure of the point
you want to make.

The way you put it to me, I understood them to be
delayed at those points.  The numbers were remaining
constant, but their flow into the ground was being
delayed because of all kinds of problems at the
turnstiles? - A. I cannot look at a turnstile, let
alone look at 23 turnstiles, and arrive at any firm
conclusion as to the rate at which people are going
through the turnstiles.  I had an impression that the
turnstiles were not operating at maximum efficiency,
and I think there has already been evidence given to
the Inquest about the extent to which people were
trying to enter the ground having the wrong tickets,
people were trying to enter through turnstiles without
tickets and people were trying to enter through
turnstiles in other ways which were not strictly in
accordance with the management's wishes for the
conduct of the event, but none of that was evident to
me at the time.

I appreciate there were all these problems, but that
would in itself make the fans late getting into the
ground.  It was not their arriving at the area that
caused their lateness;  it was the fact that they were
delayed through the problems, all types of problems? -
                             R. MARSHALL


A. The difficulties at the turnstiles themselves were
a contributory factor to the large numbers that were
outside.

Yes.  I may be wrong on this, but did you say it is
quite normal for people to become anxious as kick-off
time approaches on any match day? - A. Yes.

You said that Mr. Duckenfield would have a limited
view inside the ground of Leppings Lane, is that
right? - A. Yes.

I think Mr. Isaacs mentioned a point that Mr. Payne
had brought up in relation to Gate B, and I think you
said yesterday, if I can remember rightly, that if the
fans had gone through Gate B there was no certainty
that they would not go down the tunnel? - A. Gate B
leads to the area which is to the left of the dividing
wall that runs across the concourse.  It has now been
demolished, but at the time of the disaster it was
there.  If fans had gone through that area they would
have had three routes open to them.  Some could have
gone through the metal gate to the right of Gate B and
gone into the tunnel area, the concourse area of which
the tunnel leads off.  They could have gone into the
north entrance, the steps up into the West Stand, or
into the north tunnel which leads into pens 5, 6 and
7.




                        /Q. So it was obviously
                                                           8



                                                     R. MARSHALL


    Q. So it was obviously a better choice of gate than Gate
       C then, would you agree? - A. That is a hindsight
       comment. If Gate B, as I said yesterday, had opened
       first then the situation which arose might not
       necessarily have arose. There is, of course, no way
B      of knowing that.
    Q. No, but it was outside Gate A and Gate B that the
       crushing was occurring, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

    Q. So that was the obvious choice, those gates, rather
       than the other gate, would you agree? If a gate had
       to be opened at all then it was far better to make
       that a choice or those gates a choice? - A. Yes, but
       when I asked for the gates to be opened I could not
       take the risk of that. I asked for all the gates to
       be opened.
    Q. I know you told me yesterday you did not know the
        lettering of the gates. You did not know they were
       called A, B and C but could you have made a request
       to Control and ask for the one leading to the North
        Stand, for instance, and then they would have
D      understood which one you meant? - A. I did in fact
       make that request.
    Q. Did you? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was the request granted? - A. Yes.

    Q. That was in relation to Gate A I believe, wasn't
       it? - A. Yes.
    Q. There was one last point in relation to Mr. Isaacs'
       questions. This question of diverting the crowd, Mr.
       Isaacs was saying that if the crowd are not easily
       controlled then it is difficult to divert them.
       Would you say that you would need to consider the
       numbers that were coming in all at once and not just
       the behaviour of individuals in a group but the sheer
       size of the crowd that was coming in? - A. Yes.

    Q. These are two questions from yesterday if I may ask
       them. Yesterday or the day before you mentioned
       seeing a ticket tout at Catch Bar Lane? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did he cause an obstruction there? - A. No.

    Q. So you did not need to take any further action? - A.
       No.

    Q. I remember you saying in your evidence it was not
       possible to get an ambulance into the concourse area
       after the disaster had occurred? - A. That is right.




H
                                                 R. MARSHALL


     THE CORONER: ’ He never said it in evidence here.       He
may well have said it somewhere else.

       THE WITNESS:   That is right, at the Public Inquiry.

      MRS. McBRIEN:   I am sorry.

     THE CORONER:   That is all right, I just wanted to get
it right.  He agrees with you that it was not possible to
get it into the concourse area.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   As that was not a possibility,
     would it have been possible for the fans inside who
     had been injured to be carried to the ambulance, to
     the service road?

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, we are outside m y time
limit.  It is not relevant.  I am not saying it is not
interesting and I am not saying it is not important but I
just do not think it is relevant to the Inquest and so we
will not pursue that.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  These are just summing up questions
from yesterday if I may be allowed to ask these.

       THE CORONER:   Yes.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:  Yesterday you told the Court that
     you could not do what you set out to do without the
     approval of Ground Control and I think that would
     refer to (a) the closing of Leppings Lane to traffic
     and (b) the opening of the exit gates to allow entry
     of fans into the stadium? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you tell Mr. Duckenfield about the substantial
   number of ticketless fans who you had seen
   congregated on the bridge and what your plan was for
   them? - A. No.

Q. The camera in the Control Box could not give him that
   kind of information, could it? There was no way he
   would know there were ticketless fans? - A. No.

Q. When Gate C was eventually opened at 2.52 in response
   to your request - we know it was opened at 2.48 but
   that was a different type of opening - and thousands
   of fans entered the stadium would you agree that it
   speeded things up? They moved into the stadium more
   quickly than if they had gone through the turnstiles?
     - A. Oh yes.

Q. Because it speeded things up do you think it might be
   dangerous and could cause a blockage of the central
   tunnel? - A 1 Again that is a hindsight view. At the
   time it did not occur to me that that would be a
   result of the opening of the gates.
                                            R. MARSHALL



So if the correct number of fans had come in through
the proper means of turnstile entry there would have
been no safety problems that day? - A. No.

 MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you very much, Superintendent.

             Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

I will give you an easier, Mr. Marshall.  Can you
remember for how long you have been giving evidence
now to this Inquest? - A. Two days, sir.

How long did you have to make the decisions you are
now being asked about, whether you made them and
whether they were correct? - A. About four minutes,
sir.

Are you anxious in so far as you have any part
remaining to play in your career in football matches
to ascertain the truth and to try help for the
conduct of future matches? - A. Of course.

Are you familiar with the expression moving the goal
posts? - A. Yes.

That means that the rules that normally apply have
suddenly been changed either to make the game easier
or harder? - A. Yes.

Are you aware of the recommendations that have been
made - and I do not want to take up two hours of the
Tribunal's time but in general - for avoiding the
sort of troubles that we had at this match? - A. 76
recommendations, sir.

76 recommendations and I certainly do not intend to
go through them all but is it right that in many of
them the goal posts have been changed? - A. If one
views the situation as it applied before the
disaster, yes.

To take just one example, the flow rate through
turnstiles which was 750 has now been altered? - A.
Yes.

Do you know offhand what it is now? - A. It is now
660.

The density of fans on terraces which was previously
taken to be a certain figure, what has happened to
that? - A. That has been reduced by 10 per cent.

Capacities of ground, what has been done about
that? - A. Stringent requirements on the reduction of
                                                        11


                                                 R. MARSHALL


   capacities over a time scale which will eventually
   lead to all seating in stadia.

Q. So theoretically nothing like this should happen
   again? - A. Theoretically, no.

Q. Incidentally how many of those 76 recommendations so
   far as you are aware apply to the things that the
   Police have got any sort of control over? - A. 15.

Q. So there are a lot of other things people have got to
   do if a match is going to be safe in the future? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Again I do not want to go into detail but have you
   asked for assistance during the course of the Inquiry
   and disciplinary proceedings and so on from people to
   tell you what ought to have been done by you that you
   did not do? - A. Yes.

Q. I think I am right, I was here during the   cross-
   examination but I do not know if I missed   anything,
   the learned Coroner put to you a proposal   for a
   barrier at the end of Leppings Lane? - A.   Yes.




                          /Q. Has anybody else to your
                                              R. MARSHALL


Has anybody to your recollection put any specific
proposal to you as to what you might have done? -A. No.

I am speaking of stopping fans from getting into a
dangerous crowded condition by the turnstiles, that is
the important thing? - A. No.

Despite all the time that people have had to consider
this and if there were anything that could be done it
could have been put to you, in fact it would have had to
be put to you, nothing has been put to you, is that
right? - A. That's right.

Except the learned Coroner suggested the possibility of a
barrier by the Herries Road roundabout and you dealt with
that, quite properly, saying that because it would also
involve blocking off the local population and stopping
them from getting through and various other reasons, that
that was impractical? - A. Yes.

We have heard other evidence too from the mounted Officer
from Nottingham in particular.   The man in charge, I
asked him about that and at first he was inclined to say
perhaps a line of police horses across Leppings Lane
might have held it up, when I pointed out to him that he
would also have to have another line at Catch Bar Lane,
then he opted for the position across - if Sergeant
Griffiths could show us - across just to the right of
where the words "Leppings Lane" appear, across there or
maybe a little further back towards the road.   Now is
that the position where you might set up some sort of
barrier to try to stop crowds from getting in to the
turnstile area? - A. Yes.

Was that done on the day? - A. Yes.

Was it successful? - A. No.

Although you weren't here, have you been reading the
notes of the witnesses? - A. Yes.

I am referring to Mr. Langley, who was a Liverpool
supporter who was a coach driver and who came there. Do
you recall his evidence that he was not happy about a
barrier being placed there because it excited the fans
and made them think they weren't going to get in?   Do
you recall that? - A. Yes.

Even a barrier at that point, as you have said, in fact
did not stop the fans on that day and that there were at
least some fans who wouldn't have wanted a barrier there?
- A. That is right.
                                                R. MARSHALL


I have   manfully rejected all offers to put photographs up
during   these Inquests up to now, but I would like to
remedy   that.  Could we have up the one of the turnstiles
looked   at from inside the concourse?

     MR. JONES:     That is C.322.

     MR. HALE:    Yes, it is a very simple point, just a
mere look at it will do.    That photograph was put up at
a time when one of the turnstile operators was giving
evidence.   My recollection is that he said that when he
gets inside there is his quite happy because they can't
get at him.    Do you recall that? - A. Yes.

Could I now see the perimeter gates?   Is it right,
Mr. Marshall, that an attempt was made to hold the crowd
up at those perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

That didn't succeed? - A. No.

There is no protection there in the nature of that
turnstile?   No protection there for the people holding
the gates? - A. I am sorry, I am not with you, Mr. Hale.

Anybody trying to hold that gate against the crowd
doesn't have the same protection as the man at the
turnstile who is inside a brick building? - A. No.

Is it surprising that if the turnstiles could not contain
people that those perimeter gates couldn't either? - A.
No.

Could I now see the final one, please?   It is the
entrance to the tunnel with a temporary barrier just at
the side of it.

     MR. JONES:     C.263.

     MR. HALE:   You see the temporary barrier to the
left of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

It has been suggested to you that that might have been
used to stop this crowd on this day.   Now from your
observation of this crowd on this day what prospect would
there have been of that barrier stopping that crowd? - A.
Again I think it would depend on the mood of the crowd.

I am speaking of that crowd on that day, in your
observation? - A. There could have been problems.

It is by no means as substantial as the perimeter gates,
is it? - A. Not at all.
                                                R. MARSHALL


And hot as substantial as the brick and steel
construction of the turnstiles? - A. No.

I would like to refer now to another Liverpool witness,
Mr. Thompson.   You may recall I asked him from his
observation of the crowd, and he was right in the middle
of it, whether anything less than the brick and steel
construction of the turnstiles could have stopped that
crowd.   Do you recall what his answer was? - A. I think
he was doubtful about that.

His exact words, and they can be looked at in the
transcript, were that anything less would have gone down.
Does that accord with your view of any prospects of
stopping that crowd on that day? - A. Yes.

On the question of advance planning, you mentioned
dealing with someone with a pyrotechnic in 1988. - A.
Yes.

Was there anything in the pre-planning orders that said
what you have to do about dealing with pyrotechnics? - A.
No.

That was a matter that was left to the discretion of the
Police on the day? - A. Yes.

There was also a stabbing in Hillsborough Park.   Is
there anything in the pre-match orders that says what you
have to do about stabbings? - A. No.

Is it right there could be many things that could happen
that you would have to use your individual judgment on? -
A. Yes.

     MR. HALE:    Thank you, Mr. Marshall.

                 Further by THE CORONER:

There is this question of the numbers of people you saw.
- A. Yes.

I think you said in evidence here that you thought there
may be between 6,000 to 8,000 people coming down, or in
that area, at about 2.15. - A. Yes.

I think it was put to you that you had always
consistently said something of that order? - A. Yes.

My first question:  when you say that number did you mean
that that was the number which was at the turnstile area?
I don't mean within the perimeter gates, but within... -
A. No, within my view.
                                                           15


                                                     R. MARSHALL


    Q. The reason why I a-sk you, and I am going to do what I
       don't like doing which is to look at Lord Justice
       Taylor's report.    Before I do that, when you made the
       request to open the gates, the number of people in your
       view how many were they?     In your judgment, as you
B      remember the evidence which you have given me? - A. I
       would say about the same sort of numbers.

    Q. Had more people been adding to the crowd during the time
       gap 2.15 to 2.44, whatever it was you started, 2.47, as
       far as you know? - A. As I say, I found the greatest of
       difficulty in putting anything other than my personal
       observations on the numbers and the numbers seem to
       remain at a very high level right throughout that period.

    Q. The reason why I ask you is simply this:  if the numbers
       stayed steady and there was an influx, or at least an
       addition of people at the back, let's assume that for the
       moment, then there had to be a certain number who got
       into the stadium at the front, or went somewhere else,
       because you can't have a steady number without additions
       at the back. - A. Yes.

D   Q. Are you able to give any idea as to how many people you
       think joined the crowd?    Never mind how they joined or
       what their mood was, or anything of that sort, how many
       people joined the crowd in that time period, 2.15 to,
       say, 2.45, or thereabouts?    This is not a trick
       question, it is simply to get your feeling, and you
       didn't count them I know that. - A. As I say, I have the
       greatest difficulty in answering this question.    The
       numbers - if I can go back over it in my mind - there
       were a lot of people there at 2.15 - 6,000 to 7,000.
       Now that number seemed to swell, but by how many
       thousands I wouldn't like to say.

    Q. If you look at page 61.    It is the last page of your
       evidence at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.    At the
       bottom, I have highlighted the section.    It is the same
       point which was raised at that Inquiry with regard to the
       numbers.   Just read it through first of all.    Are you
       happy with that exchange?    I am asking you to look at
       page 61, at G basically and perhaps E. - A. Well, I have
       read it through and clearly if that is what I said to
       Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry then obviously that was my
       impression at the time.   As I say, I do find great
       difficulty....



G




H
                                             R. MARSHALL




Would you read from "At the stage when there were 6,000
to 8,000"?

      MR. KING:   Sir, I wonder if I can invite you to
 invite him to start at letter C.  It is important
 because there are two matters here, one, the numbers he
 gives, and secondly his evidence as to whether,
.whatever the numbers be, they were increasing, and
 whatever the numbers be whether they were diminishing
 at the front?

     THE CORONER:    Okay, start at C, and read it to
us. - A. Yes:

     "Q. Very well.  The other thing was this.  I
     didn't quite follow what you were saying about the
     numbers.  I appreciate it is only an estimate, but
     you said at one stage there were 6,000 to 8,000
     there and still coming? - A. Yes.

     Q. And that the numbers were growing because the
     rate at which they were coming exceeded the rate
     at which they were going through the turnstiles.
     I think you said that to Mr. Hytner last night, if
     I am not mistaken. - A. Could you say that again,
     my Lord.  I am not just understanding.

     0. At the stage when there were 6,000 to 8,000. -
     A. 2.15-ish.

     Q. Yes.  At that stage the numbers that were
     outside were increasing because more were coming
     down than were being delivered into the ground by
     the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

     Q. If that is so what I don't follow is how by 20-
     to-3 you said this morning to me that it had gone
     down to about 3,000 to 4,000 outside? - A. Yes.
     The impression I had at 2.15 was that Leppings
     Lane was full in both directions on the pavements
     and spilling over onto the road.   I guessed that
     between 2.15 and 2.40 a substantial number of
     those persons had actually got into the ground,
     and again my perception of numbers, augmented by
     the video I   think I have seen at 2.40, would be in
     the region of 2,000 to 3,000 in the vicinity.

     Q. At 2.40?    - A. At 2.40, yes.

     Q. Well, if  that is right, 2.40or thereabouts is
     when you began to become concerned? You had not
     been up until then. - A. Yes.
ts
                                                                   17

                                                            R.   MARSHALL




                   Q. What I don't follow is how you began to get
                   concerned when there were only 2,000 to 3,000 and
                   had not been when there were 6,000 to 8,000? - A.
                   Yes, but you, appreciate that the mood which I
     B             described yesterday had changed or was changing.
                   At 2.15 there was not a problem.  People were
                   being admitted very quickly into the ground in a
                   normal way, and nothing whatsoever was causing
                   anxiety, but at 20-to-3 the mood was changing.

                   0. Because at 20-to-3 you were nearer to the kick-
                   off time? - A. The kick-off time, and the urgency
                   wnich I described yesterday was starting to
                   prevail within the crowd."

         0. There are only two or three possibilities, I suppose,
            aren't there?  Either your estimate at 2.15 was wrong,
            or your estimate at 20-to-3 was wrong? - A. Yes.

         Q. With regard to the numbers, or your appreciation of the
            rate of throughput at the turnstiles was wrong? - A.
            Yes.
     D
         Q.   Tnat is another possibility,   isn't it? - A. Yes.

         Q.    Butyou have already  told me that you have great
              difficulty in estimating the numbers? - A. I think with
              respect, sir, the video gives absolutely reliable
              evidence of the numbers ....

         Q. Yes, we have seen a compilation tape. - A.      .. between
            2.15 and 3 p.m.

         Q. I am not trying to pin you down to a number, Mr.
            Marshall.  What I am anxious about is that we don't get
            misled with numbers, which may not necessarily be
            accurate.  That is what I am concerned about.

                   MR. KING:   Would you confirm, sir, that my note
              is correct?  I am not asking the witness any questions.
              Before you referred the witness to these passages, in
              answer to yourself he said that the same sort of
              numbers were outside at the time he asked for the gates
              to be opened, as there had been at 2.15?

                   THE CORONER:   Yes, that was my understanding of
              wnat he said when I was trying to review this
              particular aspect.

                   MR. KING:   His original numbers to you, sir, this
              morning, as to how many were outside at 2.15, were
              6,000 ’to 8,000.




     H
                                                          18


                                                   R.   MARSHALL




           THE CORONER:   That is right.  I think I had put
      it and you had put it, and he had agreed with both of
      us, and he agreed again.

           MR. KING:   Thank you, sir.

Q.         THE CORONER:    The second question I want to raise
     'with you is the issue of - it was put to you and you
      agreed - that if a large number of people had come to
      the turnstiles, quote, "late", the level of anxiety
      will rise if they cannot get in in time for the match?
      - A. Yes.

Q. And that this presents a problem? - A. Yes.

0. Would it be right to say that the problem that is
   presented is the fact that people, and indeed
   organisers, want to get everybody in by kick-off time?
   - A. Yes, to postpone the kick-off is not a simple
   step.  It is a step that affects quite a lot of people.
   Obviously it affects all the people who have taken the
   time and trouble to be in on time, into the stadium; it
   certainly affects the players and officials who are
   waiting to start; it certainly affects all the media
   people who are putting out television programmes; it
   affects the public transport arrangements which have
   been drawn up to cope with people going home after the
   game.  It is not a step that is taken lightly, and fans
   in general know that games will kick off on time.

Q. As I see it, the problem is that a fan might miss part
   of the match? - A. Yes.

Q. If for some reason, for whatever reason, he is delayed
   in getting through? - A. Yes.

Q. That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. And that is the problem isn't it, in a nutshell? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I think you told us yesterday or the day before, that
   kick-off might well be delayed if there were, say,
   major hold-ups which are known about? - A. Yes, the two
   circumstances which Mr. Duckenfield were if there was
   fog on the Pennines which would have slowed the traffic
   coming to Sheffield down, or there had been a major
   accident of some description.

Q. In other words, extraneous circumstances? - A. Yes.

Q. As I understand your reply this morning, what you are
   saying is that merely because there is a crowd which is
   late, unless there is an extraneous reason which is
K
                                                                     19


                                                              R.   MARSHALL




              known, that in itself would not necessarily be a reason
              for postponing kick-off? - A. Not necessarily.

    Q    Q. Would it be right, in your experience, that if you did
            postpone kick-off because there was a crowd which was
            late for non - I use the word extraneous as shorthand -
            circumstances, that this could have an effect on the
            mood of the people who are inside? - A. Yes, it is
            usually a very unpopular decision when it is announced
            within the ground.

         Q.    Would that be a factor which also has   to   betaken into
              account? - A. Yes.

         Q.    If kick-off is to be delayed at least three things are
              necessary, (a) the decision? - A. Yes.

         Q. Somebody has got to take that decision? - A. Yes.

         Q. (b), it has got to be communicated? - A. Yes.

    1}   Q. And the corollary to that is that the people to whom it
            is communicated can hear it? - A. Yes.

         Q.    (c), it has got to be accepted by the recipients? - A.
              Ye s .

         0.    Let us just assume for a moment that that were to
              happen at a match .... - A. This match?

         0.    Any match, where there is a crowd outside and there is
              some crowd pressure, but they hear kick-off is delayed
              and they say, "Good".  What would be the effect of that
              on that crowd? - A. Usually it has a calming effect.

         Q. Thinking then of this crowd, and postulating that an
            announcement had been made that kick-off had been
            delayed and that the crowd could or did hear it, what
            effect do you think it would have had on this
            particular crowd on that particular day, in the light
            of your assessment of the crowd that you saw? - A. I
            don't think it would have made any difference, sir.

         Q. Have you got any reason for that? - A. Only the mood of
            the crowd itself and the fact that repeated
            announcements were being made over the tannoy system,
            asking people not to push.  I know from evidence which
            has been given Police Officers, both on foot and on
            horseback, were trying to stop people pushing both
            verbally and physically, but it made no impact on these
            people.

         Q. It has been suggested that certainly some of the people
            - and I don't think there is very much argument about



    H
                                                              20

                                                       R.   MARSHALL




          the people right at the front of the turnstile - had no
          option.  Whether they were pushing or not, they were
          being crushed and they could not .... - A. Sir, you
n         always find in any crowd people of self-discipline who
          discourage the others.  You will always find those
          people, who will really become your allies if you are
          trying to bring some order to a crowd.  Now, I have no
          doubt in my mind there were a substantial number of
          people in the crowd at Leppings Lane of that
          persuasion.

     Q. What I am trying to find out, Mr. Marshall, is this.
        If the crowd had been minded to comply .... - A. It
        could have done so.

     Q. Was it, in fact, in a position where it could comply or
        was it in a position where it could not comply,
        whatever its mind? - A. I think it could have complied,
        sir.

     Q.   When I say the crowd, of course, we are   talking about
J)        individuals? - A. Yes.

     Q. So there is no such thing as the crowd, you would agree
        with that, wouldn't you? - A. I would agree with that,
        sir, yes.

     Q.    Mr. Marshall, you have had ahard time but I think you
          are a very important witness so far as this Inquest is
          concerned, and you will be pleased to hear that we are
          going to let ....

               MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, before Superintendent
          Marshall goes, Mr. Hale did not question before we ....

               THE CORONER:    Strictly speaking Mr. Hale is
          supposed to go last, apart from my privilege.   I
          consider Mr. Marshall to be my witness really, rather
          than anybody else's.   What is the question that you
          want to ask and I will decide whether I will allow you
          to put it?




                       /MRS. McBRIEN:   Certain questions    ....




H
                                R. MARSHALL


     MRS. McBRIEN:  Certain   questions that Mr. Hale
asked this morning, I would   have liked to have had the
opportunity to come back on   those, and even one that
you put as well, sir, if it   were at all possible.

     THE CORONER: I am exceedingly reluctant, because
if I let you have a go after Mr. Hale I have to let
everybody else have a go after Mr. Hale.

     Ladies and gentlemen, Mrs. McBrien is not a
lawyer, we know that, and she is doing very well.  No,
I think, Mrs. McBrien, you have had a pretty good go
at Mr. Marshall.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I do not know if I can help.  I
hesitate to be of assistance, because I may not be of
assistance.   If Mrs. McBrien were very quietly to tell
me what she wants to ask - she may not want my
assistance - it might be of assistance.

     THE CORONER: Why do you not do that? Let us
adjourn for four or five minutes, have a little chat
with her and see.  Yes, Mr. Catchpole.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, at some point it is your
habit to rise for coffee.

     THE CORONER: That is a good point.  Let us rise
for coffee now, the standard 15 minutes.

                (Short adjournment)

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I have no further questions
to ask.

     THE CORONER: Thank you very much, Mrs. McBrien.
Mr. Marshall, thank you very much indeed.  It is hard
work giving evidence for such a long time.  It is hard
work for all of us actually just listening to it as
well, but thank you very much indeed.

                TREVOR HICKS Called

                  By THE CORONER:

It is Trevor Hicks, is it not? - A. Yes.

I think you have moved so perhaps vou could give me
your new address? - A. It is                          \
Skipton, Yorkshire.

Mr. Hicks, before I start, everybody knows, and I
know, that of course you have suffered a very grievous
loss in losing your two daughters, and I say on
                          T. HICKS


behalf of myself and everybody else that it is very
sad and we are very, very sorry indeed that you have
had that loss. - A. Thank you.

I will try, as far as I am able, to deal with your
evidence in exactly the same way as we have dealt with
other witnesses. - A. I would prefer that.

Indeed, we have had one or two relatives so you have
probably seen it.  I think it is easier, in fact,
certainly for me, and it may even be easier for you if
we do it that way but I do not want you to think that
I am not conscious that you are in a very special
position. - A. I would prefer that, yes.

The first question I want to ask you is one to deal
with your wife.  Her full names are Jennifer Hicks? -
A. Jennifer Hicks, yes, commonly known as Jenny.

I knew that, but the one thing I do not know is what
her occupation is, if any? - A. She is a student now.

I see, and what was she before that? - A. She is at
Liverpool Polytechnic.

She is at Liverpool Polytechnic? - A. Yes.

Could you tell me what her occupation was in 1989, or
was she a housewife? - A. Housewife.  I am sorry, she
was a technician as well, yes.

The reason why I ask is because one of your daughters
was under 16 and one of the registration particulars
the Registrar General likes - I do not know why - is
the wife's occupation, if any. - A. She was a part-
time technician at a local Sixth Form College.

     THE CORONER: Which is Mrs. Hicks?  .... I wish
you well at the Polytechnic.  I am sure you will do
very well and, as an aside, I became what is known as
a mature student and in many respects it is great fun
being with a lot of young people.  It is hard work but
it is great fun, so I wish you all the best.  That is
nothing to do with the Inquest.

Now we are coming back to the subject matter and you
attended the match in 1989? - A. Yes.

With your wife and your two girls? - A. Yes.

Sarah Louise and Victoria Jane, that is right, is it
not? - A. Yes.
                                                      23



                                T. HICKS


Q.   Your wife had a ticket, I think, was it for the North
     Stand? - A. Yes.

Q.   The other three of you had tickets for the terraces? -
     A. That is right.  That was exactly the same as
     happened in 1988 as well.

Q.   If I could just deal with 1988, where were you located
     in 1988? - A. It was exactly the same, in fact.  Jenny
     got an allocation of a seat in the North Stand, and
     the girls and I got an allocation of a ticket on the
     Leppings Lane terraces.

Q.   What I meant was which bit of the terrace were you on
     in 1988? - A. We started off in what I now know to be
     Pen 3.

Q.   We are talking about 1988? - A. Yes, 1988.  We did, in
     fact, go down the tunnel and we were, I would say,
     probably three-quarters of the way back in Pen 4.

Q.   Pen 4? - A. Pen 4, I am sorry, the one at the farthest
     side, and we decided we were not too comfortable there
     so we actually went through the access gate at the
     back of what are now known as the radial fences and my
     best recollection is we took up a position either just
     in front of the stand in the farthest corner ---

Q.   That is No.7? - A. Pen 7, or whatever it is, somewhere
     along there.  I can't remember exactly where we ended
     up.

Q.   Just as a matter of interest, when you left Pen 4 and
      went over to the corner, do you recollect still what
      time that might have been? - A. No.  I have some
      difficulty obviously looking back to 1988.

Q.   Of course. - A. In fact, it was not until a couple of
     months afterwards I even remembered that there was an
      access gate in the radials there.  It only came back
      to me later.  I remember us leaving the central area.
      It was a combination of not being able to see and
     being a bit uncomfortable.

Q.   As it happens, after that you had a jolly good view? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   By chance, you actually did know about the gates at
      the back in the radial fences in the event.  I am not
      saying you remembered in 1989 but you did recollect
      them? - A. Yes, we had seen them when we went and we
     always used to go in fairly early.   We were later in
      1988 because obviously it was the first time we had
                                                        24




                                T. HICKS


      actually been to Hillsborough then and we had to park
      much further away and all this type of thing.

Q.   I think we will leave 1988 in the circumstances,
      because you were not actually watching from the
      central pens, were you? - A. No.

Q._ But in 1989 you, in fact, arrived in Sheffield
     relatively early I believe? - A. Yes.

Q.   I think you had a bit of a picnic lunch? - A. Yes,
     Jenny had a bit of a fad about food, so she did not
     like going into just anywhere to eat.

Q.   Yes. - A. We always used to come well prepared.

Q.   I think I can take you through this pretty quickly.
     You left your car at about 20-to 2, I think, 1.40 or
     so, you said? - A. Yes.

Q.   You got to the turnstiles and at that time you did not
     see many policemen about, but then there was not any
     particular crowd either? - A. No, it was fairly quiet
     for such a big occasion and we left Jenny at the
     gates, that tobacconist which shows on the
     photographs, the Benson and Hedges sign.   We always
     used to arrange to rendezvous.  It would normally be
     Jenny and I together and the girls going separate, but
     obviously the way the tickets were she was going to be
     on her own.

Q.   So she went off. - A. To the North Stand.

Q.   And you went with the girls through your turnstiles, A
      to G I take it, one of them? - A. Yes, that is right,
      I can't remember which one.

Q.   And got onto the concourse area and it was, I think,
      about 5-to 2 or thereabouts? - A. Yes.

Q.   At that time you and the girls split up, I think, is
      that right? - A. Yes, that is right.  They wanted to
      go into the centre.  Their usual spot was where they
     ended up, in fact, a couple of barriers back, slightly
      to the right of the centre line of the goal.  It was
     partly that and partly the fact that I was buying some
     programmes.   One of my quirks, if you like, was to
     bring a flask of coffee, which I had not brought that
     day, and I did in fact see the coffee stall along to
     the right, so I went off to get a coffee and that is
     how I ended up where I did.

Q.   Whilst you were there, was it the sign that you
     noticed, or was it that you saw that people were
                              T. HICKS


 walking round the side of the stand, because something
 alerted you to the fact that you could get round? - A.
 I did not know until I went along.   I know you have
 taken evidence already of that small sign which was
 on, I think, the last post on the cantilever overhang.
 It was that, in fact.   I did not realise you could
 actually get round.   I would have gone back to the
 tunnel if it had not have been for the fact that I saw
 that.

So you actually caught a glimpse of it because you
happened to be having your coffee? - A. If I had not
have gone to the coffee bar I would not have seen it
at all.

I am not disputing that in any way.  It was because
you were in that position that you could see and you
thought 'Oh, I can go round this way', and you went? -
A. Yes.  I wasn't absolutely sure because it looked a
bit of a temporary sign, to be fair.

I did not ask you, but I think you came by car, did
you not? - A. Yes, from London, so we did, in fact,
travel up with all the Notts Forest supporters.

You then went round? - A. Yes, that is right.

For whatever reason, and you finished up in what I
think we know as Pen 1 now? - A. Pen 1, yes.

You know we like marking the plan, so would you do
that for us now.  Perhaps before that can I just ask
you this.  The position that you took up, was that, in
fact, the position that you remained at until you
actually decided to leave the pen? - A. Yes.

I think we will have to have the other plan, the big
one, the plan of the whole ground.  So that would be
the position that you located? - A. Yes sir.

     THE CORONER;     If you would go round now.

     MR. JONES:     This will be C352, sir.

     THE CORONER: The scale is a bit smaller, but take
your time. (Witness marks plan)   Can everybody see’
Can you see it, Mr. Russell.

     MR. RUSSELL:    Perhaps it could be indicated with
the pointer.

     THE    CORONER: Could you point to it? Can you see
it now?     It is difficult to see the mark because the
scale is    small, but can you see the pointer?
      MR.    RUSSELL:   Yes, thank you.
                                                          26


                                                      T. HICKS


Q.          THE CORONER’:  You got on to this terracing.
       Can you describe it in words as well where you took
       up your position? - A. Yes, it was directly next to
       the steps to the gantry into the Police Control Box,
       the blue box we have seen on the photographs.  I was
       one or two barriers from the back.  I cannot remember
       which one I ended up on because there was a slightly
       better view of the Liverpool end goal.  I think it
     . was the rearmost barrier but it could have been the
       one in front, I can't be absolutely certain.

Q. I cannot remember but is there a gangway between that
   stand? - A. Yes, I have not been back since but from
   m y recollection, yes, there was a radial fence I
   suppose you would call it still which separated the
   South Stand and if I remember rightly the steps up to
   the box are on the South Stand side of that fence and
   I was literally a foot or a couple of feet to the
   inside of the fence in Pen 1.

Q. You were quite comfortable at that time? - A. Yes, it
   was remarkably empty when I first went in even at two
   o'clock if you like by that time or perhaps a little
   after.   There was plenty of room.  It was a gorgeous
   day, of course, as has been well documented.
   Everybody was in a good mood.   Everyone looking
   forward to it.   I was sitting down, drinking my
   coffee, reading the programme and, as I have said in
   m y statement, listening to the transistor radio.
   There was a lot of anticipation whether Alan Hanson,
   the Liverpool captain, would be playing again that
   day and it was one of the talking point s . I was just
   chatting with people generally.

Q. Enjoying yourself? - A. And basically waiting for the
   game, yes.

Q.    Did your pen itself fill up at all? - A.  It did, yes,
      obviously as we got nearer to kick-off time it was
      constantly filling up.

Q. Did you notice where people were coming from? You
   may not have done? - A. That particular position, of
   course, they seemed to be coming from what would have
   been m y rearmost left hand side.  If I remember
   rightly that was the only way to get to that little
   bit because of the way the banking went.   I think
   there were some steps go up the side up to the West
   Stand seating.   If I remember correctly there is a
   gangway there or very near to it.

Q.    You, of course, came from round the back   of the
      structure shall we say? - A. Yes.

Q. Was that the impression that you had that people were
   coming from or did you have the impression that they
£2
                                                                27


                                                          T. HICKS


            were coming acrotes from further up the terracing to
            your left? - A. I honestly couldn't say.

         Q. Why should you take any notice of that?   Yes. - A. I
            would be guessing, yes.
     B
         Q. From time to time you looked around, you listened to
            your transistor, and you glanced towards the
            centre? - A. Yes, you know obviously you do these
            things almost without thinking. You are watching the
            game a bit. You look at the stands, you look across
            at the far side, you look at the far end.

         Q. When did you first begin to notice anything of
            significance? - A. I would say from about 2.40, 2.35
            to 2.40, possibly even as late as 2.45 but I was
            getting concerned obviously at how many people were
            in.  I was in an elevated position.   That perhaps
            doesn't show on the plan.  It is quite steep banking
            at that point and so I could see over to the two
            central pens and it was getting very full.   I could
            see the radial fence at the side.   I obviously
            couldn't see the front fence otherwise I would have
     D      been in a worse state but it seemed initially perhaps
            2.15-ish to be pretty full then but they always are
            as we have heard on many occasions.   It would be
            difficult to put a precise time on when I started to
            get a little agitated.  As I said, I would put that
            perhaps at 2.40 to 2.45-ish.  I think that is when I
            probably paid the most attention and when it started
            to really concern me then.

         Q. What was it that caused you agitation at that time? -
            A. At that time.

         Q. You are saying at 2.40 to 2.45. We will deal with
            the times in greater detail later on but I just want
            to take you through it, you see? - A. It was
            basically the sight of the people who were pushed
            against the radial fence on the far side of it
            obviously.  I couldn't see all that well because, as
            I said, the terrace was beginning to fill up by then
            but there were spots where you could see and from my
            position I could actually see through the vertical
            bars and people were looking a bit uncomfortable and
            there wasn't, in m y view, the room that there would
            normally be even on a big occasion like that.

         Q. Players were not on the field at that point, or were
            they? - A. Forgive me, obviously it is very difficult
            to remember back but I think they had been on for the
            knock round first but they weren't formally back on
            the pitch. That came later.

         Q. When you say the knock round, they came out quite
            early? - A. That is right.  They normally come.



     H
                                                      28


                                                  T. HICKS



Q. They wandered around and then disappeared again? - A.
   Yes, it is partly warm up and partly getting rid of
   their nerves. They normally come round for a kick
   round first.

Q. Did you hear the players announced? - A. No, I
    didn't.  I did hear them on the radio. I had this
  . radio with a little ear piece in.  I did hear it on
    that but I have no recollection of any announcements
    at all.

Q. Are you saying the announcement of the players was
   actually being broadcast at the same time? - A. Yes,
   the normal trick is that you listen to the local
   radio or you listen to Radio 5 which it is now which
   is the sort of sports channel and obviously it was
   being covered as a live game anyway.

Q. If you heard it on the radio and if it was being
   covered live it would be going out coterminously with
   the announcements, would that be right? - A. No,
   because the announcement would normally be made on
   the PA system within the ground.  I am listening to,
   I can't remember whether I was listening to national
   radio or Radio Sheffield or what it was.

Q. When you heard it on the radio was that the time that
   you are now describing or was it after that? - A. I
   think that that was just before.  I think that was
   when I stopped sort of taking notice of the radio and
   reading and when I started looking at the
   surroundings more, sort of more attentive.

Q. So when you first began to think, "I am not quite
   happy with what is going o n ” was after, whether it
   was immediately after or shortly after or
   coterminously with the announcement on the radio of
   the names being called out, would that be right? - A.
   I would think probably a couple or three minutes.    I
   have a slight problem with times. As you appreciate,
   having seen a lot of the evidence the time scales are
   much longer than what I thought they were at the time
   and so that ruins your judgment.

Q. I have gone through your statements and, in fact, I
   am going to take you through those later on but I
   want to try and get from you, so far as I am able at
   this stage, before we look... - A. I think the
   announcement was made about 2.30 give or take a few
   minutes either way.  I would say it was say from 2.35
   onwards when I started to pay much more attention to
   the centre pens and obviously I got more and more
   concerned as I did so.
                                                    T . HICKS


Q. I think we have it timed in the evidence on Day 1
   when the announcement was made.  I am not sure it is
   on that, Mr. Hicks, but I think it is in our longer
   version? - A. It may not....

     MR. KING:   Sir, I may be wrong but there may be a
fundamental misunderstanding here.   I did not understand
the witness to say that he heard even on the radio the
names being announced in the ground.   He merely said he
heard the team being given out on the radio.   They are a
quite different agency as I understand it.

     THE CORONER:   I see, in that case I ma y have
completely misunderstood.

     THE WITNESS:   No, I definitely did not hear the teams
announced on the PA system.

     MR. KING:   You, sir, I think put to the witness that
what he heard on the radio was merely relaying via the
radio what was happening at the ground on the tannoy
system.

     THE CORONER:   That is what I did put to him because
that is what I understood him to say.

     MR. KING:   I may be wrong - I am not the witness -
but I do not think he is saying that.

Q.        THE CORONER:    Let us try and get that right
     because I may have misunderstood you.   Did you hear
     on the radio the announcement? You said you did not
     hear it on the PA system.   That is it, and that is
     the end of it, but was it the announcement of the
     teams that you heard on the radio or what did you
     actually hear? - A. I was listening.   The thing I was
     listening for was basically the team lists on the
     radio.  I definitely didn't hear any PA announcements
     to the best of m y recollection at all and that is why
     you can't tie the times. Mr. King's point is quite
     correct.

Q. It may have been a red herring and let us leave it. -
   A. Okay.

Q. Let me just gather m y thoughts. You could see what
   you thought were people looking uncomfortable? - A.
     Yes.

Q. I think you said between 2.35 and 2.45.  You told me
   somewhere about that and I think that is right? - A.
   Something of that order, yes.

Q. What happened then? - A. Well, as we have seen on the
   video, people were climbing over the side fences,
                                                                30


                                                           T . HICKS


         climbing over the front fence and being pulled up
         into the stands.

    Q. How close in time was that to the description which
        you have just given me about the people being against
B       the radial fences? - A. Almost continuous.   There is
        a slight difficulty because, as I think you said to
        one of the witnesses, the chappie who had been
      . standing on the barrier, some people do get from one
        pen to another by coming over the radial fence.   So
        it might have been m y attention on the first few was
        ignored, if you like, on the grounds that that was
        just moving from one pen to another but, as I said,
        around twenty to, quarter to, something like that, it
       was obviously not just the normal people moving about
        the ground.

    Q. Carry on? - A. I obviously could see.       I stood in m y
       position and didn't move but I could see fairly
       clearly.  You couldn't see individual faces or
       anything but you could see the general mass of people
       and obviously more and more people were trying to get
       out.  I got the feeling that when they were coming
       they were in a distressed state whereas if they had
       been just changing pens or anything like that they
       would have been sort of laughing and joking and
       perhaps calling back to their friends or something.
       People were looking distinctly agitated.       Some
       people, I saw one chap go over the front fence for
       instance who was immediately arrested by a Policeman,
       who obviously thought he was running on the pitch,
       but the guy's legs were w o b b l y . You could see - he
       wasn't drink - there was something wrong with him.         I
       think I said in m y statement the thing that really
       brought it home to me was an old chap in a grey suit.
       I have, in fact, seen the Police video, the one you
       showed, and I know now he survives because I actually
       see him come over the pen from Pen 3 into Pen 2 but
       that chap at one stage looked certainly unconscious
       with his head lolling to the side.       That is a very
       vivid memory I have of the general position.

    Q.    Can you time that?  I do not mean by looking at your
         watch but I want you to time it in relation to
         events? - A. Yes, as a matter of fact, I think I put
         it in here, didn't I? I have put that at about ten
         minutes to three or thereabouts would be the time.
         It would be just before the incident when the first
         Police Officer, I noticed him stood on the steps
         going up into the Police box.

    Q.    At that point were there any Police Officers on the
         perimeter fence? - A. I have been through it so many
         times.
                                                                 31


                                                         T. HICKS


    Q. I know. - A. There were the ones we are obviously
       seeing on the video, the normal pitch serial as I now
       know they are called, but it was before the Officers
       went on to form the cordon.

B   Q. I am interested not in the ones who we have heard
       evidence of which you did not hear because you have
       said you were too far away but people have said there
       were Officers on the perimeter fence walling, if you
       like, either signalling or shouting, whatever they
       may have been shouting. Were there any Officers
       doing that? Never mind whether they were being good
       or bad but were they doing anything? - A. I wouldn't
       see them very well.  That was the angle of vision.   I
       could see the side fence.

    Q. You could not see the front? - A. I couldn't see the
       front.  I may have been able to see the top of odd
       Officers but to be fair I don't have a strong
       recollection.

    Q. You do    not recollect the Officers being there at that
       point?    - A. I remember seeing a few at the front of
       m y bit   but not in front of Pens 3 and 4. They would
       be out    of m y line of vision.




E




                              /Q.   So you could not actually.




H
                                                 T-. HICKS


         So you co-uld not actually see quite at the
front, it was the side view? - A. I could see the side
mainly, and I could obviously see the top of the front
fence.   I could see people going over, but I couldn't
see what they were going over to.

We have heard - in fact we have seen it on the video - a
beach ball being bounced about^   Did you see that at
all? - A. I don t remember the beach ball.    Again, it
would be perfectly normal.    You see bananas, you see all
sorts of things being thrown about.    It is one way
people amuse themselves in the build-up to the game.

You can't relate the incident of the man in the suit, or,
indeed the others, to whether this happened before, after
or at the same time as the beach ball incident? - A. It
is an opinionj the beach ball would probably have been
bouncing around for quite a considerable time.   There
are often things like that.   Sometimes they are rude,
sometimes they are not.

I know you said you didn't hear any announcements, but
did you see any movements in the central pen?    People
apparently cheering at any point? - A. Yes, but nothing
abnormal.    As I got more anxious - and again, forgive
me, it is very difficult to separate your mind sometimes
- but there was less cheering than normal.    There would
normally be quite a bit of chanting...

In relation to this gentleman you have mentioned - I am
just using him as a marker at the moment - and when you
first saw him and thought, "Oh, I don't like this," what
was happening with regard to the cheering in the pen? -
A. I can only really say that the people on both sides of
the radial fence, the one between 2 and 3, weren't
cheering at all.   This was really what focused my
attention on pen 3 where I knew Sarah and Vicky were.
They were in an agitated state.   They were trying to
draw attention.   They were literally trying to pull
people who were packed against the fence, they were
trying to pull them up and help them over, so really they
weren t paying attention to the game at all.    They were
concentrating on what was obviously a problem.

I interrupted your flow, but I think you said this was
about 2.50? - A. About 2.50, ten minutes to three.

You remained in your location.    What did you see then? -
A. As I said, I was standing almost directly the other
side of the radial fence separating the Police Box from
the section I was stood in.    I looked up.   We were
obviously trying to draw people's attention to what was a
problem.   Nobody seemed to be doing anything about it.
None of the authorities I should say.    I then saw
                                                             33


                                                          T. HICKS


         Superintendent Greenwood standing on the steps and I
         tried to draw his attention, as two or three other people
         around me did.    Obviously shouting all sorts of things,
         "Can't you see what's going on?"    "You can see there is
         a problem."    It was obvious by that time that it wasn't
B        just people trying to go on to the pitch or people
         swopping from one pen to another.

    Q. What time was that? - A. I have put it in my statement at
       3.50.  That is the best time I can put it at.

    Q. Were there any players on the pitch at that time...

              MR. KING:   Sir, the witness said 3.50.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, it should be 2.50? - A. Two-
         fifty, I beg your pardon.

    Q. Were there any players on the pitch at that time? - A. I
       don't think so, but as I have said before, I wasn't
       really paying that much attention to the pitch at this
       time.

    Q. You have named him today as Superintendent Greenwood.
       Before I come to that, where was he? - A. He was standing
       on the platform.   The steps are a typical - I used to
       work on a chemical refinery so I know the type of steps.
       There is a sort of open mesh with a series of steps
       coming up.   He was stood on the flat part, so if you had
       opened the Police Box door you would have knocked him.

    Q. You saw him there.   You were trying to attract his
       attention.   How long was he stood there? - A. I can't
       remember whether he was stood there when I turned round,
       which I believe he was, but I can't say that for certain.
       Certainly I was trying to attract his attention for three
       or four minutes, something like that.

    Q. That would take us then, assuming you were right with
       your timing, to 2.54? - A. Two fifty-four/two fifty-five,
       something like that.

    Q. I think we can shorten it and say you didn't manage to
       attract his attention? - A. No, despite all the shouting.

    Q. Did he leave that position? - A. Yes, he then went down
       the steps and round the back of the South Stand, is it?

    Q. Round the back of the South Stand? - A. From what I
       remember the steps come down and either go to a flat area
       at the back where you would either go along behind the
       stand or there may be some other access.




H
                                                              34


                                                          T. HICKS


     Q. Why do you say it >was Superintendent Greenwood? - A. I
        have always thought it was him.    When I gave my evidence
        to Taylor on the 18th of May I wasn't absolutely sure.
        Obviously the state of mind I was in.    Jenny and I had
        always taken the decision not to watch any television
]}      because we found it quite distressing.    In fact I became
        sure it was him.    I have checked the dates back.    I was
        meeting some West Midlands Police Officers here on one of
        the days of the Taylor Inquiry.    I have established that
        was on the 30th of May.    In fact I bumped into
        Superintendent Greenwood just outside the doors here.     I
        have a very good recollection of faces.    I am terrible
        with names.   I forget names, but I have a very good
        mental image of faces.    As soon as I saw him in the
        corridor outside I knew definitely he was the first
        Officer I saw on the steps.

     Q. You described him as wearing a light coloured anorak and
        a gold braided cap? - A. That's right.

     Q. That was the visual image that you had, you put it both
        in your statement and to Lord Justice Taylor? - A. That's
        right.   The gold braid has been put down to the sun
        shining on silver braid.   The light anorak I have got no
        explanation for.   Whether that is a figment of my
        imagination, an error, I can't say.

     Q. In your mind now you feel confident that the man you saw
        was Superintendent Greenwood.    There is a problem in
        that he was wearing as far as you remember a light
        coloured anorak? - A. Yes.    Obviously the Taylor Inquiry
        was pretty traumatic for me as you can imagine.    I was
        led slightly by Mr. Woodward but I did make it in my
        statement.   If I thought about it it was obvious he
        wouldn't be wearing a light coloured anorak.    No Police
        Officer on duty that day would have been out of uniform.
        It was a recollection I had which I can't explain.

     Q. If your timing is right, and we will assume that for a
        moment, this would take us on to six minutes to three? -
        A. Yes.

       At that point did you look across to the terracing again?
       -A. Yes.   That is where my attention was diverted again.
       By this time, of course, it would have been difficult.
       The terrace in front of me was quite full, certainly
       between me and the area where they were.    There were
       more and more people going over the top and going on to
       the pitch.   I think it was about that time when the
       other Police Officers went on to the pitch.    Again, I
       was looking at the side fence and that old chap I was
       telling you about, his head was lolling on the side, and
       it caught my attention again.   There were more and more
1

                                                               35

                                                            T. HICKS


           people going over the front fence and collapsing on to
           the ground.

        Q. If your timing is right you are saying this actually
           happened either before or coterminous with the teams
    B      coming on to the field.   We know what time the teams
           came on the field and you know as well. - A. That's
           right.

        Q. it was six minutes to.   Now is that what you are telling
           me, that people were coming over the front fence,
           collapsing somewhere, before the teams came on to the
           pitch?    We must get it straight. - A. Yes.    I have to
           be honest and say I can't be certain whether it was
           because, as I say, I was not paying attention to the
           pitch at the time - it sounds ridiculous.    I don't
           remember the teams coming out in the normal way, lining
           up, doing all the rest of it, because obviously my
           attention was drawn to the pens.

        Q. Do you remember any of the play?   I don't mean the
           detail, but do you remember the play taking place?   Any
           football taking place? - A. Yes.   I remember Grobbelaar
           coming up and taking his place in the goal and things.
           Obviously he was in the periphery of my attention area.
           I don't remember Beardsley hitting the bar.

        Q. Because that was on the far side, of course. - A. Yes.

        Q. Grobbelaar, of course, would have been in his goal,
           before the match kicked-off? - A. A few minutes before
           the kick-off, yes.

        Q. What I am trying to find out is whether you have a
           recollection of him in the goal as if he was playing, as
           opposed to just being there? - A. No, I can't be certain.
           Again, he is a bit of a clown, as you know, so he tends
           to muck about a little bit.

        Q. I don't know him very well but I accept what you say. -
           A. Even when he is paying attention he is larking about
           and this type of thing.

        Q. You cannot at the moment relate to me the people getting
           over the fence to any event on the pitch? - A. Not
           accurately.   Again, Dr. Popper, it wasn't a one-off.
           It was a trickle to start with, which I didn't pay a lot
           of attention to.  As I said, it was just people swopping
           pens as far as I was concerned.   It was only as it
           started to build into a crescendo, and by which time I
           was totally oblivious to what the players were doing.

        Q. Let's assume for the minute it was Superintendent
           Greenwood.   He disappeared from your view? - A. Yes.




    H
                                                  T. HICKS


Something else happened then.    What was the time gap
before the next thing happened? - A. Again, five minutes,
possibly ten minutes.    A second Police Officer was stood
a few steps down from...    There were a couple of camera
men who were on that.    In fact the photograph I attached
to my statement, one of the camera men appears on there
which I think was in between these two incidents.    Again
they were actually taking photographs and zooming their
camera - because one of them had a video camera - down on
the pens rather than on the play, which again does not
help very much other than people in that area could see
there was a problem in the pen.

The second Police Officer who I described as an Inspector
who was wearing the regulation jacket and things, again a
similar sort of incident that we were shouting.    There
was probably about half a dozen, perhaps even a dozen
people who were shouting and gesticulating about, "Help
them.”    We couldn't believe they couldn't see what was
going on.    We were eight or ten feet below their vantage
point.    As I said in my statement, I used to sell closed
circuit television systems in a previous job.    I didn't
know the exact detail, but I knew they would have the
benefit of all that.    It just seemed totally
inconceivable that the people in charge, if I could use
that phrase, didn't know what was going on.

What was he doing, as a matter of interest, this
second... - A. The second Inspector, again I have no idea
who he is.

What did you see him do? - A. He was basically stood, if
I remember correctly, one foot on the second step down,
the other foot on the third step, sort of leaning on the
handrail, again looking out at pens 3 and 4.

Had you seen him arrive? - A. No, I didn't see him
arrive.

He just appeared in your vision? - A. It is a case of you
are looking this way one minute and, of course, they
would be behind you and then when you turned round he was
there.   I appreciated that obviously that was where the
control was of what was going on.    This is why I felt it
was best to sit tight and try and draw people's
attention.   There were obviously lots of people helping
down at the radial fence.

The radial fence? - A. The radial fence.

Because you still couldn't see the perimeter? -A. I
could only see the top.
                                                     37

                                                  T. HICKS'




Q. Was this Officer looking towards the Leppings Lane end
   or was he looking somewhere else? - A. No, he was in my
   opinion looking at pens 3 and 4.

Q. How long did he stay there as far as you remember? - A.
   Again, three or four minutes, to my best recollection.

O.'So that would take us, if your timing is right, I think
   you said five to ten minutes before he appeared and
   then another three or four minutes, if we take seven-
   and-a-half minutes that would be just two minutes into
   the game, plus another four minutes. - A. That is
   right.

Q. Which would actually be about the time the match
   finished, wouldn't it? - A. That, in fact, is when I
   have the recollection of the game being stopped.

Q. You do remember? - A. I do remember that quite clearly,
   yes.  As I said in my statement that was when - I have
   good eyesight as well - I felt it was Superintendent
   Greenwood who had stopped the game, even though I did
   not in fact see any video of that where I confirmed it
   until after the 18th when I gave my evidence.

Q. Yes, you have always said that you thought it was the
   same Officer? - A. Yes, again I think I said then again
   he had the light jacket, which is a nonsense, of
   course, when you see the video.  I can't explain that.

Q. By this time presumably you were getting quite
   agitated? - A. Yes.  Obviously I knew Sarah and
   Victoria were there.  It was quite obvious by then that
   there was a major problem, not major any deaths or
   anything, but you can get bruised, bashed, kicked, all
   sorts of things, in a situation like that, and
   obviously I felt responsible for them, even though
   Sarah was 19 and Vicky was 15.  I also, funnily enough,
   felt concerned about Jenny even though I knew she was
   not involved, because she is a bit of a worrier, and I
   thought, "She'll be worrying herself bloody silly if
   she can see what's going on".  There was basically a
   feeling of total frustration, "Why isn't somebody doing
   something?"

Q. Are you saying that at that point which we have now
   reached, when the game was being stopped, nothing was
   being done as far as you could see? - A. As far as I
   could see, yes.

0. Whether something was being done or not is neither here
   nor there, it is what you saw. - A. I have to tell you
   what I saw, sir, yes.  In my opinion then certainly
                                                         38


                                                          HICKS




       very little was being done of what was obviously going
       to need some sort of major rescue operation.

    Q. At that point you still could only see the side fence,
B      and the top of the ...? - A. I could see the side, you
       could see the tops of the heads and perhaps the top
       foot or two feet of ....

    Q. Did you at that point see people coming over the front
       fence? - A. There were people going over the fence.
       Obviously by this time there were lots of people going
       over the top and this was when they were collapsing.
       There was also the serial of Officers that were moved
       out and formed an arc around the goal.   It was obvious
       to me tnat -they thought they had a pitch invasion on
       their hands, even though all the supporters around me
       and myself could see that there was a problem, so
       certainly my view of it was that the initial attempt,
       if you like, or certainly the initial movement of more
       Officers than the ones just on normal duty, was that
       tney were going there to repel a pitch invasion, which
^      it clearly wasn't for anyone who had been to football.

    0. I want to get back for a moment to what you were
       anticipating was actually happening in the pen.   I
       don't know how regular a football attender you are? -
       A. The family, it was our one hobby that we used to all
       do together.   We had been to football grounds all over
       the country.   We had been to Millwall, obviously living
       in London.   Jenny was the original Liverpool supporter,
       and has been for 25 years or so.   I sort of followed on
       about five years behind her I would think.   Originally
       we were what are known as armchair supporters, you
       support from home and you go to the occasional game.

    Q. Do you go behind the goal usually? - A. Well, yes.   In
       fact, funnily enough we had season tickets at Anfield
       and Jenny and I had seats in the stand and the girls
       had seats on the Kop, which is obviously a large
       equivalent of the Leppings Lane terraces.

    0. Seats, did you say, or standing? - A. It is the usual
       proDlem.  Tne girls stood, sorry, on the terraces.   It
       is known at the Kop at Anfield, the same as the Kop at
       the other end, of course, at Hillsborough, but Jenny
       and I had seats.  For really big games often Vicky and
       I would swap.  She would go in the seats with Jenny and
       I would go on the terraces with Sarah.

    Q. You have mentioned this cordon around the goal.  Was
       this cordon of Police Officers on the pitch side of the
       goal or on the other side of the goal? - A. I have seen
       it on the video.  My recollection is that some went
       across behind the goal, some went in a much wider arc,




H
                                                T. HICKS




sort of going across the front.   Obviously by then the
game had stopped, of course.

Your eyes were focussed on this group of Officers,
whatever they were doing.  Could you see any Officers
nearer to the fencing? - A. No.  I think from the angle
I was looking that somebody just stood - with the pitch
being below the level and this type of thing I could
not say for definite ....

You from your own recollection or knowledge, apart from
what you have seen on TV and soforth, you can t
actually say what was happening at the perimeter fence?
- A. No.

And you did not see the gates either so we might as
well dispose of that? - A. No, I could not see the
gates, no, definitely not.  Even when I went on the
pitch I have no recollection of the gates, because
obviously I was concentrating on the girls.

I know there was an exchange of words with this
Inspector, and I don't think it is going to help us
      A. To be fair I would rather we did not go into
that, because the press obviously make more of that
than the real thrust of what was the problem.

That is right, I don't think it makes any difference,
so we will just forget that. - A. That was an aside as
far as I was concerned.       t

I think you said he stayed there for three or four
minutes? - A. Something ....

Something of that order, and do you recollect when he
left? Had the game finished or was it at the same
time? - A. I don't even remember him going.  This is
the problem I have got.  Obviously, having been through
a lot of evidence since some of the times do seem a
little bit adrift.

Either when he left or shortly thereafter you decided -
you moved, I think? - A. I had started to move down the
terraces because obviously there was still quite a
crowd on my side of the radial fence, so I couldn't see
clearly through it at all spots.  I was obviously
concerned for Sarah and Vicky's welfare so I started to
move down to the corner.

I think it is towards the stand, isn't it?- A. Towards
there, yes, but into the corner of where the radial
fence comes across, of course.  I was moving a fair way
across the terraces.
I see.  You were moving towards the centre? - A. Yes.
Would it be easier if I went and pointed?

Yes, it would be, because you know exactly where you
went.  (The witness used the diagram to illustrate
his evidence) - A. I am not sure whether there is
another fence here or not.

No, I don't think there is. - A. In that case I was
moving across the terrace in this direction.    I knew
Sarah and Vicky would be about- tEere somewhere.

So you were actually trying to get towards pen 3 on the
inside? - A. Yes, I was this side of the radial fence
and obviously going to try and render assistance and to
make sure they were okay.  It was at that stage when I
saw, I understood Victoria to be passed over the top.
It has since been proved by video evidence that she
actually was brought into here out through that gate.
I would be somewhere about here, I should think, at
that time.  I then doubled back and I think I went
through gate 1 onto the pitch.

I think we have got a picture of the terraces, but we
will come back to that in a minute.  You actually saw
her being moved?  You thought she was coming over the
front, but you have just told me that you now believe
that it may well have been over the side? - A. It is my
recollection she still went over the perimeter fence
but obviously I have to accept what the West Midlands
Police have shown me, and this, of course, illustrates
the difficulty of the angles and the parallax effect of
when you are looking down at something.

You then followed her out, so to speak, onto the pitch?
- A. That is right, yes.  I wasn't absolutely sure it
was Victoria.  I was just about 75 per cent.  She had
some quite distinctive boots on.

Can you remember whether an ambulance had already
arrived by then? - A. Yes.  In fact, I think that was
the thing that finally triggered the real concern.   My
best recollection of the timing, when I started to
leave my position was when the ambulance came out at
the far end, the St. John's one, the one that went
behind the goal.  That was the final trigger, I think.

That made you move? - A. That I knew there was ....

Something, yes.  By extraordinary coincidence in fact
both girls were laid next to each other, weren't they?
- A. That is right, yes.
                                               T. HICKS




That was not planned in any way .... - A. No.  It took
me a couple of minutes obviously to find them.  I say a
couple of minutes, it probably was a couple of minutes.

A passage of time? - A. Yes.  Obviously, my best
recollection is Victoria was just actually being laid
down as I got there.  Sarah was already on the pitch.

Sarah was already there? - A. Yes.  Sarah was laid sort
of parallel with the touchline, and Vicky was 45
degrees into the ....

I think we know his name because you identified him, it
was Dr. Flenley who was helping Sarah at that point? -
A. Yes, there were four or five people.  The reason Dr.
Flenley sticks out, of course, is that it was quite
obvious he had medical experience.  Myself and I
believe it was an off-duty first-aider, I can't
remember which - it does come out in the statements -
we were seeing to Victoria and Dr. Flenley and one or
two others were attending to Sarah.  We did swap around
quite a bit.  At one time I was not actually doing
anything.  Dr. Flenley was shouting for suction
equipment - there was a problem clearing their throats
- and I was trying to get hold of some of that.  There
wasn't any medical equipment available, of course, that
was part of the problem.

Of course, there were a lot of people already around at
that point? - A. Yes, by this time it was a full-scale
tragedy basically.  Everybody was laid everywhere, you
could hardly move.  I can time that, of course, because
as I said in my statement I was actually kneeling down
giving mouth to mouth to Sarah when the ambulance left.

Which ambulance was it? Was it the St. John's? - A. It
was the St. John's.  Victoria and I left in the South
Yorkshire one, the one that went across the front of
the goal.  That is the ambulance that we left in.

That was not the first one that you saw? - A. No, the
first one was clearly the St. John's one because as he
was trying to leave the ground it ran over my toes.   I
was kneeling down and they have a twin wheel on the
back which sticks out a bit.  Obviously the driver
didn't know, and we had to move some chap's hand or he
would have run over that as well.

That was not the ambulance that Victoria was in? - A.
No, that was the one that went behind the goal.

Then we know that you had this terrible dilemma, what
should you do, and I think you did the right thing, if
I may say so.  I think we will leave the story at this
                                                T. HICKS




point but I now want to come back to the timings for a
moment.  Before we do that, shall we just put this shot
up, because I think this is a good view of the
terracing where you moved along? That is right, isn't
it? - A. Yes.

 You were moving away from us, so to speak, when you
*were explaining your movement? - A. I may have been
 further up the terrace than where this was taken from.

 I don't mean that this was the location where you were
 .... - A. No, it is very similar.  I was higher and
 further back, if you like, from where the camera shot
 is, but yes, I was moving down almost parallel with the
 perimeter fence, towards the corner, where the radial
 fence is there.




              /Q. In fact, you got past
f   \
                                                                      43



                                                    T. HICKS


            Q.    In fact, you had got past the gate, you saw what you
                  thought was Victoria? - A. Yes.

            Q.    And you retraced your steps and went onto the pitch? -
        B         A. That is why I remember distinctly having to double
                  back again because I was in a bit of a panic as to how
                  to get through as quickly as possible.

            Q.'   Of course.

                       MR. JONES:   That is C353, sir.

            Q.         THE CORONER:  It is not very important, but it
                  illustrates your movements, so to speak. - A. Yes.

            Q.    Obviously the timing is very important.  I think there
                  is no point in beating about the bush, it is an
                  exceedingly important matter.  - A. Yes.

            Q.    I think I have got to really put several of your
                  accounts with regard to timing to you so that we can
                  see whether we can pin it down any further. - A. Yes.
        D
            Q.    It is difficult to know where to start, but today I
                  think you said that your first level of concern
                  occurred between 2.35 and 2.45, I think you said, and
                  then this man in the grey suit who appeared distressed
                  I think you timed at about 14.50 or thereabouts, is it
                  not? - A. Something like that.

            Q.    We have worked our way through it.  If you say a chap
                  is standing for 3 or 4 minutes, it is very difficult.
                  You may be right, you may be wrong because time is
                  difficult to estimate. - A.  One of my problems is
                  that I would have said the timescales were shorter
                  than they were.  Some of the timings when the West
                  Midlands video unit came on I just did not believe,
                  sort of 3.18, 3.21.  It just did not seem that length
                  of time at all and, of course, that shatters your
                  confidence in terms of trying to set timescales.

            Q.    But you can understand, I am sure. - A. Yes, that is
                  it important.

            Q.    That one has to be, within the limits of one's
                  ability, as accurate as you can? - A. Yes, I
                  appreciate that.

            Q.    As you have already heard, you have been here before,
                  we always try and pin people down as to time. - A.
                  That is fine, carry on, yes.

            Q.    I suppose you would agree with me too that on            the
                  whole the nearer to the event the more likely the




        H
                                 T. HICKS


accuracy of recollection, would you agree with that? -
A. The nearer the event, yes, probably.  This is the
point I was just saying.  I would have agreed with you
normally, but obviously as the evidence has come out
then the recollection, if you like, has gone the other
way - how could I have thought it was only that time
when it was very much longer.

This is the problem. - A. That is right.  It is a
mixture of what I know to be evidence now which I
would not have thought at the time.

I think you gave a statement, the first statement you
gave, on 15th April? - A. Yes, it was.

Have you got a copy of it? You obviously have a very
comprehensive file. - A. I think so.

If you have a copy you can use your own. - A. This is
the one that was taken in the gymnasium you mean?

I do not know where it was taken, but it is a
relatively short statement.  I think it must have
been. - A. Yes it was, if it is the same one as I have
got.

If you look at that, can you find where you describe
where you stood - "... at the side directly under the
Police box..."?  Can you find that? - A. Yes, "at the
side directly under the Police box".

You have found that? - A. Yes.

If you could read to yourself first of all the next 6
to 8 lines on my printed version. - A. Yes, right.

Is that a correct recollection of what you actually
saw at that time? - A. That is the problem I have got
now.  I have to say "Yes" because I would not have
said so at the time.  Bear in mind we are sitting in a
mortuary and we had just identified our two daughters.

I know, it is very hard. - A. But I have to say yes
presumably it was.

I think that it is only fair that we should then read
it, and perhaps you would read it from, "From my
position          A. Yes.

    "From my position I could clearly see that there
    was a dividing fence from my ...."

It is hand-written.
                                 T. HICKS


Shall we give you a typed version of it because it is
a lot easier for you, and the second page as well.  I
am sorry I did not realise you had the hand-written
copy. - A. This is the original Police Officer's copy.

It is much easier to read it from the typescript. - A.
Yes.

     "From my position I could clearly see that there
     was a dividing fence from my side of the standing
     area and the central standing area.  The game
     started and everything seemed all right.  Where I
     was standing I could clearly see the central pen.
     The game was about 4/5 minutes old.  I could
     clearly see a problem in the central pen.  I
     could see people pushing and shoving and
     obviously trying to get out of the pen."

Keep going?

Yes, let us go on to the end, the next paragraph
really.  - A. Yes.

     "I could see people being pushed both downwards
     into the fencing and sideways into the dividing
     fence.  I remember seeing an old man with a grey
     suit on and his tongue was hanging out.  I turned
     towards the Police box and saw an Officer with
     gold braid on his hat.  I shouted at him 'Can't
     you see what's going on?'  That Officer, I think,
     ran onto the pitch and spoke to the referee.   I
     don't know if this was the officer I saw
     initially."

In fact, you are now confident that this was the
Officer? - A. Yes.

But it would be right, would it not, that if this is a
correct recollection, then the events which you have
described occurred considerably later than what you
have told me today? - A. Yes.

That is right, is it not? - A. Yes, I accept that.

I am going to take you through all the other ones as
well because it is only fair that I should do that,
because I think you then gave another statement, if I
can find it.  This does not look like a statement of
the West Midlands Police.  I think it looks like a
statement which you wrote yourself, and I will pass it
to you.  - A. If it is the one I did myself, I have
got it.
                                                              46




                                               T. HICKS


    Q.   I cannot find a date on it at the moment.  It is
         headed "Statement from Mr. T. Hicks, Hillsborough
         Disaster".  Have you got it? - A. Yes.

B   Q.   Is it typed your version? - A. Yes, in fact I did it
         on a typewriter, well my secretary.

    Q.   That is fine.  My version begins on the top of page 3,
         and it starts, "A little before kick-off...."  Can you
         find that? - A. Yes, "A little before the kick-off,
         approximately 14.50 ...." yes.

              MR. MANNING:  I am sorry, there are two things.
         First of all, is there a date for this statement?

               THE CORONER: No, I have not been able to find
         that.
    Q.   Have you got a date? - A. No, I have not, in fact.   I
         was asked to prepare a statement.   Again it was a case
         of the state of mind you are in.   I actually wrote
         this up and had it typed up by my secretary.

    Q.   She did not type a date on it? - A. It was one of
         those things.  I had a couple of goes at it, I think.
         It would have been prior to 18th May, because this was
         produced before I gave evidence to Taylor.

              MR. MANNING:  That is very helpful, thank you.
         The other thing is if Mr. Hicks is going to read from
         it, bearing in mind that none of us have seen it at
         all and our writing speeds are relatively slow, could
         he go a little bit slower.

              THE CORONER: Do you want to go over anything
         which he has already read, or do you have that?

                MR. MANNING:   No thank you.

                MR. RUSSELL:   Yes, please.

              THE CORONER:     Mr. Russell says "Yes".    All of it,
         or what part?

              MR. RUSSELL:  I took a verbatim note, I think, up
         until the words "4/5 minutes old" - after that.

                THE CORONER:   Could you just re-read that? - A.
         Yes.

              MR. RUSSELL:  Perhaps Mr. Hicks could read from
         the words, "The game started ...."

              THE CORONER: Yes.
         You do not have to read at dictation speed, but just a




H
IS
                                                                 47

     A
                                                T. HICKS


              little bit slower.  It is hard, particularly for Mr.
              Russell who has a job hearing because he is so far
              away. - A. I am sorry, where do you want me to start?

     B        Just start, "The game started
              the page. - A. Yes.
                                                  at the bottom of


                   "The game started and everything seemed all
                   right. Where I was standing I could clearly see
                   the central pen.  The game was about 4/5 minutes
                   old.  I could clearly see a problem in the
                   central pen.  I could see people pushing and
                   shoving and obviously trying to get out of the
                   pen.  I could see people being pushed both
                   downwards into the fencing and sideways into the
                   dividing fencing.  I remember seeing an old man
                   with a grey suit on and his tongue was hanging
                   out.  I turned towards the Police box and saw an
                   Officer with gold braid on his hat.  I shouted to
                   him 'Can't you see what's going on?'  That
                   Officer, I think, ran onto the pitch and spoke to
                   the referee.  I don't know if this was actually
                   the Officer I saw initially.”

         Q.   Then just so that it is clear, the next sentence deals
              with the fact that you knew your girls were in that
              section? - A. Yes.

         Q.   And you went onto the pitch? - A. Yes.

         Q.   I have paraphrased it.   If you turn to the other one,
              the one that you typed, which probably sequentially is
              the next statement along, is it not, even though we do
              not know the exact date of it? - A. Yes.  This would
              have been perhaps 10 days afterwards, something like
              that.

         Q.   So that we get the context of it, perhaps you could
               start with "I took up a position about the second
               barrier from the rear".   This is what you have told
               me, but read it through  first to make sure that you
               are happy with it, and I think we need to read down to
               the word "pitch", which is the end of the paragraph
               basically. - A. Yes.

                   "I took up a position about the second barrier
                   from the rear in front of the floodlight tower
                   and to the left of the Police box, see Exhibit
                   A."

              Exhibit A was a photograph I attached.

         Q.   Yes, we do not need to worry about that. - A.   Yes.




     H
                                                            48



                                          T. HICKS


            "I stood in this position drinking my coffee,
            reading the programme and listening for team news
            etc. on the small transistor radio I had in my
            pocket.  A little before the kick-off
            (approximately 14.50 p.m.) I noticed there were
            large numbers of people in the centre sections.
            I now understand these to be known as pens
            numbers 3 and 4.  From my position on the terrace
            I could quite clearly see the dividing fence and
            could see several people crushed against this
            side fence, many clearly in some distress.   One
            in particular, an old man, I believe wearing a
            light grey coat or possibly suit, had his eyes
            closed.  People were being pulled from the rear
            of the pens up into the seating area of the West
            Stand.  People were also being pulled/assisted
            over the dividing fence and some youths were
            scrambling over the pitch-side fence but were
            being repelled/arrested by Police Officers on the
            pitch."

Q.   Then I think you describe the senior Police Officer. -
     A. Yes, do you want me to read that?

          MR. KING:  Sir, it would be in context, I submit.
     If the next paragraph is read out, it would fit in
     with the same sequence as the previous statement.

Q.          THE CORONER:   If you would, yes. I agree. - A.
     Yes.

            "A senior Police Officer was standing on the
            landing of the Police box, I would estimate some
            10 feet away from my position, and I called
            several times to him trying to attract his
            attention to the crushing. (I believe he had gold
            braid on the peak of his hat and was wearing a
            light-coloured anorak).   He ignored me completely
            and continued to observe the scene for some
            minutes until he walked down the steps and round
            the segregation barrier underneath the South
            Stand. (I believe he was the Officer who ran onto
            the pitch and told the referee to stop the game
            some few minutes later.)"




                              /Q.   So in this statement.
                                                             49


                                                           T. HICKS

    Q. So in this statement you have in fact timed it about
       fifteen minuted 'earlier than you did in your first
       statement? - A. Yes, that is right.

    Q. I do not know whether it is necessary to read them
       but when you were giving evidence at Lord Justice
B      Taylor's Inquiry you also had your timings there.
       Perhaps we ought to just take one, page seven I
       think.  Have you got a copy? - A. I have most of it.

    Q. Page seven.  I think if you read to yourself from C
       where it begins "At about 2.30...”. Have you found
       that? - A. Yes.

    Q. If you would read down to the bottom of E when you
       are ready? - A. Right.

    Q. The reason why I am doing this, Mr. Hicks, is to try
       and be fair to you because if I only read the first
       one it would seem somewhat unfair so I am trying to
       be fair? - A. Fine. So you want me to start at B?
    Q. C I think, Mr. Hicks? - A. It reads:

            "At about 2.30 when I looked across, it
            was obviously starting to get quite busy
            then, and I kept looking over because
            obviously I hadn't realised when I had
            come round the side and I didn't, in
            fact, until later, that there was what
            looked like a solid barrier...."

      That is obviously the radial fence:

            "...between Pen N o . 4, I think   -the
            nearest one to me --- .

            Q. 3, in fact.  A.   3, I am sorry, Pen
            No. 3, and the one that I was in - the
            comer.   I would say at around quarter to
            three, something like that, it was
            starting to look extremely busy and
            people were showing obvious signs of
            distress then.

            Q. You were aware of that - this is
            before the teams have come out, is it?
            A. Yes, they had come out.

            Q. They had had their warm-up but -       A.
            They were warming up.

            Q. Before they had formally come out.
            A. Before they had formally come out.
            think during the warm-up - I can't be
            absolutely certain, to be fair, but it




H
                                                       50


                                                     T. HICKS

         was obviously looking extremely packed
         t h e n ."

Q. I think it is Mr. Collins who was questioning you at
   that point.  What meant by formally I do not know? -
   A. This is the thing I was saying earlier where they
   come round and have this warm up, kick around, and
   then they go back in and usually about ten minutes to
   three they formally come back out.  For a big game
   they would line up, swap banners, toss the coin for
   which team kicks which direction.

Q. I think the teams did come out twice but I think the
   first time was about twenty past two.  It was very,
   very early on.

     MR. KING:   I was going to suggest, sir, that the
witness could read on for the moment in this transcript
because he actually mentions a time immediately where he
stopped.  If you read on a little further, it is not far
on, he fits that time in with speaking to the Officer.

     THE CORONER:   I am trying to restrict the amount of
reading but I have no objection.

Q. Would you carry on with that? - A. "...it was looking
   extremely packed then", do I carry on from there:

         "Q. Did you see at some stage people
         apparently getting out of those pens,
         climbing over the side fences? A. Yes,
         at around ten minutes to three, as best I
         can put it together, people were being
         pulled over the side fences.  I could see
         fairly clearly from where I was people
         crushed up against the fence and
         similarly you could see some young boys
         were, in fact, climbing over the top, and
         I also believe some went over the pitch
         side fence as well at around that time.

         Q. This is again, is it, before the
         formal entry of the teams, if I ma y put
         it in that way, which we know was about
         five to three? - A. I think it was.   I
         cannot be absolutely certain, I must be
         honest, but I think it was around ten to
         three, yes."

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, did you want any more?

     MR. KING:  Obviously there is no purpose in reading
every word out but if I can read out the next question:

         "Did you begin to feel concerned because
         your knew your daughters, of course, were
         in these pens?"
                                                        T. HICKS

Then if you go to C there is the reference to the Police
Control Box.  Perhaps all I want the witness to be examined
on is the fact that he links him speaking to the Officer at
the time he is now talking about.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Would you begin at page eight? -
     A. It reads:

           "Did you feel begin to feel concerned..."

Q. No, I do not think we need read that paragraph
   because we know that you were concerned? - A. Yes.

Q. Go to C? - A. Yes.    It reads:

           "Q. You were standing, as you told us,
           fairly close to the Police Control Box. -
           A. Yes, that's correct.

           Q. Were you aware of a certain amount of
           movement of Police Officers to and from
           that Control Box? - A. Yes, I was.  Yes.

           Q. Did you speak to or see any Officer in
           particular at about this time? - A. Yes,
           there was one Officer who came out of the
           Police box and there is a set of steps
           with a landing at the top and stood on
           that landing looking out into the general
           area of Pens 3 and 4, and I would say he
           stood there for a couple or three
           minutes, and myself and a couple of other
           people around me were calling to him,
           couldn't he see that, you know, people
           were being crushed? You know, we
           obviously got - swear words started
           coming out as well, I am sure, at several
           spots, 'Can't you bloody see what's going
           on?' and that type of thing.

           Q. Can you help us to identify that
           Officer at all? - A. I think so.   I think
           he had a light-coloured anorak.  I think
           it was light brown and I am almost
           certain it was the man who actually ran
           on the pitch and, in fact, stopped the
           game.

           Q. So it was a senior Officer? - A. He
           had gold braid on his peak, I remember.

           Q. He had a flat cap? - A. He had a flat
           cap and he had gold braid on his hat, I
           am sure...."

Q. I think we can stop there because that is...
       MR. RUSSELL: I would be grateful, since we have read
so much, if the witness would just read to the end of that
ans w e r.

Q.        THE CORONER:       Read to the end of the answer? -
     A. The answer:

             "A. He had a flat cap and he had gold
             braid on his hat, I am sure. I think, as
             I said, if I could see some photographs -
             obviously we didn't video anything that
             went out on television on the day,
             otherwise that would probably help but,
             as I said, I am sure he had - because I
             thought at the time it was a little
             strange for him to have a non-issue
             anorak, if you like, on the top."

Q. M y main concern really is the timing basically and
   the differences? ? - A. Yes.

     MR. RUSSELL: So far   as timing is concerned, of
course, you will not overlook the fact that later on in the
examination-in-chief exactly the same sequence is dealt
with again by Mr. Hicks on page eleven at letter D when Mr.
Collins returns to the subject.  Perhaps for completeness
those few questions could be dealt with as well?

       THE CORONER:        Yes, there is quite a lot about timing.

     MR. RUSSELL:    Letter D is a question beginning,         "I
would just like to be clear about this".

Q.          THE CORONER:     Yes, paragraph D on page 11? - A.
     Yes:

             "Q. I would just like to be clear about
             this.  You say about 10-to-3 people were
             starting to be pulled over the side
             fence? - A. Yes.

            Q. Then the time when the Officer with
            the gold braid was there and you were
            talking to him, that was when? - A. That
            would b e ....

            Q. Before kick-off or after? - A. That
            would be around 10 minutes, 5-to-3 as we
            were leading up to the kick-off."

Q. As I say, there are several more references to timing
   in this but I think really the question I want to ask
   you is this:  it is terribly difficult for you I
   realise but in these accounts which we have read not
   only do we have different timings to what you have
   told me but we also have pitch events which you
   appear to have noticed? - A. Right.
                                                           53


                                                         T. HICKS


    Q. Whereas today it seemed, if I have understood you
        correctly, that you couldn't actually recollect
        anything that happened on the pitch.   I have said
        this to many witnesses, it does not matter tuppence
        to me what the answer is because all I am trying to
B      do is find out so far as the witness is able as to
       what he believes to be right, bearing in mind of
        course that we are now almost two years on? -A. The
       .first statement, as I said, I cannot account for the
        fact that I said three or four minutes other than we
       weren't in particularly good shape at     that time. I
        can't help too much with that.   As I said,   the
        problem I have got is that the more I    have got
        involved with the evidence the more I    have realised
        that the time scales were longer than you would
       normally expect.   It would be m y submission, if I can
        use that term, that the timings given at the Taylor
        Inquiry were probably the best compromise that we
       will get on the grounds that obviously that was not
       too soon but even then it was very, very       difficult.

    Q. Because in some respects, you see, as we look at the
       statements the timings get longer as we go along, in
       other words, the acuteness of events begins earlier
       as we move across time? - A. Yes, the statement that
       I made, the one that you asked me to read, the one
       that was undated, I did that in isolation before I
       had looked at television and as best I can remember
       probably ten days or fourteen days after the event.

    Q. I am not trying to be unkind to you, do you
       understand? - A. I appreciate the relevance of your
       questions.

    Q. I am sure you will appreciate that it is exceedingly
       important? - A. Yes, I appreciate that and I am sorry
       I cannot help any more.

         THE CORONER:   We will pause for lunch and we will
    come back at two.

                        LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
                                                  T. HICKS


     THE CORONER:'  Mr. King, I will let you go last.      I
hope you are happy with that?

     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.

             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Mr. Hicks, you have given your evidence about the timing
of events this morning when asked by the Coroner, and I
am not going to go over it again.   Can I just summarise
the position which was reached at the end in this way,
that in the statement which you made on the 15th of April
you said when the game was four or five minutes old that
you started to be alarmed, to put it in summary? - A.
Yes.   I would like, if I may, just explain about that
statement and the circumstances it was taken under.    You
will appreciate we had had a pretty horrific afternoon.
With hindsight I shouldn't have given a statement, as
many of the other families chose not to do.   If any of
those statements are unreliable, then that would be the
one which I would obviously go for, for the reasons I
have just said.

It is my belief that the 1.50 time which I gave to Taylor
and, to some extent, today, that is my belief as best I
can.   Obviously I had great difficulty with timing.

You obviously mean 2.50? - A. I'm sorry, 2.50.

You have given this explanation before and everyone can
understand exactly what you are saying about that but
what it boils down to is that in the statement of the
15th of April the timing is roundabout five past three,
and when you were first asked about it today you started
at about 2.35? - A. Right.

So there is a half hour gap? - A. Yes.

The only thing I want to ask you is just to amplify what
happened at about the time of kick-off.   I want you to
look at the sequence of photographs which have in fact
been produced at one stage earlier during the Inquests,
but I am going to ask you to do it again, since you have
dealt with the question of timing and that is the only
reason I am asking you to do this.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I am not sure how far these
photographs have got into the jury's bundle.   They are
numbered C.326 to C.330.

     THE CORONER:   You will remember the photographs
when you see them straight away, but they are not in the
jury's bundle.
                                                 T. HICKS


     MR. PAYNE:   'Well, Mr. Griffiths will put them up on
the screen.   Unfortunately some of them haven't come out
very well and they do need some study.

     Now that is 326, numbered AGJ 1/2A:

Now, Mr. Hicks, I would be particularly grateful if you
would just help the jury to find and look at yourself in
these various photograph, to see what the people are
doing in front of the pens and also what one can see
about the gates into the pens, do you follow? - A. Do you
mean you want me to tell you what I saw on the
photographs, or what I saw on the day.

I want you to look at what can be seen in the photographs
because the timing in these photographs are probably more
reliable than our memory, if you don t mind me saying so.
- A. Right.

Now this particular photograph, it is very difficult to
see the gates but there is a better copy of it, which I
am sure you have seen, Mr. Hicks, and it is exhibited at
the back of the Taylor Report.   I am going to hand this
copy in and if there are any other spare copies so the
jury could have a look at it I would be grateful if
people could get them out.

     THE CORONER:   We won't give this an exhibit number.
We are merely looking at it because it is easier to see.

     MR. PAYNE:   It is the same photograph that is on
the screen but it is a better print.

     THE CORONER:   In fact we have got the original of
the one on the screen and we can certainly see the time
on the original.

     MR. PAYNE:   Now, Mr. Hicks, you see the timing on
the scoreboard? - A. Yes, 14.59.

If one looks down to the fence, in the foreground you can
see quite clearly and easily gate 5 open? -A. Yes.  Well,
gates 3, 4 and 5 are open.

You can see that and one can see - I don't know whether
the jury has had     a chance to   study this photograph
before, to follow what you are saying that gates 3, 4 and
5 are all clearly open at one minute to three, 14.59.
It is not clear on the acetate and the only photograph on
which it can clearly be seen is in that print, which is
at the back of the Taylor Report.   When each member of
the jury has   had   a chance to   see it,perhaps they would
be kind just to share it so this can now be seen.     It
has to be looked at carefully, to look along the fence.
                                                     T. HICKS


Gate 5 is in the foreground and then gate A, one can pick
it out and then one can see gate 3 also, the "3" can be
seen.  It is just about parallel with the far end of the
goalpost as one looks at the top of the goalpost as we
look at it and then over to the right, you can just see
the square box.

Mr. Hicks, can you go on to the next one in this sequence
which is 327? - A. Is that in here as well?

No, that is not in the Taylor Report.    That is in your
bundle.   We haven't got a print of this, the only thing
we have got is this acetate that is on the screen.     In
this one it is less easy to see.    First of all, looking
at the timing on the scoreboard, which is shown as 15.01.
Now we understand that this timing could be one minute
wrong.   However, if one looks along the line of the
fencing in the foreground one can then find gate 5 open?
You can just make out the square of 5? - A. Yes.

If.one looks further up, one goes along the front of the
line of fencing, one can come to the place where gate A
is, and it is not so easy to see. - A. It does look as
though it is open, yes.

If one then goes up to where one knows one will find gate
3, I think it is possible - Sergeant Griffiths is
pointing, it is very faint...   It is certainly not so
easy to see. - A. I would neither agree nor disagree
there.

One can certainly make out 5 and A? - A. Yes.

Three is more doubtful. -A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Are you saying that A is open?

     MR. PAYNE:     Yes, A is certainly open and 5 is
certainly open.

     THE CORONER:     I can see 5.

     MR. PAYNE:   But 3 is faint.   We think we can see
it but it is certainly arguable.   I think it may be
necessary to get a magnifying glass for this exercise.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, 5 is clearly open:

We will get you the magnifying glass in a minute.   Can
you see it? - A. I can see the first two, I would assume
the third one is in a similar...
                                                            57



                                                      T. HICKS


              CORONER:'  You have agreed... - A. I have agreed
     the first two, 5 and A, yes.   I think even with a
     magnifying glass I wouldn't...

Q.        MR. PAYNE:  There is certainly a congestion of
     people at where we know gate 3 is, isn't there?   There
     is a little knot of people at that point? - A. Yes.  Are
     you asking me would I be prepared to concede...

Q. No, I am not asking you to concede anything.   Everybody
   can see for themselves and we agree it is difficult to
   make out.   It is not a competition.   Can you then go on
   to the next one, which is 328?   This time fortunately it
   is more clear.  The 5 on the acetate is in the middle of .
   the streaky line down the page. - A. Yes, 3, A and 5 are
   open.

Q. Yes, they are all clear.     The next one in the sequence
   is 329.

           MR. PAYNE:  Sir, may I suggest for the purposes of
     the jury's study, it may be helpful when they have these
     acetates and have a chance to study them in their own
     retiring room that they are then supplied with a
     magnifying glass so they can make their own study at the
     time:

Q. Now 329.

          THE CORONER:   We have got some more here which
     shows gate 3 wide open;  15.03 on the clock, 15.02
     corrected.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:   If we can go on to the 329, which is on
     the screen now.   The first problem is to try and make
     out the time on the clock, which I think can be seen. We
     think it is 1505.

          MR. PAYNE:   Sir, that was the time that was given
     when this was put in evidence.

0.        THE CORONER:   Can you see it, Mr. Hicks? - A. Yes.
     I wouldn't like to say whether it is 3 or 5, but yes, I
     can see it.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:   Can you see the gates here?   This is
     slightly out of focus, but one can find out where they
     should be. - A. Yes, 3, A and 5.

Q.        THE CORONER:  Mr. Hicks, this is the original.   It
     is easier to see on there.   It is quite clearly 5? - A.
     Yes, 15.05 and yes, you can see all three gates are open.
                                                 T. HICKS




When I say the original,   the one we made a copy from. -
A. Yes.

      MR. PAYNE:   15.06 is number 330 and that is the
 one that is on the screen now.  Can you make any
 comment about that, Mr. Hicks? - A. Well, the gates are
-open, the Police Officers are on the pitch.

You agree the gates can be seen to be open? - A. Yes,
on the original, and you can just about see it on here,
yes.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sergeant Griffiths, what I would like
to do again is now to run through this sequence again
one after the other, so if you could prepare to do
that, please.

The Coroner has another photograph which he is going to
have copied at 15.02, which does show that gate 3 is
open. - A. Right.

Mr. Hicks are you able then to summarise it, to agree
that these photographs, certainly over the period of
time shown here, which is from 14.59 to 15.06, gates 5,
4 and 3 can all be seen to be open, with the exception
of gate 3 at 15.01, which is not clear on this
photograph? - A. I accept that, yes.

I would like you to watch the screen with the Jury
while Sergeant Griffiths just runs through this
sequence of photographs to see what developed during
that time period.  I would like you in particular to
look at the crowd of people in front of the fence, that
is on the pitch side of the perimeter fence, to see
what develops during this period.  At the end of it I
am going to ask you, Mr. Hicks, so that you know,
whether this corresponds with what you remember
happening during that time. - A. If I could help, while
we have been looking at the photographs - again, I will
have to address this to you, Dr. Popper - I noticed a
comment in my statement on page 5 where I have said
from 15.05 to 15.10, and I am talking about the
Constables on the pitch holding people back and
containing them in that area, and that is my
recollection of 328, 329, 330 photographs, and the
times therefore aren't that far apart, sort of 15.05,
15.10 and you are saying 15.03, 15.06.

Okay.   Well if you just follow this sequence through.

     MR. PAYNE:   Mr. Griffiths, I would like you just
to put the sequence of photographs up one after the
other so that the Jury can just see the situation
develop.
                                                             59



                                                          T. HICKS




               (The photographs were shown on the screen
               in the following order: C3^6. timed at 2*759,
               Cj^7 timed at l-minute-past-3,
B              C328, 3-minutes-past-3, C3£9, 5-minutes-past-3,
               C330, 6-minutes-past-3 . )

    Q .-        MR. PAYNE:   That last photograph shows the cordon
           that you were referring to? - A. Yes.

    Q. You thought that the Police were stopping people going
       onto the pitch, did you? - A. Yes.  I was under the
       impression then that the Police were responding as if
       it was a pitch invasion.  At the time I was on about
       earlier, when I said about 10-minutes-to-3, none of
       this was taking place.

    Q. No, certainly not. - A. I am talking about what I could
       see at the side fence.

    0. Ouite - this sequence only begins at just before 3
       o'clock.  Thank you very much, Mr. Hicks.
D
    Q.        THE CORONER:   I think it might be worth, as I
         have mentioned it, and it gives us another time .... -
         A. I have just noticed the photograph of the laddie who
         streaked on the pitch - 323 is the number - I remember
         that happening as well.

    0. Do you? - A. And the Police actually grabbing hold of
       nim.  It is timed on here as 15.15.  I remember it
       happening and can't quite fit it into the sequence.

    Q. It is a question of fitting it in, is that right? - A.
       Yes, but I remember him being grabbed by one or two
       Officers and taken off, because I thought at the time
       now ridiculous, with what's going on.  If I could just
       elaborate on the point I made to Mr. Payne, because I
       don't think this is the statement he's got, the one
       which I said to you I made privately about two weeks
       after, that sequence of events does seem to fit in with
       what I am talking about at the top of page 5, which
       would bring me more back to the 10-minutes-to-3, rather
       than the original statement I made in the gymnasium,
       because otherwise it couldn't have happened would still
       have been at 15.05 - you are going to tell me
       otherwise.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS

    Q. Not at all, Mr. Hicks, but is not the position this,
       and this is certainly no criticism, you have given a
       number of different accounts as to time, that is right,
       isn't it? - A. I don't think I would accept different




H
                                                      60


                                                   T. HICKS




   accounts.  Slight variations I accept because I have
   been unable to be absolutely precise.

Q. As you have just said to Mr. Payne, you started off by
    talking about a time when you were first alarmed after
    3 o'clock, about 4-rainutes-past-3, and you have ended
  . up today with that particular point at about 2.35 or
    slightly past that time.   Those are two different times
    in the context of the period we are talking about? - A.
    They are also two different degrees of concern as well.

Q. I think you said in relation to your first statement
   made on 15th April that that was the first time you
   became concerned because up to then everything had been
   going all right? - A. I have to accept that is what the
   statement infers, yes.

Q. Please don't think for a moment that this is any
   criticism.  I am just trying to establish where we are.
   A number of different accounts as to time, we are
   agreed about that now.  You make no reference to any
   independent point from which time can be determined,
   that is right as well, isn't it? - A. I thought I had
   just given some assistance with that by seeing the
   sequence of events we have just looked at.

Q. That is post 3 o'clock when things had already started
   to happen.  We are now dealing with the build-up, do
   you follow? - A. With respect, Mr. Isaacs, I was not
   looking at my watch, there were things on my mind.   I
   had two daughters I was very concerned about and it is
   not the easiest of circumstances to be precise about.

Q. Mr. Hicks, that is exactly the point that I am seeking
   to make, and as I said no criticism.  You would be a
   superman if you could do anything better than do what
   you have done.  The point that I seek to ask you about
   is this, you have told us that you have this great
   difficulty with regard to time, and everybody accepts
   that. - A. With precision of time, not with the overall
   timings.

Q. Well we know you were there. - A. Yes.

Q. And we know that things happened whilst you were there,
   but it is right, isn't it, that there must be great
   uncertainty about any of the times that you have given?
   There is bound to be. - A. There has to be a degree of
   error, yes.  I would not use the term great uncertainty
   either.


                /Q. Uncertainty? - A.
                                 T. HICKS


Uncertainty? - A. A degree of uncertainty.

You say that the most unreliable is the statement you
first made on 15th April, but it is all a question of
degrees of unreliability? - A. I take issue with that.
If you compare the statements in the evidence that I
gave to Taylor and the times in my statement, there is
a high degree of consistency in what you are
inferring.

But even as between the times you gave to Taylor and
the times you have given today there are differences?
- A. Mr. Isaacs, have you ever lost your children?
You must appreciate it was 10 o'clock at night, I had
spent all afternoon trying to save the lives of my
daughters, my wife and I had just identified two
bodies in carrier bags, we had been treated abysmally
outside and you are expecting me to be precise about
times?

You see that is just the point, Mr. Hicks.     Please
understand, as far as I am concerned and those I
represent  are concerned, we have the greatest of
sympathy.    That is not what I am saying at all.   I am
not expecting you to be precise.   Nobody in the world
would expect you to be precise and that is exactly the
point I am making to you.   You cannot be precise, can
you? - A.   I cannot be precise, I accept that.

It is all   relatively unreliable? - A. Itake issue
with unreliable;   I accept imprecise.

     MR. ISAACS:   Very well, thank you very much.

          Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Mr. Hicks, to live with the sort of experience you
have faced is beyond words, and you must have lived it
and re-lived it countless times since then? - A. Yes.

You very fairly said that probably for help with
grief, if that is a correct phrase, in the initial
stages you chose not to watch the TV or to see any
videos? - A. Yes.

That, in the making of the statement that you made
about 10 or so days later, you think puts a fairish
sort of complexion on that within the bounds of what
we have been talking about? - A. Right.

Since that time you have been very much involved with
many other families who have suffered in similar ways
to your own family? - A. Correct.
                                    T. HICKS


 It is no secret that you are one of the leaders of, if
 Family Prfc
         Group, that
                 yes. W a y   A * 1 am the Chairman of the

 Thank you.  Obviously you have discussed these events,
 again countless numbers of times, both with individual
 people and in groups of people? - A. Yes, and with
 Police Officers.

And you have had facilities made available to you to
watch whatever film was reasonably available to look
at, photographs that were available, to see
statements? - A. Only in respect of my two daughters
when we did the visual evidence at West Midlands.

It is a question of the assembly of all of that
information, when we have all got these great big clip
files around, these ring~binders.  I am sure that
those who are connected with you have similar volumes,
probably even larger volumes? - A. I have got many
myself.                                           J

Would you accept from me, and I am again associating
myself with Mr. Isaacs in not seeking precision, that
there comes a time when what you saw, what you are
reminded of, and what maybe you even think you saw or
what must have happened begin to verge into one? - A.
That is the problem I have got now.  It was not the
problem I had when I prepared this statement.

But even when you were making the statements and even
when you were giving evidence at the Taylor Inquiry,
you were able, for example, to highlight specific
problems that you do specifically remember, and I am
looking now at words when you dreadfully saw your
daughter, as you thought, being passed out of the top
of somewhere where you now know factually that that
was not factually correct as you believed it to be? -
A. Do you wish me to explain this?

No, because I think you actually did, if I can just
look at those words - "It illustrates the difficulty
of the paralex effect when you are looking down on
something"?  Those are the words you used? - A. Yes.

We are talking about perceptions of things, are we
not, Mr. Hicks, in that respect? You thought you saw
something which ultimately factually turned out not to
be what you thought you had seen? - A. Yes, that is a
factor, but that is something everybody suffered from.
Every witness we have had and we have seen has had
problems with times and perception.
                                T. HICKS


Sure, but in that respect we possibly, if we looked at
some video evidence and stopped the camera, could tell
exactly what time that was and it does not matter
because, with respect, nothing matters in terms of it,
but what I am putting to you is whatever time it was
the paralex effect had caused you to believe that you
had seen something which, in fact, factually you had
not been seen? - A. The paralex effect was that
Victoria obviously came across at the junction between
two fences and, as I said, I did not have as good a
vantage point either then because I was already going
down the terraces.  But, yes, to answer your question,
if I had not known otherwise I would have said here on
oath today that she went over the perimeter fence.

I hope, and I say this, that nobody will suggest that
you have come here to not do everything you can to
establish the true facts.  The difficulty, Mr. Hicks,
is the totality of the situation? - A. Yes, I do
resent the inference of unreliability, though.   Within
the circumstances it is acceptable.

It is perhaps a Court word that is used, Mr. Hicks,
because in different Court circumstances, for example,
the question of a man with gold braid on his cap and
wearing a light-coloured anorak would make that
evidence of identification so totally unreliable that
it just could not go any further, so we are talking
about the totality of the scene that we are trying to
portray? - A. Fine.

          Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Hicks, had you attended a match at Hillsborough
before the semi-final in 1989? - A. Yes, we had been
to the previous 1988 semi-final.

When did you first realise there were radial fences?
Was it in 1988 or 1989, or previously? - A. Previously
in 1988, as I gave evidence to Dr. Popper earlier, we
did in fact leave Pen 3 and go to the other side
through the gate at the back of the radial fence, but
obviously it was just a football fence at that time.

So you knew they were there in 1988? - A. Yes, but to
be fair I had forgotten about them when we went in
1989, and even to the point of when I was trying to go
through to where Victoria was I had forgotten that
there was a gate at the back.  Hence the reason I
turned to go onto the pitch.

I appreciate that you would have had great difficulty
in remembering the actual times when things happened.
I heard a witness in this Court, he was one who was in
                                 T. HICKS


 the pen, and he was describing how he did not know
what world he was on, what planet he was on.    In fact,
 time had no meaning that day for many, many people and
 that would apply to you.  You were at the match, you
were on the terraces and your daughters, of course,
were in those centre pens, so I can really appreciate
the difficulty you had.   I know it is difficult with
times now, and I do not want you to give an actual
time, it does not really matter as far as I am
concerned, but could you give me some idea of when
....   I will put it this way to you.  Did you say that
you saw the man in the grey suit just before the
Police Officers made a cordon across the pitch? - A. I
made a couple of references to seeing him.   To be
precise, if I could go back, the first comment I made
was at around 14.50 - this is page 3 of my statement -
I said then that I could see people crushed against
the fence and one in particular, the man in the grey
suit, does show up quite clearly when we see the
video.   In fact, you can see him being brought over
the top of the radial fence.   But obviously at the
time I saw him he looked in a totally distressed
state, whereas we see him actually being lifted over
the perimeter fence.   So the first time I saw him was
about 14.50.




                       /Q.   THE CORONER:   Hang on
                                            T. HICKS


     THE CORONER':  Hang on, Mr. Hicks.  On the 15th
you actually refer to him in that first statement as
well? - A. Yes, in fairness I did.

This is the point that you actually refer to him in
several statements? - A. Yes, that is one I have a
very clear recollection of and that is why I spotted
it straight away when I saw the video but again it is
this problem of which is the correct time.  I believe
that this statement is correct.

The Jury will make up their minds about that? - A.
Fine.

That is obviously a matter for them in the end what
they make of it and what weight they put on it? - A.
Yes, as I said, I hadn't seen any television or
anything at that time but it was taken giving more
thought than the one I had given in the gymnasium
immediately after seeing the girls.

      MRS. McBRIEN:   I was just wondering if it could
be connected very closely to when the Police made
that cordon across the middle of the pitch.   Did it
seem quite close to that time? - A. This is the
problem I have tried to emphasise several times, if I
can explain, Dr. Popper, by means of this answer;
the first time I went to the West Midlands when I was
the guinea pig in many ways on the visual identify I
couldn't believe the times.   15.21, for instance, I
would have put at 15.10 perhaps even to the point
that it took me some considerable time to accept
them.   Obviously I had to do at the finish because
quite clearly there were various shots and the camera
does not lie, if you like, but then it sets in
context the problem of time.   That is why I can't be
precise.   It is not that I am trying to evade it or
paint a particular picture.   I am sure the sequence
is correct.   It is a question of the exact timing.

When did you realise there was not any cheering
coming from the centre pens? - A. Again it is the
same time as I am saying, around quarter to or ten
to.  To say that you do not see any cheering, you are
just getting the feeling that there is something very
badly wrong and I was answering a specific point
there.  I wouldn't like to say there was no cheering
but, you know, it was not a normal situation.   You
could see that and you could even feel it.

Was that before the match began? - A. It is m y belief
that it was before the match, yes.

You said you saw an Officer with an anorak on and
with what was happening that day you could have seen
                                                 T. HICKS


     anything.  Some Witnesses say there could have been
     four teams on the field.

        THE CORONER:   No, no, let us have the question, Mrs.
M c Br i en .

Q.      MRS. McBRIEN:   You said you saw a Policeman with
an anorak on anyway? - A. Yes.

Q. Standing on the steps leading up to the Control Box?
   - A. This was the first Officer who was stood on the
   platform.  The one I have now stated was
   Superintendent Greenwood.

Q. I was wondering if that was the same Officer you saw
   earlier on?    - A. He was the first Officer.

Q. Did  you see them twice? - A. He was the first
   Officer.  The second one was a totally different one.
   He was only an Inspector, the second one, who I have
   been unable to identify.

Q. These were just two different men? - A. Yes.

Q. The  one you      tried to attract his attention, he was
   not  the same one    who stood on the steps just outside
   of the Control Box, was he? - A. No, I did try to
   attract the attention of both of them.

Q. These were two different men? - A. Two different
   Officers, yes.

Q. The one that you saw round about three or four
   minutes after kick-off he was obviously a senior
   Officer? - A. Again if I can ignore the time for the
   moment, yes.   The first Officer, I explained it was
   m y belief that I thought it was gold braid and
   obviously that could have been the sun reflecting off
   silver braid, of course, which is the correct
   markings for a Superintendent.   Whether the same
   excuse, if you like, can be that the black nylon
   anorak was reflecting the light as well but I can't
   be precise, I have to be honest, on the anorak.

Q. But the one you saw after kick-off he ran on to the
   pitch, didn't he, and he had the match stopped, is
   that right? - A. Yes, that is the one, as I say, it
   is m y belief who was Superintendent Greenwood.

Q.        THE CORONER:    But that was the first Officer
     you saw? - A. That was the first Officer.   In fact,
     in both m y statements I do say that he was the
     Officer.

Q. Mrs. McBrien put it to you that there was a second
   Officer I think.
                                               T. HICKS



     MRS. McBRIEN:    I am a bit confused now really.

     THE CORONER:    So are we.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I thought it was Superintendent
Greenwood who was standing on the steps about three or four
minutes past kick-off and he ran on to the pitch.

     MR. KING:   Sir, everybody is going to get terribly
confused and to be fair to this witness what he has always
said is that the two Officers he saw, who he saw at
different stages, were both at roughly the same position
but they were different Officers.  Mrs. McBrien, I think
has got confused because she is only seeing one Officer in
that position.

     THE CORONER:    I realise that.

     MR. KING:  But it is unfair to the witness in a sense
because he will undoubtedly get confused with these
questions, if not all of us.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    I am sorry if I am confusing anybody.

     THE CORONER:   Let me try and summarise this for you,
Mrs. McBrien, and you tell me if I have got it right.
Irrespective of the timings, forget the timings, Mr. Hicks
said that he saw an Officer standing on the platform of the
Police Control Box.  He had tried to attract this Officer's
attention, that he stood there for several minutes, and he
appeared to have gold braid on his cap and was wearing a
light coloured anorak.  That having seen Superintendent
Greenwood, he is of the opinion that that was
Superintendent Greenwood who was the Officer who
subsequently ran on to the pitch to stop the match.  In
addition, at some time later he saw another Officer who was
definitely not Superintendent Greenwood who was an
Inspector.  He too was not standing on the platform but was
standing on the steps and he was looking out towards the
pitch and again Mr. Hicks tried to attract his attention.
The Officer was standing there for X number of minutes and
then he disappeared and we do not know what happened to him
after that.

Q. That is I think right, is it not? - A. Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Have you understood it?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, with not having the transcript in
front of m e ...

     THE CORONER:    Nor have we.   It is just that I have
remembered it.
                                                T. HICKS


     MRS. McBRIEN: ' You have explained it very well to me
thank you, sir.

Q. Superintendent Greenwood who you saw, who was there
    for a few minutes, I know you were trying to get his
   attention.   In fact, you tried to get both Officers
   attention.   It could be difficult, and I do not know
    if you will agree with me on this, for a Police
   .Officer to react to individuals in a crowd when they
    saw a mass of people who were moving in all kinds of
   directions.   There was noise and everything.  It
   would be difficult for them, wouldn't it? - A. Yes.
    I think if I may answer that more fully it would be
   m y belief that there wasn't just myself, of course,
   but there was perhaps half a dozen to ten people.    I
    think we were making enough noise that even given the
   difficult circumstances normally somebody would have
    had their attention drawn to what we were saying.   I
   did concede at the Taylor Inquiry though that if he
   was already concentrating on the problem he ma y just
    see us as a peripheral....

Q. Yes, that is how I see it really.  If he saw a number
   of people trying to get his attention it would be
   difficult to concentrate on the individual?

     THE CORONER:   He has answered this question.  Can we
have the next one please?  I must rush you a little bit.
am not rushing you but I must hurry you a little bit.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Did you see any individual out
     of Pen 1 where you were actually go up to the Officer
     and speak directly to him? - A. We couldn't because I
     think I commented, and as you saw in the photograph,
     there was a fence in fact between us and the steps
     and, of course, they were above us as well.

Q. No one else in Pen 1 could have done that then? - A.
   No, from the position we were in there was no access.
   It is meant presumably as segregation between the
   away fans and the people in the stand and so all we
   could do was to shout to them.




                        /Q. Obviously the people who were.
                                                  T. HICKS


Obviously people who were trying to get the Police
Officers attention, and you in particular, would be very
concerned about your daughters, individuals in the pens.
Now the Police Officers might just see the people in the
pens in the centre as a mass of people and they might
have a different attitude.   They may think if they saw
people going over the front it could be that they were
trying to invade the pitch. - A. It was my impression -
am I allowed to give an impression - that the Police were
responding as if it was a pitch invasion.   It was also
as plain as a pikestaff that that wasn't the situation
and there were people getting seriously hurt.

     THE CORONER:   Both of those were impressions,
weren't they? - A. Very strong impressions, yes.    My own
personal impressions, yes.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, that's fair enough.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   You didn't actually leave your
position in pen 1 until you saw the St. John's ambulance?
- A. Yes.  Again, I made the comment about the hooligan
who ran on and if the photograph is timed correctly at
15.15, I think that is the time you said the ambulance
came on as well.   That was about the time.   I can't
remember whether it was before I left my position or as I
was working my way through the terraces that I did see
him go on.   Again we are back to the timing problem.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you, Mr. Hicks.

            Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Mr. Hicks, first of all may I, in this rather strange and
unfriendly place, add my condolences to the mass of
condolences that I am sure you have received about your
tragic loss. - A. Thank you.

I am not going to suggest that you are trying to mislead,
and I hope that none of my other learned friend has tried
to do so.   I am sure they haven't.   I hope you haven't
got the impression that they have.   I am not going to
seek to distinguish between what might be a matter of
imprecision and try and call it a matter of
unreliability.  As I understand it, you are prepared to
accept that some of the different timings you have given
in the various statements stem from a natural imprecision
through time marching on from one statement and one court
appearance to another.   Is that fair? - A. To an extent,
and obviously the circumstances.

Yes, everything is obviously founded on those
circumstances.   I accept that.   Before lunch,
Mr. Hicks, you told us that the timings that were set out
                                                       70


                                                    T. HICKS


   in the evidence you gave to Lord Justice Taylor were, in
   your view now in January 1991, the best one? - A. Well...

Q. That is what you said. - A. Well, it was the statement
   and obviously again I had a similar problem.   Not quite
   as bad as we have had today at Taylor, because again
   Mr. Woodward put me through some cross-examination and I
   had to accept, as I have accepted with Mr. Isaacs, that I
   could not be precise on some of the timings.

Q. I am not going to dwell on your account of timings from
   one to the other.  I am prepared to accept your account
   that your precise timings may be subject to some
   imprecision? - A. Correct.

0. In the same way that the evidence you gave about timing
   to Lord Justice Taylor being only a matter of weeks after
   this terrible disaster, was, you now feel, the most
   accurate.   Do you also feel that the account of the
   events - leave aside the timing, I am talking about the
   events themselves, do you also feel that those events
   were most accurately portrayed when you gave evidence to
   Lord Justice Taylor? - A. Well, without going through the
   transcript in detail, I would say probably, yes.

Q. It would be natural, of course, because we are now almost
   two years from that terrible day, and then it was a
   matter of a few weeks? - A. Yes.    If I could pick up
   Mr. Isaacs' point, you know over two years almost you go
   over these things several times.   Items like you have
   just seen, the hooligan, for instance, I had completely
   forgotten about that until I happened to see it when I
   was looking through the bundle.   Things drop into place
   and sometimes that helps the sequence and other times it
   actually makes it worse.

Q. You have given an account of your recollection of the
   state of the central pens, and I am going to use a
   neutral term which I hope you will accept - "shortly
   before the kick-off". - A. Right.

0. I know you have listened to a lot of the evidence, if not
   all the evidence we have been listening to since the 19th
   of November of last year. - A. I have not been here every
   day but I have seen some of  the transcripts. Not all of
   them though.

Q. I don't know whether you heard the evidence, or read the
   transcript of a witness called Mr. Hilton? - A. No, I
   don't think I have.

Q. He was a man who told the jury he arrived and got through
   the turnstiles at about five to three and made his way
                                                              71


                                                           T. HICKS


         into the same enclosure that you were in - 1 and 21 - A.
         Right.

    Q. He told the jury how before the kick-off he was able to
       make his way from enclosure 2, across enclosure 3 and
B      into enclosure 4, because he was looking for some
       friends.   Does this ring any bells with you, this piece
       of evidence? - A. Not off the top of my head.

    Q.    I am not going to ask you to try and remember whether or
         not you saw that happen, but does that account surprise
         you given your recollection of the state of the central
         pens shortly before the kick-off? - A. Well, I was just
         glancing again at the photographs.    It is always
         possible to get everywhere.    I was here the day the
         6' 3" sixteen stone boy was talking about how he could
         get around.

    Q.    I was going to come to that.   You deal with it now if
         you want to. - A. It is always possible to force your way
         through a crowd of people, provided there is room to do
         it, which I think is the point you are trying...     As I
         think has been a commonly accepted position, the pen I
D        was in, pen 1 or pen 1 and 2, whatever it is called, was
         not tightly packed, to use the terminology I have picked
         up.    It was possible to move round.    I myself, as I
         said, when I was getting concerned about Sarah and
         Victoria started to move across, but it is not a question
         of an easy walk.    You have got to literally push in
         between people to get across.    Everything is possible if
         you want to do it.

    Q. The second instance, did you hear the evidence given of
       the young man who was able to make five journeys from the
       middle of pen 3 up to the pillar at the entrance to the
       tunnel from pen 3 in the minutes before the kick-off? -
       A. Yes, I was here that day.

    0. Again, I don't expect you to remember having seen that,
       but did that account surprise you, bearing in mind your
       recollection of how things were, as far as you can
       recall, in pen 3 at that time? - A. Yes, it would with
       pen 3.   I was not in pen 3 so again I am voicing an
       opinion.   Again, I worked in London for many years and
       what can be called involuntarily movement I think was the
       terminology I heard used.    I have been carried along
       tube station platforms totally against my will in a
       situation which looked significantly less packed than
       what pens 3 and 4 did.    I have been on football terraces
       where at times I have been unable to scratch my nose
       almost.   There have been other times where if you try
       hard enough or if you are 6' 3" or something like that,
       even in a situation like that you can force your way
       through.




H
                                                          72


                                                       T. HICKS


Q. As you said, finally, there was that man of 6' 3" and
   fifteen stone who was able to climb on to the barrier and
   when he fell off picked himself up and got back on and
   did it again.   Do you remember that evidence? - A. Yes,
   I was here that day.   It was the same day.

Q. He told us when he jumped or went from on top of the
   barrier down on to the terrace, a space was made for him.
   Do you remember him saying that? - A. Yes, I did hear him
   say that.

Q. Does that surprise you, bearing in mind your recollection
   of the state of the central pens shortly before the kick-
   off? - A. Let me ask you a question.   If you were the
   one who he was falling on to, I think you would make
   space!   It would be involuntary movement, I think.

Q. It would be involuntary movement if someone was able to
   move out of the way? - A. Yes.   I think though the
   evidence states that at the front of pens 3 and 4 people
   weren't able to move, were they?    That's the problem.

Q. Whether from reading the transcripts or from listening to
   witnesses here in this court, no doubt you also heard or
   read the great body of evidence from a variety of
   witnesses who have felt that until very shortly before
   the kick-off things were normal in pens 3 and 4 for a big
   match?

        THE CORONER:    What is the question?

        MR. RUSSELL:    First of all I am seeking to
   establish...

        MR. KING:   Sir, I am sorry to interrupt because I
   know I complained when I was interrupted many times, but,
   sir, what is now happening is a selective extract of
   various witness, in effect, to make a point.   I am
   busily now, sir, going through my notes and I look at one
   Alfred Langley who tells us about someone who was crushed
   over a barrier backwards just after twenty to three in a
   pen.   We could all do that, sir, with respect to the
   line of questioning at the moment.   It is just a
   rehearsal of selective witnesses.

        THE CORONER:   One has to be careful.   I think
   obviously it is a matter which has to be considered by
   the jury in due course.

        MR. KING:   I agree, sir, but it is a matter of
   making a collection of evidence to make a point.

        THE CORONER:    Making sense of all of it in the end,
   as far as you can.
                                                    T. HICKS


     MR. KING:  I got in trouble many times, allegedly,
for making a speech through questions, sir, and that is
the point I raise at this stage.

     MR. PAYNE:   It is, if I may say so, legitimate to
show that different people had different perceptions.
That is all he is doing.

     THE CORONER:   He has got to be selective.   I
suppose he could go through every single one, but I would
not be happy with that.

       THE WITNESS:   Do you want me to answer that?

       THE CORONER:   I have forgotten what the question
was!

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I am not seeking to do anything
other than set out items that might or might not have
surprised Mr. Hicks, bearing in mind the position he was
in at and the surveillance he was maintaining of pens 3
and 4.   Indeed, sir, you will be telling the jury in due
course of the various accounts that have been given by
the witnesses, but the last point is perhaps a fair one.
There has been a body of evidence, and I was enquiring
whether Mr. Hicks had listened to it, of those who had
found that the state of affairs in pens 3 and 4, up to
almost the kick-off itself, certainly until when the
teams came out on the field to play the game of football,
was no worse than for a normal big match terrace:

The question is:   is that in accordance with your
recollection from your position? - A. No, it isn't,
that answer needs some elaboration, if I may.   You have
used the term "normal on a big match."    I think this
morning I emphasised that on big match occasions or if
one of the girls was feeling unwell or something, they
would exchange places and I would go up in the standing
or on the terraces, if you wish.    "Normal for a big
match", as we have said already, some people have
different perceptions of what is acceptable and what is
unacceptable.    I have been to big games all around the
country, even to some worse grounds than Hillsborough as
well, and it was abnormal what I perceived to be
happening.    Similarly, the fact that people were pressed
against the radial fence to the point where, as I said,
the man in the grey suit, if I quote that example again,
he looked as though he was going unconscious which does
happen if you basically get squashed.

Now to answer your question, having elaborated, in a
normal situation on a big game when you get a sway going
on the terraces or something like that, is not acceptable
to me.   That is one of the reasons I prefer to go in the
                                                  T. HICKS


seating.   However?, it is acceptable to a lot of other
people who consider it to be part and parcel, if you
like, of the atmosphere of a big game.

Mr. Hicks, I am turning to something else now.    Whatever
the difficulties or the change there was in the degree of
cheering and chanting that you saw coming out of pens 3
and 4, would it be fair to say there were no such
physical inhibitions on the amount of cheering and
chanting around you in the build-up immediately before
the kick-off? - A. There weren't inhibitions, but
similarly the atmosphere I was feeling was all around me
and between me and that radial fence and what was
happening in pen 3, otherwise I would not have sensed it .
and I would not have commented on it.




       Q. We have heard there tends
01
                                                              75

                                                            T. HICKS »




         Q. We have heard that there tends to be a crescendo of
            noise before a kick-off, especially before the kick-off
            to a big match such as this.  Is thait your experience?
            - A. Yes, it is.
     B
         Q. And in the position in which you were there would have
            been people cheering in the West Stand? - A. Yes.

         Q. In other parts of pens 1 and 2? - A. Yes, presumably
            so.

         Q. And in the South Stand on the far side of the Police
            Control Box? - A. Yes.   I am answering an opinion
            second-hand here.   I have no recollection of that on .
            the day, but yes I would assume   on a normal game that
            would be the situation.

         Q. Is this also right, that when a team is announced over
            the tannoy - I appreciate you did not hear it on this
            occasion, but it is clear that the team was announced
            because we have got it on film. - A. Yes.

     D   Q. But is it your experience that when a team is announced
            the crescendo of noise goes up another notch? - A.
            Well, compared with the kick-off, of course, it is a
            lesser crescendo if you like, because there is only one
            half of the ground cheering for their own team and
            whistling for the other one usually....

         0. It is building up to the kick-off, and we know from the
            chronology sheet that the Liverpool team was read out
            at about 9-minutes-to-3.   As I understand your evidence
            to the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry, and I am going back
            to your timings from that because of my first questions
            to you, that would be at about the time you saw a
            Policeman on the steps some ten   feet above you? - A.
            Correct, give or take a few minutes.

         0. Whoever that was    . - A. I have said who I think that
            was.

         0. Whoever that was there is nothing to indicate by his
            demeanour that he heard you, is there? - A. No, I have
            accepted that point, yes.

         Q. And your recollection, as given to Lord Justice Taylor,
            was that whoever that was he came out of the Police
            Box? - A. Yes, I do believe I said that.  I can't be
            absolutely certain of that.  I think I said that this
            morning.

         Q. I did not take a note of it this morning but I have
            read that you did say it to Lord Justice Taylor. - A. I
            must have said it then.




     H
                                                             76

                                                          t. hicks: 1




    Q. And that Officer was distinguishable to you by two
       features, wasn't he? - A. Three features.

    Q. At the time you told us that he had the gold braid on
B      his cap. - A. Which explained as I now believe to be
       silver braid, With the sun ....

    Q.v I am just interested, Mr. Hicks, in your recollection
        of what you remember seeing rather than any explanation
        for other discrepancies. - A. Fine.

    Q.    I am trying to establish the distinguishing features
         that you observed were first of all the gold braid on     .
         his cap? - A. Correct.

    0.. And the fact that he was wearing a light coloured
        anorak? - A. Correct.

    Q. The fact of the light   coloured anorak was something
       about which, when you   gave evidence to Lord Justice
       Taylor, you expressed   yourself to be sure about? - A. I
       could not say without   looking at the transcript.
D
    0.   That is very fair.  Have   you still got the transcript
         in the witness box? - A.   Yes - well, most of it.

    Q. It is page 8 of your evidence, and since we referred to
       it a moment or two ago, can I ask you first of all to
       look at letter "D"? - A. Yes.

    0. You see you say there that there was one Officer who
       came out of the Police Box - I say that in parenthesis.
       Now, look a little further down the page.  The last
       answer that you complete before the bottom of the page
       is an answer to the question, "He had a flat cap?"   Do
       you see that, at letter "F"? - A. Yes.

    Q. You read through the answer that you gave to Lord
       Justice Taylor. - A. Answer:  "He had a flat cap

    0. Read it to yourself if you like, there is no need to
       read it out.  You have read it out once. - A. Do you
       want me to read it out?

    Q. Read it through to yourself. - A. Right.

    Q. At the time you told Lord Justice Taylor that you were
       sure, is that right? - A. No, I think that is answering
       the fact that he had a flat cap on, with respect.

    0. Perhaps then can I read it, or would you like to read
       it? - A. I am answering the question where he says that
       he had a flat cap:
                                                  T. HICKS-




     "A. He had a flat cap and he had gold braid on his
     hat, I am sure."

Would you please read the whole of the sentence
beginning, "Obviously ..." aloud? - A. Yes:

     "Obviously we didn't video anything that went on
     television on the day, otherwise that would
     probably help but, as I said, I am sure he had
     • • • •   •

This is again ....

Would you please read it out first and then comment
later? - A. I am sorry:

     "Obviously we didn't video anything that went on
     television on the day, otherwise that would
     probably help but, as I said, I am sure he had
     because I thought at the time it was a little
     strange for him to have a non-issue anorak, if you
     like, on the top."

The fact that he had a light coloured anorak on was
something you could be sure about when you gave
evidence to Lord Justice Taylor because it was
something you remembered thinking about at the time,
wasn't it? - A. Yes, but I didn't say I was sure.   I
was answering the question I was sure he had a flat cap
on.

But it was something - it is all right, I have asked
the question and you have given me the answer.

As far as the faces of the two Officers were concerned,
it was the face of the second Officer that made the
indelible impression on your memory, wasn't it? - A.
No, it was the faces of both Officers.  If you
remember, in all of my statements the other consistent
feature was the fact that the first Officer was the man
who went onto the pitch.

I am dealing with the faces rather than the activities,
Mr. Hicks. - A. Fine.  The second face, I said in my
statement I think I could recognise him if I saw him.
In fact, we didn't proceed with the complaints.   I
accepted them being settled under informal resolution
so there was no attempt, in fact, to bring photographs
or anything, so I was not ever asked to try and
identify him.  As I said this morning I confirmed it
was Superintendent Greenwood, the first Officer, when I
met him outside in the corridor on 30th May.   I must
admit I only got that date when I checked back
yesterday to see the date I came here for that meeting.
                                                T. HICKS'.




Mr. Hicks, I am asking about the recollection you gave
to Lord Justice Taylor, and what I am suggesting is at
that time as far as the faces of the two Officers were
concerned, among all the other confusion that might
have been present at the time because of what else
happened that day, it was the face of the second
Officer that made an indelible impression on you. - A.
That is your interpretation, with respect.

Can we just look at what you said?   Could you turn to
page 19 of the transcript?   Once again, at the top of
page 19 it was being suggested that your recollection
of events might have been disturbed, wasn't it? - A.
Distorted or disturbed, yes.

You were asked by Mr. Woodward this question:

     "0. In the events that happened your sense of time
     at some stage may have been distorted or
     disturbed? - A. I think actual start and finish
     times, yes, but as at the time though, because I
     was obviously extremely anxious ....

     Q. But not at this time? - A. I think my problem
     relates to later in the fact some of the items -
     again you don't write things down until afterwards
     - obviously we were in a traumatic state
     af terwards.

     Q. Yes, it depends what else is on your mind. - A.
     The second Police Officer's face, for instance, I
     don't think I could ever forget.  I may, as I
     said, if it ever comes to try and follow that
     through, but these are the sort of things which
     •   • • •



- and then it goes on to the hat and the braid.  At the
time you gave evidence to Lord Justice Taylor, when it
came to faces and your recollection of faces, it was
the face of the second Police Officer that had made an
indelible impression, wasn't it? - A. Well, I will give
you the answer and you stop me if ....  Forgive me,
sir, I nad iust been giving evidence that this man had
told me to shut my fucking prattle", at a time when I
was trying to draw his attention to what I considered
to be in need of a life-saving operation and the
context those comments were made in is that I obviously
focussed in more on the second Officer on the grounds I
was extremely upset.  He also, whilst I conceded that
Superintendent Greenwood may not have heard me, because
his attention may have been elsewhere, the particular
Officer did in fact turn round and utter what I have
just said, so it is quite obvious he had heard me and
chosen to ignore the situation as I perceived it, so
                                                        79

                                                    T. HICKS’ > •




   quite naturally the thrust, if you like, of this
   discussion that you are reading bits from in the
   transcript, obviously   I would be saying that I   feltat
   the time I could have   recognised the Officer. I would
   say now I don't think I could, because I have made no
   attempt to follow that through at all.

Q. Your recollection of the colour of the jacket was not
   merely that it was light coloured, but that it was
   light fawn coloured, wasn't it? - A. If you read the
   transcripts again you can interpret them in one of two
   ways.  "Sort of fawny colour" I think was the lead-in
   question from Mr. Woodward at the time.

0. Le t s ....

        THE CORONER:   Mr. Russell, forgive me, I want to
   know where we are going because at the moment I can't
   see that we are going anywhere.

        MR. RUSSELL:   I   am seeking to establish how
   positive Mr. Hicks' recollection was as to the two
   distinguishing features of the first Officer that he
   saw come out of the Police Box, and I then wished to
   clarify the clothing and uniform that Superintendent
   Greenwood was wearing but a few minutes later.

        THE WITNESS:   Sir, I ___

        THE CORONER:   Allow me.  I think the witness has
   already said on more than on one occasion, in fact, he
   admitted quite clearly to me that (a) he did say it was
   gold braid, though he now thinks he has got an
   explanation for that, (b) he agrees that he said it was
   a light coloured anorak and he can't explain that
   issue, so I don't think you need to establish it.  He
   has said it.

Q. You haven't denied that, have you? - A. No, I have
   accepted that.

        THE CORONER:   So I think we can move on.   We have
   got to move on to the point.

        MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I am sorry.   Let me take it
   quickly then:

Q. Have you subsequently seen any photographs of
   Superintendent Greenwood on the pitch? - A. I have seen
   the Police video ....

Q. Having stopped the match. - A. And I have seen that he
   wearing the regulation nylon anorak thing over the top
   of a uniform.  That is why I accept there is no way
                                                T. HICKS-




that I could have seen a light coloured anorak.   I
accept that, but I will state again, and I remind
myself and the Jury I am under oath, I am categorical
that the first Officer I saw on the fence was
Superintendent Greenwood.




              Q.    THE CORONER:    Not fence
                                 T. HICKS


      THE CORONER:  Not the fence.  You mean on the
 platform? - A. I am sorry, on the platform, I do beg
 your pardon.                                       s

      MR. RUSSELL:  That was the gentleman you
 remembered seeing wearing a fawn-coloured anorak? - A.
 Who I believed at that time was wearing a fawn-
 coloured anorak, yes.

Just so that there is no room for doubt, could you
have a look at this photograph, please.

     MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, it is photograph No.24 in
DB.17 and you are probably familiar with it.

     THE CORONER: I cannot see it from that distance.
I may well be familiar with it. Are you asking the
witness, Mr. Russell, whether he accepts that
Superintendent Greenwood was wearing a regulation
anorak?

     MR. RUSSELL:    Sir, yes.

     THE WITNESS:    Yes.

     MR. RUSSELL:  And what a regulation anorak looked
like, because it may be that the Jury do not know what
a regulation anorak looks like and here is a
photograph of Superintendent Greenwood wearing one.

     THE CORONER: Can we put the acetate up.  We have
already produced an acetate of 15.02 and there is, in
fact, an Officer with a regulation anorak on.  So it
might be that you might be able to deal with that and
then it saves doing another exhibit.

     MR. RUSSELL:  The advantage of this, which can be
passed round the Jury so quickly, is that there is
only one Police Officer in it.

     THE CORONER: Very well.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Certainly I can hand up a second
copy to make that process even quicker.

     MR. JONES:    Can we give that a 1C' number.   It
was used before.    That is now C354.

     THE CORONER:   That was the one that I referred you
ic*              ^ have taken it out of sequence, the
15.02 one.   There is no argument about that.
                                 T. HICKS


     THE WITNESS:  We have all seen policemen in that
standard - I call it an anorak.  I do not know if it
has another name - a car coat if you like.

     MR. RUSSELL:  Mr. Griffiths might like to hand
this one up to start this one going round.

     THE CORONER: Show that to Mr. Hicks.  (Photograph
handed to the witness and the Jury) Can we give it a
number and then we will make an acetate of it.

     MR. JONES:     Can I have the reference, please, Mr.
Russell?

     MR. RUSSELL:     It is photograph No.24 in album
DB.17.

     MR. JONES:     That has got a reference C355.

     THE CORONER: Can we borrow this and make the
acetate in due course?

     MR. RUSSELL:     Yes sir.

     THE CORONER: Carry on.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Mr. Hicks, if there is other
evidence called before this Jury that Superintendent
Greenwood did not go into, let alone come out of, the
Police box in the half-hour before the kick-off, or
spend any time on the steps outside the Police Control
Box, would you be prepared to accept that there is a
possibility that you are mistaken about your
identification of Superintendent Greenwood? - A. There
are a few features which I am fairly confident about,
or fairly sure about.   As I have said already, if
concrete evidence, if I may use that example, can be
brought here and not just somebody else's opinion of
the same situation, then I would accept that, as I
have accepted other things where I have been wrong,
but I am as sure as I can be that I am not wrong on
this occasion.   I do have a very good recollection for
faces.   I need to see somebody a couple of times and I
can meet them.   Obviously I have seen the Jury lots of
times, but I see the Jury in the town, for instance.
As I said this morning, it is a problem sometimes that
you see someone and you can't remember who they are.
But it was not a bit of de.ja vu though, or something
like that.   As I said, it is the same with the grey
man.   There are certain features and it was not until
I met him in the corridor that the penny dropped.    It
did actual happen just outside this very room.
                                                     83



                                     T. HICKS


Q.   So, in short, your answer to my last question is that
     if there is other evidence --- A. I would have to
     accept it, but I will need some convincing is my
     answer.

Q.   You would accept that you could be mistaken? - A. We
     have to accept we can all be mistaken, especially in
     the very difficult circumstances.  I am more sure of
     that than many of the other features which I have
     agreed on today.

                Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G ;

Q.   Mr. Hicks, you have had a long day, we have all had a
     long day, but I do want to try, if I can, to bring a
     little order into all the evidence you have given.
     Can I do it in this way.  First of all, can I ask you
     certain questions directed to show the sequence of the
     events which you are giving us evidence of?   I am not
     going to ask you about timings, just the sequence of
     events.  I am then going to ask you one or two
     questions about timings, and then I am going to ask
     you one or two questions about the individual
     incidents - all right? - A. Right.

Q.   In terms of the sequence of events, point No.l about
     what you have told us concerned how you got onto the
     side terrace in 1989? - A. Correct.

Q.   And you told us about the fact that if you had not
     gone to get your cup of coffee you would not have seen
     any sign which directed you there? - A. No, quite the
     contrary.  The standing sign which we have seen many
     times over the tunnel - and bear in mind we went in
     when it was fairly quiet so we had plenty of time to
     look around - we had been the previous year as well so
     quite categorically I would have gone down the tunnel
     if it had not have been for going for the coffee.

Q.   Event No.2 which you told us about was at the time
     when you were positioned not far from the Police
     Control Box and you saw things at the radial fence
     side of Pen 3. - A. Yes.

Q.   Which gave you concern. - A. Yes.

Q.   I am not going to ask you about timings for the
     moment.  First of all, how close were you to the
     platform of the Police Control Box at that time? - A.
     If I could have reached through the fence, I could
     probably have reached out and touched it, perhaps say
     4 feet to it and then to the platform would be perhaps
     6 or 8 feet above.   You can actually see on the
     photographs.
                              T. HICKS


What you were looking at which gave you concern was
the side radial fence of Pen 3, one of the centre
pens? - A. Yes, and a little bit of the top.

From where you were positioned what could you see at
the time of this Event 1 I am calling it - Event 2
after the coffee point but Event 1 on the terraces -
which you are about to tell us about drawing to the
attention of the Officer, or seeking to, what could
you see? - A. I could see people who were severely
crushed and were in various forms of distress and the
man in the grey jacket who basically looked
unconscious and at a later stage looked worse than
that.

Where were they in relation to the side radial fence?
- A. They were on the far side of the radial fence, so
they were within Pen 3.

Were they far away from the radial fence, close to it?
- A . No, they were squashed against it.

So they were squashed against the radial fence? - A.
Yes.  It was almost what we now know from the
photographs of the front fence along the side, but
obviously less in degrees as you went up the terrace.

Did you yourself have difficulty from where you were
positioned in seeing what you have just described? -
A. I couldn't see the same bit all the time because
you were looking down through gaps in people but, yes,
I could see quite clearly.  This is why I was getting
agitated and concerned.

You have described where the first Officer was on the
Police platform, you have described that to us? - A.
Yes, he was standing on the platform piece at the top
of the stairs.

From what you could see, would he have the same view
as you of that side fence, a worse view, or a better
view? - A. He would have a significantly better view
because he had the elevation.

You tried to draw his attention to what I have called
this Event 1 on the terraces, did you not? - A. Yes.

What did you do to try to draw to his attention what
you could see at the side fence? - A. We were
basically shouting, 'Can't you see what is going on?'
There wasn't just myself, there were several others.

It has been suggested that that Officer, first of all,
may not have heard what you were saying.  I want to
                                                         85



                                       T. HICKS


         ask you about that.  In terms of your position and his
         position, what do you say in answer to that? - A. I
         would have expected him to have heard, even with the
         noise levels, several people calling.  I would have
B        expected him, otherwise we wouldn't have done it, but
         I have conceded that it is possible he may not have
         done, but it would be my opinion that he should have
         heard if he had wished to.

         That is what he heard.  Would you have expected him to
         see what you had seen? - A. I would expect him to see
         what we had seen, yes.  He may not have seen us
         because he could have been looking across the top of .
         us.
         I am not going to go into the detail of who that
         Officer was because you have given evidence of that
         about identity, but was he a Police Officer? - A.
         Absolutely and categorically yes.

         What was it are you able to say makes you say he was a
         Police Officer? - A. He had a Police flat cap on with
         chequered ---

         I was going to ask you whether he appeared to be a
         senior Officer or not, from what you could see of his
         clothing? - A. I repeat what I said, and I accept
         about the anorak.  It is my belief it was the same
         Officer who went onto the pitch and stopped the game.

         Let me move on now to what I shall call Event 2 on the
         terraces, that is when you are communicating, or
         seeking to communicate, with the second Police Officer
         - all right? You were still positioned in the same
         position? - A. Yes.  I may have moved a couple of feet
         but effectively yes.

         How close to you was this second Officer? - A. He
         would be a couple of feet nearer because he was down a
         couple of steps from the platform.  It may have been
         the second and the third, or the first and the second
         steps, I couldn't say.

    Q.   What was it at that stage which you were able to see
         which you wanted to draw to his attention? - A. It was
         basically the same as we were drawing to the attention
         of the first Officer, but it was getting worse of
         course, because this was some few minutes later. More
         people were going over the top. You could still see,
         as I said, the one that sticks in my mind, the chappie
         in the grey jacket. It was him. He looked decidedly
         worse by this time.  There were other people quite
         clearly squashed against the fence.




H
                              T. HICKS


As regards that second Officer, whoever he was, again
was he a Police Officer? What makes you think he was
a Police Officer? - A. Yes, he was a Police Officer
and, as I have said on all occasions, he was an
Inspector because he did have the black braid on his
hat.

Were you the only person who was trying to speak to
him? - A. No.  In fact, again, I think if I am not
mistaken, there was a slightly bigger group by this
time already shouting up as well.  In fact, as I said
in my statement, he must have heard me otherwise he
wouldn't have come back with the remark he did.

That is what I was going to ask you about. You cannot
say what was in his mind, and I am not asking you to.
- A. No.

But he turned, did he, and looked at you? - A. He
basically turned round and told me to shut my F-ing
prattle and the reason I know other people were
involved, there was somebody around me said, "At least
he heard you that time".

Let me deal, if we can help, with timings.  You have
told us today that there was something like a 5/10
minute gap between Event 1 and Event 2. The learned
Coroner traced you through the timings you told us
today, and I think we arrived at about 6 minutes past
3 for Event 2 when you were communicating with the
second Officer. - A. Yes.

You also told us today that Event 1, the first
Officer, was about 10-to 3. That is what we arrived
at today. - A. Yes.

I know it has been put to you that in your statement
in the mortuary you gave a different account.  I just
want to see if one can test the evidence that Event 1
was at about 10-to 3 and Event 2 was about 6 minutes
past 3 with some features which we do know to be true.
First of all, is there anything in the photographs
which my learned friend Mr. Payne showed you, which we
know from them start at about 5-to 3 and end at about
5 or 6 minutes past 3, which helps you?




                        /THE CORONER:    Excuse me
                                                        87


                                                 T. HICKS


     THE CORONER: ’ * Excuse me, one minute to three.

     MR. KING:  I beg your pardon, m y mind actually said
one minute to three.  This is the bundle, so the Jury know,
is the one that flashed up.

     THE CORONER:      Yes.

Q.. .    MR. KING: It starts at one minute to three and
    ends I think at six minutes past three? - A. I made
    the comment to Mr. Payne, I didn't understand why he
    was asking about the gates because I couldn't see
    those clearly. That sequence of events would seem to
    fit in with the timings in my statement.

Q. What is it you see on the photographs which we know
   is one minute to three and five or six minutes past
   three which fits in with either Event 1 or Event 2 as
   I call them? - A. The fact that they are on the
   pitch, of course.   People have either gone over the
   top or they are actually on the pitch.   People are
   being brought out or are getting out. As I said, it
   was m y recollection at this time which fits the 1505
   to 1510, so this is a little earlier but not such a
   big gap, of when I believe the Police were stopping a
   pitch invasion but which I quite clearly and many
   others around me perceived as people in distress.

Q. At the time of the first event which you have
   described on the terraces when you first saw what you
   have described at the side fencing and you turned to
   the first Officer on the platform, were any of the
   events which we see in the photographs taking
   place? - A. I don't think so.  I can't be absolutely
   precise but I don't think so.

Q. As regards the cordon of Police Officers which you
   have described, how do they relate in time to the
   second event, that is to say, the event when you
   turned to the second Officer and you got the answer
   you gave? - A. I think they came on to the pitch
   after the second Officer.  I think I said that in m y
   statement as well.

Q. The circumstances in which you gave your first
   statement, and I do not want to go into any great
   detail, but they are the circumstances of being at
   the makeshift mortuary in the gymnasium where your
   daughters had been? - A. Yes, having spent all day
   looking for them etc.

     MR. KING:      Mr. Hicks, thank you.

     THE CORONER:      The Jury just want to look at the 1459
photographs.
                                                T. HICKS


                    Further bv THE CORONER:

Q. Mr. Hicks, there is just one point I want to ask you
   about and that is this chap in the grey suit, not the
   anorak, but the fellow who was being squashed? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I assume that although your terrace was not full in
  . .the sense that you were crushed, there were people in
    it?   It was not empty by any means, was it? - A. No,
    it wasn't and if you look at the photographs it is
    quite full.

Q. What I am interested in is, and I know the human eye
   is a wonderful thing and that you do not need long to
   take a scene in, were you able to keep him in your
   vision the whole time or not? - A. I think if I was
   able I wouldn't have done so.  I was obviously
   looking.  One of the reasons I remember him is that
   he was about the position I would have to look
   through to see where the girls would have been.

Q. You were actually looking for the girls? - A. I was
   trying to look beyond him.  This is why I know I
   could see their tops but not with any r e a l ...

Q. The other thing, and do not take this in any sense as
   a criticism, you said that the Police Officer was
   higher and, therefore, should have had a better view?
   - A. Yes.

Q. It may well be that that is true but I suppose it is
   possible he might not have been able to see this chap
   if he happened to be obscured because of the angle by
   heads, for instance? - A. I was seeing the people as
   people were moving about and obviously they were
   walking up and down because, funnily enough, the
   front part where they were trying to do the rescue
   over the side fence people were moving around and
   that is how I could see people through it.  So I
   still think he would get a better view because he
   would not have the people, sort of, in the middle.

     MR. MANNING:  Can we just take that point objectively?
I think it must be right that just because somebody is high
enough you cannot, unless you are there at the time,
necessarily see what the person can see. All you can say
is that the person is higher.  One would expect he might be
able to see or he might not be able to see but you cannot
say objectively that he can see X simply because he is at a
higher level somewhere else.

Q.        THE CORONER:   I do not think actually, Mr.
     Hicks, you are saying that, are you? - A. No.
                                                         89


                                                  T. HICKS


Q. You are not saying he definitely saw him.  You are
   just saying you think he saw him? - A. No, all I am
   saying is that if I had been in his position it is my
   belief I would have had a better view from there than
   I had from where I was.

Q. I think we will leave it there. Mr. Hicks, I was not
    planning that you would have quite such a long
  . session but, on the other hand, I hope you will
    understand, as I tried to explain in the beginning,
    that I wanted to deal with you exactly the same as I
    did everybody else? - A. That is fine, yes.

Q. Secondly, the points that you make are very important
   as you know? - A. Yes, I appreciate that.

Q. I cannot say in what mood you are to leave because
   you must take that for your self but Ido want you to
   go away with this thought; that whatever your
   evidence may be with regard to the events and
   whatever construction that I, the lawyers, the
   congregation, and in particular the Jury eventually
   put on it as far as its value in the overall picture
   is concerned, everybody sympathises with you and your
   wife in the terrible loss which you have suffered. -
   A. Thank you very much.

Q . I think Ialso want to make this point because it is
    very easy for me to forget this, you lost two girls
    and we tend to think of you a lot and also because
    you are the Chairman.   So we tend to have you very
    much in our eyes so to speak but there are quite a
    lot of other groups where two children were lost, the
    Hewitts, the Traynors? - A. That is right.

Q.   There are one or two others, the Howards?   - A. Yes.

Q.   They were not two children but two people in the same
     family and there may well be others whose names just
     escape me? - A. No, those are the ones.

Q. They, of course, have suffered quantitatively the
   same lost.  Qualitatively, everybody whether you lose
   one or two has suffered a terrible loss.   I want to
   say this not so much to you but really to the other
   families that it is so easy for them to think that we
   are not conscious that they too have suffered losses.
   These Inquests are not designed to denigrate your
   loss and nobody is doing that but, on the other hand,
   if we are going to do the job we have to do it
   thoroughly? - A. I accept there is a job of work to
   be done, yes.

Q. I want you tc> understand all this because it is a
   golden opportunity to say it all again.   Thank you,
   Mr. Hicks. - A. Thanks.
<—>*-f

                                                                   90



                  THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, we have got six
             more witnesses. We will not do them all today but I want
             to do at least one inore because there is a young man who
             has come with his dad and if we do not do him today it is
             very inconvenient. Can we rise for ten minutes and come
             back? It is Mr. Hand and we will be taking him out of
             sequence. He is one of the young men who were in Enclosure
         B   3.

                   MR. ISAACS:   Whilst the Jury are having a break there
             is .just one matter I would like to mention and perhaps it
             is convenient to do it now. We can all stand perhaps a
             longer session without a break but there is a one matter I
             would like to address you upon.

                  THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, leave us.   Go and
             have a rest and we will call you back.

                            (The Jury retired from Courts

                  MR. ISAACS:   I will preface my remarks in the way
             that my learned friend, Mr. King, has prefaced his remarks
             with some of the witnesses and that is, what I say is not
             meant by way of criticism. With the greatest of respect,
             the last two or three days, certainly starting with
             Superintendent Marshall, it has appeared to me that there
             has been a loss of control over some of the witnesses and
             some of the questions they have been asked. I have waited
             and listened but it does seem now that we have got to a
             stage where questions are being asked, and I say this with
             respect, both by you, sir, by perhaps all of us. The fact
             that it happens does not mean that it should continue to
             happen. These seem to give free rein to witnesses to give
             opinions, how things would have appeared to other people
             and I think what was said by my learned friend, Mr.
             Manning, on the last occasion was a perfect example of
             this. Mr. Hicks was given free rein to be able to say what
             he thought may have been the appearance of what was going
             on to other people but by the same token Mr. Marshall was
             being asked similar questions both by my learned friend,
             Mr. King, and others. I make no criticism of him because
             this is way, unfortunately, this seems to have developed.

                  All I am asking you, sir, is perhaps at this stage to
             think hard and to exercise once again the control that was
             clearly there last week and the times towards the end of
             last term so that these Inquests do not deteriorate into
             something which it should not be. This is not an Inquiry
             and, as I understood it, witnesses were going to be
             restricted to what they saw, what they did, what they heard
             and in so far as they could give valid opinion evidence
             then they would be asked to give that. We do seem, and I
             say this with respect, that over the last couple of days to
             have strayed way beyond that. I noticed Mr. Hicks was
             referring to the statement that he had made. On a regular
             basis he was referring to it. I wonder whether that is to
             be taken as a precedent for other witnesses. It may have
             started with Superintendent Marshall when he had his



         H
                                                     91


statement with him. Clearly so far as events in a log are
concerned, yes, there can be no doubt somebody should be
able to refer to that if it is a question of refreshing
memory but it may be said by some witnesses, "If Mr. Hicks
can refer to his statement that he made over a year ago,
then so can I". Where does it end? We do seem to have
moved to a different sphere.

     I can understand what my learned friend, Mr. Russell,
was doing when he was asking Mr. Hicks for comment about
what other witnesses said but frankly, where does it get
us?. What is the relevance of Mr. Hicks' views as to
whether he is surprised by what they said or not? I ask
you to exercise some control. It is a bit like a referee,
sir, who perhaps during the course of the game is beginning
just to lose a little touch with what is going on and then
all of a sudden he says, "I am going to have to exercise my
authority and there is going to have to be a booking here
or a booking there or somebody is going to be sent off”.
If it is me I will take my punishment but it has got to
happen at some stage otherwise instead of being here until
March we will be here until June. I think I have said
enough, sir, but it is a matter of concern to me.

     THE CORONER:   I think I do accept you have a point.
I do not quite go all the way down the road with you but I
do agree that the balance of where to draw the line I do
not find very easy to achieve. I do also agree I do not
want to introduce opinion evidence which is useless. On
the other hand, take Mr. Marshall for instance, (a) I
recognised him as an exceedingly important witness in every
sense of the word. Secondly, I recognised him rightly or
wrongly as not only being a man who could give evidence as
to what he saw, heard and said - which are the points you
have made - but because of his experience he was able to
give valid opinion evidence in certain fields, not in all
fields but in certain fields. That is why I allowed that.

     I was quite conscious that Mr. King was asking him a
lot of questions where he was asking for an opinion. In
fact, he prefaced a major series of questions, an hour and
a half of them approximately, with the comment, "You were
not involved but I want to know what you think". On
another occasion he said, "I am relying on your judgment"
or words to that effect. So I was very, very conscious of
that but I did not stop Mr. King on that because I felt,
right or wrongly, that Mr. Marshall could express an
opinion which carried a degree of weight.
                                                      92




     MR. ISAACS: ’ ' Certainly so far as some of those
questions, I have no objection.     He could clearly, as an
experienced Police Officer, give some evidence about
those matters, but there were others without the
necessary foundation being laid.    We found out after the
event that he had never been in a position, for example,
in the control box to see what could be seen on a semi­
final day.   That is just one small example.

     My concern, sir, and I don't for a moment ask you to
justify the course you have taken.   I only ask that
perhaps you could think about where we are going.

     THE CORONER:  I do take issue with you on that.    It.
is quite true that he agreed he hadn't been in the
control room on a semi-final day, but it was also quite
clear that he knew what you could see on the screen on a
league day.  As the cameras are identical on league/semi­
final days - the crowds may be different, tha volume of
people - the view is the same.

     MR. ISAACS:   Let me take another point, sir,
accepting that is valid...

     THE CORONER:   The point is I don't think we need to
discuss it because I accept the principle of what you are
saying.   I am not arguing with that.

     MR. ISAACS:   My concern is this and I say no more.
As I say, I don't ask you to justify the course that has
been taken, or to explain it.   What I say is this, the
mischief is that when it happens it is self-continuing.
It perpetuates itself.   I do it, my learned friend
Mr. King does it, Mr. Russell does it, Miss Addleman does
it and so it goes on.   Mr. Payne never does it, of
course!

     What I am saying, sir, is that we then all fall into
the trap and then it starts to become a real mischief.

     THE CORONER:     I entirely agree with that.   I have
got no quarrel with   that and it is terribly easy to fall
into that trap.   I   know I have fallen into it from time
to time and it is a   good thing if you remind me.

     MR. ISAACS:   That is all I am seeking to do, sir.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I accept some of that criticism,
but by no means the whole amount.   It is vary easy to
fall into the trap that because one doesn't like an
answer one gets, one therefore becomes hot under the
collar and makes these criticisms.
     If I may just' give a gentle example.   Those acting
on behalf of the Police, on a number of occasions,
different representatives, have asked a witness who is in
a pen looking outwards, what would the position have been
in their view of someone looking inwards in the position
of the Police, what they would have seen and what they
would have made of it.    I have not objected to that line
of questioning, sir, because it is a legitimate avenue of
investigation but it doesn't follow at all, merely
because you ask a witness his judgment or view based on
what he could see that that is illegitimate.    Sometimes
it is, but it isn't by any means.   For example, in the
position of Mr. Hicks, he is entitled to give evidence of
what he expected the Officer to do and then be asked why..
If it is right or wrong, so be it, but it wasn't
speculation of somebody who wasn't even there, wasn't
witnessing it and so forth.

     There is a balance and sometimes criticisms are made
and are easy to make, but when one analyses them they are
not justified.

     THE CORONER:   I think the principle that Mr. Isaacs
is making which is that one has to keep control, that is
right and there can't be any argument about that at all.
One can argue whether the line has been correctly drawn
in any particular case, but the principle, I entirely...
You are right and I am grateful to you.

     MR. ISAACS:   All it is is that I don't want to have
to - and I don't think any of my learned friends do - is
to keep on standing up and saying to you, sir, "I don't
think that questions should be asked.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King has actually reminded me of
a question I wanted to ask Mr. Hicks.   When the jury is
back, would you mind just coming back, Mr. Hicks.

              (In the presence of the jury)

                  TREVOR HICKS Recalled

                 Further by the Coroner:

Mr. Hicks, you gave an interesting reply when somebody
asked you a question - I have forgotten who - about the
tension, the cheering, in your part of the ground. - A.
Yes.

What   did you mean by that?   What was it like where you
were   with regard to yourself and the people you could
see?   - A. The people in close proximity to myself were
like   minded to myself.   They were more concerned about
                                                                  94




         what was happening in pens 2 and 3 than what was
         happening on the pitch, it is my opinion.

         Was that because you had generated - I don't mean this in
         a critical sense - you had generated the anxiety on those
B        groups, or was it that they were all seeing that
         something... - A. No, I think everybody - I mean, a
         specific example, the chap who was right next to me at
         the barrier also was in a similar position.   He had a
         young boy - you know, exactly the same as I was with the
         girls.   My impression was that everybody was in a
         similar mind, certainly within two or three yards.

         And further away you could not tell? - A. Well, it would .
         be a guesstimation.

                THE CORONER:   Thank you.   Mr. Hand.

                               PAUL HAND Sworn

                               By THE CORONER:

    Q. You are Paul Hand? - A. Yes.
    Q. Your address is                                   Lancashire? -
         A.

    Q. You are a draughtsman? - A. Yes.
    Q- You came to the semi-final in 1989, is that right? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. You travelled by car? - A. Yes.
    Q.   Do you know what time you arrived in Sheffield? - A, It
         was between half eleven and twelve o'clock.

    Q. Did you go straight     to the ground? - A. No,    we parked   at
       a pub on a hill and     went in for a drink.

    Q. I think you said it was terrible and youcould        not stand
         it and you went out   again? - A. Yes.

    Q. You then went to the ground and got there at about 1.15?
         - A. Yes.

    Q. Quite early? - A. Yes.
    Q. No problems getting in at all? - A. No.
    Q. Were you searched? - A. Yes, twice.
    Q. Then you went down the tunnel? - A. Yes.




H
4
                                                                    95


                                                                  P. HAND


        Q. Which was completely deserted, I assume? - A. Yes.

        Q. You exited on to the terracing? - A. Yes.

        Q. Did you go into the left or the right one? - A. The
    B      right.

        Q. So it would be right, what time would you say you got on
           to the terracing? - A. It would be about quarter to two.

        Q. Were they empty or full?- A. There were about 30 people
           there.

        Q. So they were empty really? - A. Yes.

        Q. They weren't totally empty but they were virtually empty?
           - A. Yes.

        Q. You took up a position where you thought you would like
           to watch the match? - A. Yes.

        Q. Did it then begin to fill up over the next half hour? -
           A. Yes.

        Q. Until about quarter to three?     Up to that point nothing
           excessive? - A. No.

        Q. You were quite content? - A. Yes.

        Q. Did you stay in that original position or did you move? -
           A. Our first position was right at the back and it got a
           bit crowded, nothing excessive.    We lookeddown and
           there was loads of space near the front so we moved down
           there.

        Q.   At quarter to three there was loads of    space in front of
             you, you are saying? - A. Well, no, it   was about half
             past two.

        Q. That is when you moved forward? - A. Yes, something like
           that.

        Q. I think you had three friends, there were four of you? -
           A. Yes.

        Q. It then continued filling up, is that right? - A. Yes.

        Q. When did you first begin to notice that anything was
           unusual? - A. It was about twenty to when it started
           filling up pretty badly.

        Q.    At what point did you decide it was getting - are you a
             big match attender?    Have you been to big matches
             before? - A. Yes.    I have been to Wembley and Anfield.




    H
                                                          96


                                                     P. HAND


Q. Do you usually go behind the goal? - A. Yes.

Q. Have you ever been in a tight situation somewhere else? -
   A. No.

Q. Never? - A. No.

Q. So you can't compare it with anything? - A. No.

Q. At what time did you begin to feel so uncomfortable that
   you thought, "I don't like this."? - A. It was between
   quarter to and ten to.

Q. Had you caught sight of a couple of girls? - A. Yes.

Q. When had you caught sight of them? - A. It would be about
   half past two.

Q. At that point they were fine? - A. Yes.

Q. You were as well? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you sort of keep your - I don't mean keep your eye on
   them in any derogatory sense, but you noticed them from
   time to time? - A. Yes.

Q. When did you first notice that they didn't seem to be
   quite as all right as they had been? - A. Well, at first
   they were to back and the left of us and then at about
   quarter to they all started surging forward and they
   ended up in front of us.    The youngest girl fainted.

Q. What was happening on the pitch when that happened? - A.
   Nothing.

Q. Were there any players on the pitch? - A. I don't think
   so, no.

0. You can't remember or you don't know, or there weren't? -
   A. I don't know.

Q. You don't know? - A. No.

Q. You say the one that look younger to you appeared to
   faint? - A. Yes.

Q. What was the older one doing? - A. She was trying to hold
   her up.   She was like sliding down to the floor.

Q. Where was she at that point in relation to you?   In
   front? - A. They were right in front of us.
                                                          97


                                                        P. HAND


Q. Right or left of you? - A. Well, they were like one was
   to the left and   one was to the right. Iwas like in the
   middle of both of them but at the back.

Q. Were you all right at that stage? - A. Yes, just getting
   a bit squashed.

Q. But you weren't worried for your life? - A. No.

Q. She seemed to you to have fainted? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you at that point worried about her? - A. Yes.

Q. Why was that? -   A. Because she...

Q* Because she had   fainted? - A. Yes.

Q* Did she revive after a little while? - A. Yes, after a
   couple of minutes.

Q. You could see that she revived? - A. Yes.

Q. You could actually see that she was OK? -A. Yes, we
   actually asked her if she was all right and she said,
   "Yes, I'm fine."

Q. You actually asked her? - A. Yes.

Q. I think it was at that point you realised sha wasn't from
   up north? - A. Yes.

Q. When she came round and you asked her that question, what
   was happening on the pitch? - A. I don't really know.

Q. Do you know whether the players had already been
   announced? - A. I don't think so.

Q. Do you remember the players being announced? - A. A few
   of them, yes.   I remember Grobbelaar's name being
   mentioned.

Q. But you can't relate these events to that? - A.No.

Q. Or are you saying that they definitely happened before
   the players were announced? - A. Yes, it was definitely
   before the players were announced.

Q. Before they were announced? - A. Yes.

Q. What happened then?   What did you do? - A. There was a
   Police Officer stood in the front of us and all the men
   around us started shouting at him to try and get these
   girls out because they looked pretty distressed.
You yourself weren't distressed at that stage? - A. No.

It was just these two girls you wanted to get out because
she had fainted? - A. Yes.

Did they want to go, as a matter of interest? - A. No.

They didn't want to go? - A. No.

Do you remember the players coming out? - A. No.

Do you remember the players coming out at all? - A. I
remember seeing a few of the players like Grobbelaar in
the goals and then I can't remember anything else after
that.

I'm sorry? - A. I remember seeing Grobbelaar in the
goals.

So you do remember remember the players? - A. Yes.

When you saw Grobbelaar at the goal, can you remember
what happened after that? - A. There was just a massive
surge forward.   It started with people swaying, like in
a normal match and you don't think anything about it,
like.   All of a sudden there was a massive surge and we
just stuck in the same position.




         Q. That was when Grobbelaar
u
                                                                 99

                                                               P. HAND' *




         0. So that was when Grobbelaar was already on the pitch? -
            A. I think so, yes. I am not sure.

         Q. This surge, you used the word "massive".   You   mean
    jj      that* do you? - A. Yes.

         Q. At that point you lost sight of the girls, is that
            correct? - A. They just disappeared.

         Q. It was at that point that you began   tohave difficulty
            with your breathing? - A. Yes.

         0. Would I be right in thinking that it was at that point
            that you became concerned for your safety? - A. Yes.

         Q. Up to then you had not been, or had you been? - A. No.

         Q. You had not.  How close to the front gate were you? -
            A. I was about 12 foot, approximately.

         Q. When this massive surge came can you remember anything
            about the gate at all? - A. No.

         Q. Can you remember it opening or shutting? - A. Yes.

         Q. Tell me when that was, as far as you remember? - A. It
            was about five minutes after the massive surge and it
            was to the left of me, the gate to the left.

         0. Do you recollect it staying open or not? - A. No, it
            was pushed open by the fans and then the Police shut it
            again.

         Q. How long did it stay shut after that, or did you not
            see it again? - A. I can't remember.

         0. But you think it was five minutes after this massive
            surge? - A. Yes.

         0. Can you remember whether anything was happening on the
            pitch at that time? Had the play already started at
            that point? - A. I can't remember.

         0. You can't remember? - A. No.

         Q. Can you mark on a plan for us the position where you
            were? (The witness marked his position on Exhibit C356)
            Was the position you have marked the position where you
            were when the massive surge took place? - A. Yes.

         Q. I just want to ask one more question about these girls.
            You know who they are, don't you? - A. Yes.

         Q. You didn't know them at the time? - A. No, I didn't.




    H
                                                   P. HAND




But you recognised them from the pictures? - A. Yes.

And in fact it is Mr. Hicks' daughters, isn't it? - A.
Yes.

You say you lost sight of them when this occurred? - A.
Yes.

You saw nothing more of them? - A. No.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I was making a note of your
question very early on, when the answer came and I
wasn't sure I got the question right.  You asked the
witness, "When did you decide it was so uncomfortable
that you didn't like it".  I could not remember the
question you put, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I was trying to distinguish between
uncomfortable and distressed.

     MR. KING:   You asked him a number of times, "When
was it unusual", and then you tried again, and my note
was, "When did you decide it felt so uncomfortable that
you didn't like it?", or something like that.

     THE CORONER:   That is more or less what I did say
actually.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

And I think, Mr. Hand, you said at about quarter-to, or
10-to-3 was the answer you gave? - A. Yes.

What was happening around you at quarter-to or 10-to-3
which you pinpointed that made you feel at the time on
the terrace where you were it was so uncomfortable that
you did not like it? - A. Nothing - because we couldn't
move.
      THE CORONER:    Sorry, I did not hear? - A.
Nothing, because we couldn't move.

I could not near that - try again. - A. Nothing,
because we couldn't move.

And that was at quarter-to, 10-to-3? - A. Yes.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Hand, I did not quite hear that last answer even
though you repeated it twice, so I will ask you again,
what was it like in the terrace for you personally
between 2.45 and   2.50? - A. Very distressing because we
couldn't move at   all.  All we could move was ourheads.
>                                                                   101

                                                               P. HAND. ,




         Q. At that time? - A. Yes.

         Q. All right.    Thank you very much.

    ]g             MR. KING:   Sir, there was one point   of
              clarification again, I am sorry.

                   THE CORONER:    It is all right.  Iknow I have
              gone a bit faster than with Mr. Hicks.

                   MR. KING:   I would like to say to Mr. Hand I am
              very appreciative to him for having waited so
              patiently.

         Q. Mr. Hand, when you described the massive surge, again I
            was rapidly making a note - I don't want to put words
            into your mouth - what happened on the surge to you? -
            A. At first we were just swaying backwards and forwards
            and then all of a sudden we just swayed forwards and
            stayed there.

         0. And that was the difference from a normal sway? - A.
            Yes.

         0. Tnat is what I wanted.    Thank you.

                           Further by THE CORONER
         Q. I ought to make quite clear that we have got this
            right.  This massive surge was when, whoever else was
            on the pitch, Grobbelaar was already on the pitch?- A.
            I think so, yes.

         0. And it was then - you were distressed and
            uncomfortable, before that I think? - A. Yes.

         0. But it was then that it really became desperate? - A.
            Yes, I think so.

         Q. would that be right? - A. Yes.

                   MR. MANNING:   There is a matter which surrounds
              tnat, sir, and that is that the witness said that
              althougn he, and I am not sure whether anybody else,
              tried to attract the attention of the Police Officers
              to the two young ladies, that they themselves didn't
              want to go out?

                   THE WITNESS:   Yes, they didn't.

         Q.        MR. MANNING:   How was that shown, that they
              didn't want to go out? - A. They kept shouting, "We
              don't want to go, we want to stay".
                                                           102

                                                         P. HAND,




    Q. So you were shouting to a Police Officer, '‘Get these
         two out"? - A. Yes.

    o. And they were equally shouting, "We don't want to go,
B      we want to stay"? - A. Yes.

    Q- Thank you very much indeed.
    Q-        MRS. McBRIEN:   Mr. Hand, how do you know that the
         time was 2.45 to 2.50 when you said you were very, very
         uncomfortable? - A. It is just approximate because I
         wasn't really looking at the time, at the time, because
         I was fighting for my life.

    o.        THE CORONER:   Mr. Hand, thank you very much
         indeed.  I know it has not taken long to take your
         evidence, and I am sorry about the wait.

                 SHAUN MICHAEL FORTUNE Called (Sworn)

                               By THE CORONER

    Q. Shaun Michael Fortune, is that right? - A. That is
         correct, yes.

    Q. And g ive us your address? - A. It is
             , Bristol.

    Q. And you were and perhaps still are an accounts clerk,
         is that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

    Q. Not that that matters very much because you are here as
         a Liverpool football supporter, is that right? - A.
         Yes, that's right.

    Q. You went to the '89 match in Sheffield? - A. Yes.
    o. I think you travelled up in a supporters' coach? - A.
       Yes, that's right.

    Q.   Eastville Coaches, is that right, was the company? - A.
         Yes.

    Q.   It was Bristol, so you had to leave fairly early? - A.
         Yes, I think we left about 8.30.

    0. You arrived off the motorway junction in Sheffield at
       about 12.30, is that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

    Q.   In fact, the Police stopped your particular coach? - A.
         Yes, just off the motorway.




H
                                                       103

                                                S. M. FORTUNE ,




Q. Is it right that they came on board? - A. They came on
   board to check that we all had tickets and that there
   was no alcohol on the coach.

Q.    And tney put a sticker or something on the coach - you
     may not have seen that? - A. No.

Q. But they definitely did those two things? - A. Yes.

Q.    You then drove on, at least the coach did, and you
     arrived at some side street and parked, isthat right?
     - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. I think you got off the coach at about half-past-1? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Then you wandered around a bit, is that right? - A. No,
   I went straight into the ground.  We walked from the
   coach to the ground and went straight in.




                    /Q. When you got there
                                   S. M. FORTUNE


When you got there, it was not a very long walk, was
it? - A. No, it was about 5 minutes walk from the
coach to the ground.

Quite close you were? - A. Yes.

No problems getting in, I take it? - A. No.

Except you were searched? - A. Yes, I was searched
just going in and once I got inside as well.

Twice? - A. Yes.

So three lots of searching   as far as you    were
concerned? - A. Yes.

How many of there were there? There were two other
lads and you, was it? - A. Yes, two of my friends who
were with me.

It was fairly empty I presume at the turnstiles? - A.
At the turnstiles, yes.

Then had you ever been to the ground before? - A. Yes,
I went to the game earlier in the season.

Not a semi-final? - A. No,   a League game earlier in
the season.

You went down the tunnel on this occasion? - A. Yes.

Is it because you like standing behind the goal? - A.
Yes, we tend to stand in the same place, just to the
right of the goal at each game.

The tunnel itself was clear, was it? - A. It was
fairly crowded as you sort of came out onto the
terrace.  There were a few people you had to push your
way through.

Could you see through them? Were they so thick that
you could not see through them? I do not mean were
they fat, but was the depth of the crowd such that you
could not see through, or could you see that the
terracing had plenty of space on it beyond them? - A.
I can't remember, to be honest.

Anyway you got through? - A. We got through, yes.

In fact, the terracing itself was relatively clear? -
A. Yes, once we got through this initial crowd and we
got through there it was fairly clear.

I think you entered Pen 3? - A. That is correct, yes.
                                  S. M. FORTUNE


Pen 4 was in the same sort of condition, as far as you
could see? - A. Yes, as far as I could see.

This would be about what time? - A. It was probably
quarter-to 2 when we were on the terrace.

Nothing much happened for 15 minutes or thereabouts,
is that right? - A. No, it was about quarter-past 2
when the crowd started to build up quite heavily.

Tell me then what happened - quarter-past you are
saying? - A. Yes, it was about quarter-past 2 the
crowd started to build up heavily and then there was a
bit of pushing and shoving.   We actually got pushed .
down to the front, so we decided to move down and
stand nearer to the front, in front of the crush
barrier.

What time would you say you took up your position in
front of this crush barrier? - A. The one at the front
was probably maybe 20-past to half-past 2.  I couldn't
be sure, but between 20-past and half-past 2 I would
have thought.  This was the one at the front.  There
were a few surges and you would get pushed and shoved
about, and so we decided just to move down the front
and stand in front of the barrier so that the pushing
would stop at the barrier.

It was protecting you, in fact? - A. It was protecting
us, yes.

In fact, this is   the barrier that you later discovered
broke? - A. Yes.

But you were not anywhere near   itwhen it broke? - A.
I was sort of in front of it.

When you were in that position you were not
particularly uncomfortable, would that be right? - A.
Not at 2.30, no, we weren't uncomfortable, but as time
went by it got more and more uncomfortable.

When would you say you first noticed that you were
uncomfortable?  I do not mean distressed,
uncomfortable? - A. It was probably 20-to 3, quarter-
to 3 it got really uncomfortable.  I had been in
crowds before where it had been tight, but this was
different.

In your statement you said, "By this time it was about
2.45.  I was not uncomfortable at  this time.  I was
able to move my arms."   Does that ring bells with you?
- A. I can't remember.   It is such a long time go.
                                  S. M. FORTUNE


Can I ask you this.  Times, as you probably have
discovered, are horrific things. - A. Yes, it is
difficult to say.

When you say 2.20/2.30/2.45, was it that you actually
looked at your watch? - A. No, just presumed.

Presumptions? - A. Yes.

Can you relate in any way to anything that was
happening on the pitch or anywhere else because
sometimes it helps because we know timings which you
do not know, and we can sometimes piece it together. -
A. 1 can remember seeing the teams come out onto the
pitch and kicking about, and that was probably about
2.30.

Did they then go back in again? - A. Yes, they went
back in.

At that point you were presumably --- A. I think we
were stood in front of the barrier at the front.

Carry on, I interrupted you and I should not have
done. - A. As time went by, I should say it was about
quarter-to 3, as 1 said in my statement we were
comfortable and then as time went by, maybe 10-to 3,
it got more and more crowded and the pressure was
getting terrific and then people were shouting for the
gates to be opened but nobody seemed to be taking any
notice.

When were you doing that?   Were you shouting yourself?
- A. Yes, I was shouting myself and other people - we
were all of us shouting, loads of us.

I say when, but what I want you to do is tell me what
was happening at the time when you were shouting for
the gates to be opened? - A. Nobody seemed to be
taking any notice of us.

That is not the question 1 am asking.   I am asking was
this when the teams were -- A. No, they weren't on
the pitch at the time.   I think they had gone by now.

Did you see the teams come out again? - A. No, I can't
remember seeing them come out again.

You never saw them again? - A. No, I can't remember
seeing them come out again.  There was so much going
on.

So you saw them do the kick-around about 2.30 you say?
- A. Yes.
                                  S. M. FORTUNE


That was the last you saw of them? - A. That is the
last I can remember seeing the players, yes.

You never saw any of the play? - A. No, I didn't see
any of the play.

Do you remember the teams being announced? - A. Yes, I
think I can remember that over the Tannoy.

Were you shouting that the gates should be opened
after that, or before, if you can remember? - A. I
can't say for sure.  I would have probably thought it
would have been after that because the teams are
usually announced about 10-to 3, and I think we were
shouting for the gates to be opened maybe 5-to 3.

Sometime after that? - A. Yes.

But it is difficult for you to be precise? - A. I
can't be precise now.

You also, I think, saw a couple of girls, did you not?
- A . That is right.  I saw at about quarter-past 2 the
Hicks sisters.   They were stood next to us at the time
and then they moved down towards the front as well.   I
know one of them was in trouble.   The girl with dark
hair was crying.

Which one? - A. One had red hair and one had dark
hair, and it was the one with dark hair.  She was
crying.  I think this must have been about 20-to 3.
This was with the pushing.  It got quite bad and she
was only a small girl so she couldn't sort of look
after herself.

Did you see either of them faint? - A. No, I didn't
actually see them faint, no.

Did you hear anybody say to them, "Do you want to get
out?" and they say, "No, we don't", or words to that
effect? - A. No.  People were sort of shouting to the
Police saying that, "These girls are in trouble, can
you do something?" but I don't think anything was done
at the time.

That was not the question.  The question was did you
hear them say to anybody --    As. No, I didn't hear.
They were about this distance from me to you.

I see, and there was quite a bit of noise going on? -
A. Yes, it was pandemonium.

So you were not actually right next to them? - A. No.
                                                            108



                                           S. M. FORTUNE


    Q.   I misunderstood, I am sorry.  When did you yourself
         become distressed? - A. It was probably about 5-to 3,
         I think.

B   Q.   Describe what happened that led to that distress? - A.
         There was a lot of pushing and shoving, and then
         suddenly there was an almighty sort of surge and you
         were just crushed, you couldn't move.  Well, you could
         move your arms, but you couldn't move your sort of
         lower body.

    Q.   This was not a steady build-up of pressure, it was
         sudden? - A. Well, it built up slowly, but then there .
         was more of a sudden surge.

    Q.   You think this was about 5-to 3. What makes you say
         that? - A. I don't know, probably just guesswork more
         than anything.

    Q.   You have already told me but I just must re-check.  It
         had nothing whatever to do with events on the field? -
         A. No, I can't remember seeing the players come out
D        and I would presume that would have probably come out
         at about 5-to 3. They generally do.

    Q.   But you did not see them? - A. I did not see them come
         out.  I didn't see anything.

    Q.   You yourself were not in any particular trouble at
         that time? - A. No, not at that time.  As time went
         by» it is difficult to say what time actually, but
         maybe quarter-of-an-hour, 20 minutes went by and then
         I started to sort of feel my legs go numb.   I could
         feel my heart pounding and my head and that.




F


                                 /Q.   That is not to say




H
                                          S. M. FORTUNE

That is not to say that other people were not in
trouble? - A. There were people around me.  There was
a chap to m y left. He sort of turned to his mate who
was next to me but there was nothing he could do.
His face was purple and his head was slumped forward
and we couldn't do anything.  I couldn't move.   There
was nothing we could do.

This is an interesting thing because there you were
next to him and he was obviously in very serious
trouble? - A. Yes, he was a lot shorter than me, that
was the trouble.  I am quite tall and I think most of
the pressure was round m y waist.

When this lad whoever it might have been was next to
you and was obviously in a very desperate state, what
was happening at the perimeter fence? - A. I remember
there were Police stood on the fence shouting out to
people behind just to push back and they were going,
"Push back, push b a c k " .

It was clear to you that that was happening? - A. It
wasn't clear that people were moving.  The Police
were saying "Push back".

In fact I think people came over the top of your
heads? - A. Yes, people were sort of climbing over my
head to go over the fence at the front.

You did not know where they  were coming from?   You
knew they were coming from behind? - A. Yes.

But you did not know from how far behind, did you? -
A. No, I didn't know how far back, no.

Your friends had got slightly separated from you, is
that right? - A. Yes.  There was one quite near to me
and there was another one sort of four or five yards
down towards...

Did you communicate with them at all? - A. I think we
did once to sort of just ask if you were okay and
just saying, "Don't panic".

What did they say to you? -   A. I can't remember to be
honest.  I can't remember.    Just said that they were
okay I would have thought.

They said they were okay? - A. Yes.

That is what you said in your statement and I just
wondered whether you could remember.  You were a very
sensible young man because you said you did not panic
and that was obviously a good thing.  You waited
basically to get out, did you not? - A. Yes, I just
sort of waited.  I just stood there trying to stay
                                                                 110


                                                      S. M. FORTUNE

       upright because I was sort of crouched down.        The
       pressure was just round m y waist.

    Q. Had you lost sight of the two girls? - A. Yes.

    Q. When did you lose sight of them do you remember? Was
B      it before this surge or after? - A. Yes, I think it
       was before the big surge.  I remember seeing them
       crying and then I can't remember seeing them again.
       1 saw one of them.

                   Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:

    Q. Mr. Fortune, obviously times are a little difficult
       for you and that is clear obviously from what the
       learned Coroner.  You perhaps place events ten
       minutes in your statement after what you have told us
       today but does it seem that there was a time when you
       literally could not move anything and then at about
       2.55 you describe being able to move your hands or
       your arms? - A. No, you could always move your arms.
       It was just the rest of your body.  It was just
       solid.  You just couldn't move.

D   Q. That has clarified it.  I was going to ask if there
       was a change in the position but you say you could
       always move your arms.  You could not see the
       position of the people who were coming.  You did not
       know where they were coming from, did you? - A. No, I
       was just looking forward.  I couldn't see.

    Q. People were physically climbing over you? - A. Yes,
       there were people sort of crawling over me and being
       passed down to the front.

    Q. Do you remember whilst you were in Pen 3 a beach ball
       being pinged around the crowd? - A. Yes, I remember
       that.

    Q. Were you able to stretch up to hit it or reach it at
       all? - A. No, I think that was fairly early.  That
       was probably twenty to three or quarter to three.

    Q. You are absolutely right.  That was twenty to three.
       There was no problem then? - A. Not at that time, no.

                    Cross-Examined bv MR. K I N G :

    Q. At the time you were conscious of the girls in some
       distress, the darker girl crying, what was the state
       of the crowd around them at that stage? - A. It
       wasn't too bad because that was about half past two
       to maybe twenty five to three and it wasn't that bad
       at the time.  There had been so many surges that I
       think they had got pushed about.




H
                                              S. M. FORTUNE

Q. How long after that was it that there came a time
   when you said to' yourself, "This is so uncomfortable.
   There has never been anything like this before.   I
   have been in tight crowds but nothing like this"? -
   A. It was about five to three and so it was probably
   quarter of an hour to twenty minutes after that.

                Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Mr. Fortune, could you describe the person who was in
   serious trouble near you, the person who was shorter
   than you? - A. All I can remember is that he had
   brown hair and he was quite a big chap, quite well
   built.  He was short but he was stocky.  I can't
   really remember him.  I couldn't pick him out in a
   crowd by his face.

                    Further bv THE CORONER:

Q. We have got a plan and I want you to put a cross
   where you were when this surge occurred and the
   barrier, if you like, that you stood in front of? -
   A. Yes.  Do you mean when I started off or where I
   finished up?

Q. No, when you decided to stand in front of a barrier,
   do you remember? - A. Yes.

Q.   To shield yourself, so to speak? - A. It was the
     barrier that broke and so I was probably about there
     ( indicating\.

Q.   Was that the position where you ended up after the
     surge or did you move from there? - A. I think I
     probably moved from there about a yard towards the
     front.

Q. Put a circle there? - A. Possibly a bit more to the
   left.

Q. Do you want another plan to do it again before you
   sign it? Do it the other way round.   Put the circle
   for the first position and the cross for the
   second? - A. Yes.

       MR. JONES:   That will be C.357.

      MR. KING:  I have been asked, probably in the desire
to hurry things, to pick up on a couple of points.

     THE CORONER:   Let me just ask one more question which
I forgot to ask as well.

Q. You were near that barrier which you know broke.  Did
   you realise it broke whilst you were there? - A. No,
   I didn't realise until it was thrown over the top of
   the fence.
                                         S. M. FORTUNE


Tell me about that please? - A. All I can remember is
that I remember somebody throw part of it over the
front of the fence.

Was it a big piece of pipe or what? - A. I cannot say
how long it was.  I just remember seeing the blue
barrier and it was part of the barrier.

.It flew over the top? - A. Yes.

Were there people on the front fence at that point? -
A. I would have thought so.  I cannot remember but I
would have thought so.




                /Further Cross-Examined bv MR. KING
                                               S. M. FORTUNE


           Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING?

Can I take you to the time when you recall that people
were shouting for the gates to be opened? - A. Yes.

You say that they were shouting to the Police? - A. Well,
whoever was stood at the front - Police, stewards.

Where were the Police? - A. They were stood in front of
the fence.    Well, there were a few Police in front of
the fence.

What were they doing in response to that shouting? - A.
Well, they didn't seem to be doing anything.   I can't
say what they were actually doing...

But they didn't do anything? - A. No.

     THE CORONER:      Well, perhaps you ought to say as far
as he saw.

     MR. KING:      As far as you saw? - A. As far as I saw.

They didn't, as far as you could see, open the gates? -
A. No. Well, the gate did burst open and it was shut
again under the pressure.

I know it is difficult, but in terms of time how long
were people shouting,  Open the gates,” during which
time, from your viewpoint, the Police weren't doing
anything in response?   How long did that go on for? - A.
Two or three minutes, I would have thought.   The gate
did burst open on two occasions and the first time it was
shut back up and the second time I think a few people
were let out and then it was shut again.

On two occasions the gate was opened;  once you thought
it burst open, once opened perhaps deliberately and on
each occasion shut again? - A. Yes.

What was  happening around      you at    that time? - A. People
were just shouting  to the      Police    for help and to open th
gate.

What was   the state of the     crowd?    - A.Well, it was just
panic.     Well, not panic,     it was    just pandemonium.

In terms of conditions? - A. Oh, conditions, there were a
few people sort of just collapsed and other people were
just stood there like myself just in a daze, just trying
to hold on.

You also told us about the Police on the perimeter gates
at some stage shouting to people to push back? - A. Yes.
                                                             114


                                                    S. M. FORTUNE


Q.    Were you yourself in a     position   to be able to push back?
     - A. No, I couldn't.

Q.    Why? - A. Well, it was     just the   pressure, there was so
     much pressure.

Q. You yourself were solid? - A. Yes.

Q. So you couldn't respond to that request? - A. No.

                Cross-Examined by MISS ADDELMAN:

Q. Can you help about this, Mr. Fortune, you have been asked
   some questions about the shouts to the Police to open the
   gate. - A. Yes.

Q. I think you agreed with the learned Coroner when he asked
   you about this when you were first examined about it,
   that there was a lot of noise going on at the time.   Do
   you stand by that answer? - A. Yes, I stand by that, but
   I am sure they must have realised what was going on.
   You just couldn't miss it.

Q.    Why do you say that? -    A. Well,  there were people who had
     sort of collapsed and we were shouting and pointing to
     different people who had maybe collapsed, who had gone
     blue.   It was fairly obvious what was going on.

Q. You say there were people pointing? - A. Yes.

Q. What else was going on at that time?   There was the
   noise?   You agree with that?   There was a lot of noise?
   - A. There was noise, there were people screaming,
   shouting, "Help, help."

Q.   How far away were the Police from you at that time? - A.
     They were on the fences, probably five or six feet, maybe
     a bit more than that.

Q.   You say that there was no response from the Police? - A.
     Well, there didn't seem to be a response that I could
     see.   They didn't open the gates straight away.    That
     is what I am saying.    They didn't react straight away.
     Maybe they didn't hear, I don't know.

                     Further by THE CORONER?

Q. I think you yourself were trapped from the waist down,
   basically? - A. Yes.

Q. That is because you are a nice tall young man.

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, could I just ask this witness
     one more question?
                                               S. M. FORTUNE


     THE CORONER: ’    Yes.

       Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

About how many Officers did you see in  front of the
perimeter fence when people were calling out for help? -
A. At what time?   Well, when people were shouting for
help they were stood on the fence, and  maybe there could
have been a dozen of them stood on the fence on the
front.   Maybe - I can't say exactly - but eight to a
dozen.

                  Further by THE CORONER:

You are saying they were standing... - A. Well, there is
a little wall and then there is the fence, and they were
stood on the wall sort of looking over, pulling people
up.

The Officers?     Pardon? - A. They were pulling some people
out.

In that case I don't know whether you have answered...
Are you saying that that was the time... - A. No, that
was maybe five past three.   It was not when the initial
surge came.

What I think Mrs. McBrien was after was when people were
shouting and when you said there didn't appear to be any
response from the Police, how many Police Officers were
there?   If you know. - A. I couldn't say, actually.  I
don't know.

                Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

I am sorry to go over something you have said a few
moments ago.    Is it our evidence that the Police didn't
respond to the shouts you have spoken about for two or
three minutes? - A. I could not say the exact time but it
seemed like two or three minutes.

     THE CORONER:     That is clearer for you, isn't it?

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.     Mr. Rex, and then we are
stopping after this witness.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am bound to say that I feel
personally now under such pressure of time that...

     THE CORONER:     You would rather I didn't...?
7^r
                                                                      116


                                                              S. M. FORTUNE


                  MR. KING:   Well, I can't speak for Mr. Rex and if
             he can't come tomorrow I will obviously agree, but...   I
             can't speak for those around me but we are getting to a
             point where I may not be asking questions...

      B           THE CORONER:      Mr. Rex, could you come back
             tomorrow?

                  MR. REX:  I came with Mr. Fortune,       We travelled up
             from Bristol today.

                  MR. KING:      Call the witness, sir.

                              JEFFREY ROBERT REX Sworn

                                   By THE CORONER:

          Q. It is Jeffrey Robert Rex? - A. Yes.

          Q. Of                                      Bristol? - A. Yes.

          Q. You are a friend of Mr. Fortune? - A. I am, yes.
      D   Q. In fact you came on the same coach? - A. I did.

          Q. We know what time you left because you would agree with
             Mr. Fortune, 8.30 or thereabouts? - A. That's right, when
             the coach was searched and when we actually arrived and
             parked up just after Leppings Lane.d

          Q. I think we can skip what happened with the searching on
             the coach and all that because we have heard that.   Did
             you go straight to the ground with your friend? - A. We
             did.  It was about a five or ten minute walk, something
             like that.

          Q. Other spectators were going to the ground as well? - A.
             That's right, they were.

          Q. They all seemed reasonably happy? - A. Yes, it was a
             typical FA Cup semi-final atmosphere.

          Q. You got through the turnstiles with no problems? - A. No
             problems at all.

          Q. The usual searching? - A. That's right.   A Policeman
             checked we had tickets just outside the turnstile.  We
             went in and were searched inside, which is quite normal
             these days and we went on in.

          Q. So your ticket was checked outside by a Policeman? - A.
             It was, just to check we had a valid ticket, outside the
             ground.




      H
                                                          117


                                                      J. R. REX


Q. Where was that Policeman doing the checking? - A. Just
   outside the turnstiles.

Q. Then you entered pen 3? - A. That's right.

Q. What time would you say you got in? - A. We actually
   entered it at about quarter to two, twenty to two.

Q. It was reasonably empty at that point? - A. Yes,
   reasonably empty.

Q. Describe for me your experience.   It doesn't have to be
   the same as your friend s, of course. - A. Well, we moved
   to the same position in which we stood while watching the.
   Liverpool versus Sheffield Wednesday game, which was in
   the January of that year, which was more or less the
   middle of pen 3, originally.   As my friend said, we
   stood quite near what we later found out were the Hicks
   sisters.  We stood just behind them in fact.   From about
   quarter past two onwards, quarter past two to half past
   two I would say, rushes of people seemed to come down the
   terrace.   We put up with this for about five or ten
   minutes and we thought we would get out of the way of it
   and go down the front where it seemed to be a bit less,
   down to the front behind the crush barrier.

Q. So it was really because you didn't enjoy the rushes? -
   A. That's right, because every time it came down we would
   get pushed down four or five steps and you gat a bit fed
   up with this after a while and we moved down the front.

Q. You took refuge in front of the barrier? - A. That's
   right, yes.

Q. The girls moved as well? - A. They did, actually.
   Probably just before us, I would imagine.

Q. You didn't actually speak to them? - A. No, not at all.




           Q. It was just that there
It was just that there weren't many girls on the
terraces? - A. That is right.

So they attracted your attention? - A. That is right,
they did, yes.

Did you see them when they had moved out of the way of
these rushes? - A. Yes, they were in that sort of
direction in front of us, if you see what I mean - a
few people in front.

What time would you say that you sheltered, if I can
use the word, in front of the barrier? - A. I would say
probably approximately half-past-2.

And the girls were there as well? - A. They were at
that time, yes.

At that time you were okay? - A. I was reasonably okay,
yes.  It seemed to be just filling up the way a normal
terrace does for an average big game, I would say, at
that time.

What happened then? Perhaps you had better tell me in
your words? - A. Well, it was just one of those things,
the crowd seemed to get bigger and bigger as it went
on, and I think it was about quarter-to-3 that we
noticed one of the girls, the younger girl, in fact,
was being - well, the older girl was holding her in her
arms.  She seemed to have either fainted or she was in
some sort of distress, and I think people in that sort
of vicinity just in front of us were trying to point
out to people outside that she was in some sort of
distress at that time.  About five minutes after that
we lost sight of them because from about quarter-to-3,
10-to-3, the crush, as I will call it now, became worse
obviously and they were just removed from our sight.

She was being held by her sister? - A. That is right,
her older sister, yes.

Did you see her recover from this faint at all or not?
- A. I didn't actually, no.   The last time I saw them
she was   in her sister's arms.

And this would be about quarter-to-3,   you say?   -     A. I
would say so, yes.

Can you   relate it to any event on the field? - A.    Well,
I would   say it was before the teams came out. I can
vaguely remember the teams coming out at about 10-to-3,
but only vaguely.   I think it was before that time.
                                                          119

                                                       J. R. REX-




     Q. It was ...? - A. It was before the teams came out, to
        the best of my knowledge.

     Q. In relation to the teams coming out when did it become
jj      a severe crush? - A. For me personally, I started
        really getting worried just before the teams had come
        out, so that would be just prior, say, to lO-to-3.

     Q V The teams actually came out at 6-minutes-tO“3. - A. 6-
         minutes-to, did they? Well it must have been around
         lO-to-3, I seemed to notice then it changed from a
         crowd for a big game, the difference between that and
         something that was getting different and a bit
         worrying, and that was round 10-to-3.  I was certainly
         worried for my own safety at that time anyway, getting
         worried.

     0. Did you notice any increase in pressure after the teams
        came out? - A. There was a sudden surge actually.  It
        was a gradual pressure but obviously you felt it, it
        was quite tight, as I say, worrying, but there was at
        one point quite a surge and it came quite out of the
D       blue, we didn't expect it, and it was very, very
        shocking in a way, quite worrying.

     Q. The teams by this time were already on the pitch? - A.
        They were on the pitch.  I vaguely remember them
        kicking about in the goal but I can't remember the game
        kicking off itself.

     Q. You don't remember that? - A. I don't remember the game
        kicking off.

     Q. In fact, I think you saw a man in the crowd who was
        trying to communicate with the people at the back, is
        that right? - A. There was a man whose face was
        literally that far from mine, between say two people's
        shoulders.   I think he originally started, because he
        wasn't that far from the Hicks sisters, and I think he
        had turned round, probably just before, say, the major
        crush started, and he was trying to indicate to the
        people behind to push back because he could see they
        were in distress and he didn't want any pressure on
        them, but when the actual major crush started he was
        caught facing back up the terrace, if you see what I
        mean, with his back to the pitch, looking me in the
        face.  I would say throughout the entire - when the
        crush was at its fiercest - he was telling me every so
        often, he was saying, "Please push back", and I said,
        "I can't, can't move a muscle", because I really could
        not move a muscle.   My arms were in that sort of
        position and I really couldn't move a muscle, I was
        just trapped, the same as everybody else.




H
Did you actually see the girls behind this chap? - A. I
didn't actually see them, but if you see what 1 mean,
in my mind's eye I would  imagine they were and I am
sure that he started off warning people.

So you didn't see the Hicks girls when this man was
actually communicating with you? - A. No, I didn't
actually, no.

It was before then that you had seen them? - A. The
last time I saw them was before that, yes.

I just want to check this with you, simply tomake sure
that we have got it right.  In your statement you
seemed to indicate that you caught a glimpse of the
girls behind the man asking the crowd to push back? -
A. I did?

Yes.  Do you remember that? Does that ring a bell? -
A. It seems to now, yes.  I think it is just that it is
18 months since I made the statement.

I will read you the bit and then all I want you to do
is tell me what is correct.  It doesn't matter, you
see, so long as we get the truth:

     "I then caught a glimpse of the Hicks girls, who
     were directly behind the man asking the crowd to
     push back.  The man was obviously trying to
     protect them.   I could see the Hicks girls from
     the shoulders upwards and one was holding the
     other with her arms round her shoulders.   The
     Hicks girl that was being held was the younger one
     of the two.   I cannot remember much about the
     Hicks girls, but the younger one was slightly
     shorter and thinner than the elder one.   The
     younger one who was being held by her sister
     appeared in a bad way.   Her head was tilted to one
     side."
- A. That is right.

You remember that? - A. I do.

Yes:

     "As best as I can remember I think the young Hicks
     girl may have been unconscious at that time.  I
     would not say she was dead."
- A. That's right.

Now then, is this the same episode which you described
to me when you said that you thought she had fainted? -
A. Yes, it was.  Perhaps it was over a few minutes.
Because it is a totally different time, isn't it?   It
doesn't matter, as I say.  You had said that the
fainting episode occurred quite a bit earlier, that
this was after the surge? - A. The man was telling me
to push back after the surge, but he was also telling
people to push back probably before it actually
started, if you see what I mean, to try and protect the
girls.

When   was it in  relation to    the surge that you thought
that   the Hicks   girl was in   a bad way in the way you
have   described   it? - A. It   would say it was less than
five   minutes, four or five     minutes before.

It is not quite what is in your statement.  Now, as I
say, it does not actually matter to me which is correct
but are you saying that you were mistaken when you
wrote the statement, because the clear implication in
the statement is that this was happening after the
surge.  I did not read this bit but you said:

       "At about 5-to-3 I saw a man facing the crowd
       looking towards the rear of the pen.  I could see
       the man as I looked over the shoulders of people
       in front of us.  This man was saying, 'Push back,
       push back.  They're in trouble'.  I then caught a
       glimpse of the Hicks girls, who were directly
       behind the man".

- and then it goes on talking about her being
unconscious. - A. Yes, I think probably when I made the
statement I remembered the fact, thinking back now I
think it is probably correct, that they were behind him
and I did catch a glimpse.  I am probably thinking now
in January 1991 that I couldn't see them, if you see
what I mean.

Yes.  It is exceedingly difficult. - A. It certainly
is.  I agree with you there.

As you were facing this man and he had been calling,
and this had happened with the girls, did you hear a
cheer? - A. I did hear a cheer.  I didn't know whether
it was perhaps because the game had kicked off or it
might have been the moment when Peter Beardsley hit the
crossbar, it could have been either of those, and as I
said I can't remember the game kicking off so I could
not be certain.

Where was the cheer coming from?        Can you remember
that? - A. From behind.

From within the pen? - A. I would say so, at the back
of the pen, and the other pens.
                                                              122



                                            J. R. REX


    Q.    This poor man, in fact, was quite distressed himself,
          was he not? - A. He was, yes.  As I was watching him,
          I couldn't avoid seeing him because I was staring
          directly into his face - his face was there, as I said
B         - and I can only say his condition worsened.

    Q.    But he kept on saying, "Push back", did he not? - A.
          He did, yes, for it must have been 5 or 10 minutes.

    Q.   Did you see the match finish at all? - A. Not at     all.

    Q.   Were you in a position to see the gate at all? -     A. To
          see the gate?

    Q.   Yes. - A. I could see the gate originally, yes.

    Q.   Did you see any movement at or on the gates, or with
          the gates? - A. I vaguely remember the gates being
         opened and a number of people getting out, say half-a-
         dozen, a dozen people, and then the gates were shut
         again.   I think the Police probably at that time
          thought it was some sort of pitch invasion and shut
D        the gates again, and they didn't realise the severity
         of the situation.

    Q.   Do you know in relation to the surge which you have
         described, when did that happen? - A. The gates being
         opened you mean?

    Q.   Yes, and these people? - A. To be honest, I can't
         remember.  I can remember them as two separate
         incidents, but linked in time I cannot remember.

    Q.   Okay.  Then after quite a while it seemed to ease and
          you were able to escape I think? - A. It did, yes.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

    Q.   May I just see how your evidence, please, can be left
         with the Jury on the question of the sequence of
         events.  One thing you are clear about is that there
         did come a time when the crowd changed from being a
         crowd for a big game into something different, meaning
         a crush? - A. That would have been around the time —

    Q.   Just a minute.   All I am asking you at the moment   is
          that there was a change? - A. Yes, there was a
          significant change, yes.

    Q.   You have given various times for that, and does it
         come down to this, that that was somewhere about 10 or
         5-to 3? - A. I would say it was slightly earlier
         perhaps, about quarter-to 3, when I personally was
         worried and it seemed different to me.
                                                            123




                                               J. R. REX


                      Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

    Q.   I am sorry about this, Mr. Rex, it is just that that
         last answer seems to be slightly inconsistent with
         something you said to the Coroner, which was that just
         before the teams came out it became more than just a
         big crush, sort of different and it got a bit
         worrying, and it seemed to me certainly that you
         believed that the teams came out at 10-to 3, and so
         that is why you said 10-to 3 to the Jury and to the
         Coroner.  Then the Coroner reminded you — perhaps not
         "reminded you" are the best words - told you that in
         fact the teams had come out at 2.54, 6 minutes to 3. -
         A. Yes.

    Q.   That is s6mething different from that which you have
         just told Mr. Payne, which was that it was 2.45 when
         this change took place? - A. I did not actually know
         what time the teams came out. As I say, I didn't
         actually look at my watch then.

    Q.   Exactly.  Could we just look at it from the point of
U        view of what actually was happening on the pitch. You
         did not look at your watch so it was not as if you
         knew it was 10-to 3 or quarter-to 3 or 6 minutes to 3
         from looking at any time that was either on your wrist
         or on the clock in the ground, that was not it, was
         it? - A. No.

    Q.   You were telling us that it became more than just a
         big crush just before the teams came out.  That was
         something that made sense to you? - A. Yes, it did.

    Q.   More than just a big crowd, I am helpfully reminded by
         Mr. Payne.  - A. Yes.

    Q.   So that   if that happened just before the teams came
         out, it   would have happened just before, if the
         Coroner   is right - and we know that he is - 6 minutes
         to 3? -   A. Yes.

    Q.   That is how you leave it now? - A. Yes, in other words
         about 10-to 3.

    Q.   Or some time just before the teams came out? - A. Yes.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

    Q.   You may have been questioned on matters without a
         difference, Mr. Rex, but we seem to be arguing about
         what is meant by "just before".  If the team came out
         at 6 minutes to 3, and you assume that to be the case,
         you would say it was 10 minutes to 3 when you became
         worried for your own safety? - A. Yes. When I was




H
^ 3
                                                                       124




                                                     J. R. REX


                  saying "just before", I am saying 5 minutes, about 10-


           Q.     Yes, that is what I wanted to investigate because
      B            just before can mean different things to different
                  people, and it is unfair to you not to find out what
                  you mean.  So you are putting it at about 5 minutes
                . before the team came out that you became worried for
                  your own safety? - A. That is correct.

           Q.    What was happening?   Give us some flavour because none
                 of us were there.   Give us the flavour of what was
                 happening where you were in that pen at that time 5
                 minutes or so before the team came out when you were
                 worried for your own safety? - A. The surge started
                 ana basically it was just pandemonium.   People were
                 screaming "Help" to the front, to each other.   People
                 were shouting "Push back".

          Q.      What was the crush like? - A. I   beg your pardon?

          Q.     Were you crushed at that point? What was it like,
      D          could you describe it? What did you think was going
                 to happen, what were you worried about? - A. I was
                 worried about getting killed.

          Q.     I am sorry to press you on that because it is an
                 experience which none of us have had and we hear words
                 and it can mean different things.   In many ways I do
                 not apologise to you because you are here to help us,
                 but I do apologise because I do not want you to re­
                 live it in such a way that it brings back painful
                 memories, and I appreciate that.   I am very grateful
                 for your help.   Again it is the obvious point but when
                 you said the man was turned round towards you and was
                 saying,   Push back", that was something which, much as
                 you would have loved to have helped on, you personally
                 couldn t , you were just trapped? - A. I could not move
                 a muscle.

          Q.     And that was true of the people around you? - A. Quite
                 true, yes.                                       x

                      HR. KING:   I do not think I can take it any
                 further, sir.                                   7

                          Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

          Q.    Mr. Rex, did you say that the man who turned around
                and was telling the people to push back, continued
                doing that for 5 to 10 minutes? - A. He did indeed,
                yes.                                               *

                     THE CORONER: Nothing else from anybody?
                  Further by THE CORONER:

 Can you just mark the plan? (Witness marks pl a n )

     THE CORONER: Members of the Jury, while he is
doing that, I am very sorry about making you so late,
but you do understand that when people come a long way
- and as it is we have got a few people we could not
deal with - it is a shame to make them go all the way
back to Bristol and bring them back tomorrow morning,
it is an awful long way.  Where has he marked it?

Is that the position that you took up in front of the
barrier? - A. Yes.

One other question which I had forgotten.

     MR. JONES:      That will be C358, sir.

     THE CORONER: Did you see or hear that barrier go
at all? - A. I didn't hear a thing actually. I didn't
even realise it had broken.

So you know nothing about that? - A. Not the barrier
breaking, no.

The other thing, because we have mentioned the Hicks
girls, you caught a glimpse of them, as you said, at
that point? - A. Yes.

      that you lost sight of them and you do not know
what happened to them? - A. No, not at all.

     THE CORONER: I am most grateful to you.     I hope
you have a good journey back.

     Ladies and gentlemen, go as fast as you can and
we will see you in the morning at 10 o'clock.

           (In the absence of the Jury)

     THE CORONER: Whilst the Jury are going out, I
will tell you whom we are planning for tomorrow.    It
is Mr. Tudor, Mr, Taylor and P.C. McGuinness, the
overspill (if I can use that word and perhaps I should
not have used it).   It is the people who we have not
been able to deal with today. Mr. Tudor, Mr. Taylor
and P.C. McGuinness.   Are Mr. Tudor and Mr. Taylor
still in the room?

     MR. JONES:     No sir, we have dismissed them.

     THE CORONER: Who are you?
2 -25
                                                                 126




                                                J. R. REX

                   MR. TUDOR:   Mr. Tudor.

             haH        C0R0N5R: M* ‘ Tudor, I apologise that you have
                  Z     ? e and We have not caH e d you and that we
        B    want you to come again tomorrow, but I think if you
             have been here for any length of time you will realise
                    n<>t as easy as all that to get the timings
             all            yOU are flrs*: ln the llst so you should be
             ail right tomorrow, so please be back, if you would.

                   Then we are going to have Dr. Flenley.  This is
             not necessarily in the order we are going to take
             them. We may drop P.C. McGuinness down to the bottom
             because it is easier.   So it is Dr. Flenley, Mr.
             Goodman, Mr. Oyitch, Mr. McMahone, Mr. Griramant, the
             youngster, Mr. Trees, another youngster, and Mr.
             Leigh.

                 MR. MANNING:  Sir, I have felt from 4 o'clock
            onwards that justice has not been done.   I appreciate
                Pressure on you, that you have witnesses whom we
            all know have come a long distance and you could have
        D   had no way of knowing that the examination of
            witnesses would take as long as it did.   You must have
            thought clearly that we would get through that list,
            otherwise you would not have called them.

                 I have felt under pressure not to ask questions,
            although you very fairly said, "Please don't feel
            inhibited . I also looked into the faces of the Jury
            and felt that there was almost a groan as the clock
            took its turn minute by minute.

                 I think there is a world of difference, with the
            greatest of respect, to asking a Jury to sit until 10-
            past 4, or even 20-past 4, as we have done, and there
            is a world of difference between us staying and making
            submissions after 4 o'clock when they have gone away.
            But to be looking at a clock at 10-past 5 for a
            witness and although they nod and say they understand,
             , ° n°t think that these witnesses have had either
            the examination or, more importantly, the attention of
            the Jury that other witnesses have had.

                  I say that with the greatest of respect because I
            equally appreciate the difficulty in trying to
            estimate whether a person will have any examination or
            examination which in one case lasted 2 \ days.   I think
            a line has to be drawn and I think, at the end of the
            day* the interests of justice are what are paramount.
            At the risk of being rude to people who have come from
             u            interests of justice have to come.-before
            their inconvenience. If we have two people who surely
            °®e of; your Officers will have told you have travelled




        H
! -- » a              ...a .                  ■"m     -                S ir s
                                                             127

                                                                       >•


                                              J. R. REX
           /   ’ ■*

           ^together in the same car, then either we were going to
           have both of them or we had none of them.    I think .had
           it not been the fact that they said they had come i i
           the same car, all of us would have been on our feet
B          supporting Mr. King that enough was really enough at
           that time.   It may be thiat I am pushing at an open
           door, sir.

                THE CORONER: I hear you, and I also heard Mr*
           Isaacs earlier.   I know Mr. Isaacs is not rising, but
           he made the point about, if you like, not speed of
           questioning, I agree with that, but the point that one
           has to keep some control over the proceedings-   I do
           not like keeping the Jury late, as you know.   I do not
           think that the occasional extra hour is of such
           consequence as to render them incapable.   If we did it
           regularly every day, I would entirely agree with you.
           I did warn them yesterday, if you remember, that we
           would go on until A.30 today in any case, so they were
           prepared for that.   So whilst I hear what you say, I
           think that is all 1 am going to say. Anything else?
           10 o'clock tomorrow.
D
                  (The Inquests were adjourned until 10 o'clock
                              tomorrow morning)




                                              I   .
