                                                                                           M I R . 15

                                                                                                                  jO^j
  OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised            o S ^ rp                Number



  JW
Jk(Include source and any document number if relevant)                    ( ^ Q _      —

        :    >
   Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No ____
                                                                                                                     Receiver




                                                                                                                       Indexer
  Document registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                 Statement Reader
  Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                       Indexer
   Indexed as indicated

  No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                 O/M         SIO
  Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                       Indexer
   Further action No(s)


  When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                 RICHARD JONES




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

                3rd May, 1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                           INDEX TO TIUMSCRIPT

                                                                                   Page N o ,

                        PROF. ALAN USHER Called

                             Bv THE COROl'TER......................... .              2

                             By MR. FRASER .............................              2
                    B
                             Ftir’ther by THE C O R O N E R ..................«•      3

                        POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCIC Called

                             3y THE CORONER ............................

                        POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                             Ey THE CORONER ............................




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        3rd May, 1990


                                  INQUEST INTO TITS DEATH OF RICKARD JONES

                             KR. FRASER:   Sir, the evidence that you will now
                        hear relates to Richard Jones.  Richard's parents are
                        in Court with social workers and members of the family.
                    B   The parents are represented by a practice which is a
                        member of my Group and I appear on their behalf as agent
                        through the usual Steering Committee arrangement.

                             THE CORONER: Now, I think, Mr. Jones, you were here
                        on the first day, were you not, so you know the general
                        form so I am not going to go over that ground now and
                        we will start straightaway.

                             This is a resumed Inquest which was opened on the
                        18th April, 198 9 . On that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                        Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this
                                Inquest has been identified to PC 2220
                                Bromley of the South Yorkshire Po3.ice as
                    D           that of Richard Jones by Leslie Jones,
                                his father. He was 2 5 37-ears of age having
                                been b o m on the      October, 19^3
                                Liverpool. He was a single man and he
                                lived a t __________________ Allerton.
                                He was an office worker by occupation.
                                He died at Hillsborough Football Ground
                    E           following an incident there on Saturday,
                                15th April, 19 8 9 * PC Bromley caused the
                                body to be removed to the Medico Legal
                                Centre and there he identified it to
                                Detective Constable Simon Weigold who
                                subsequently identified the same body to
                                Prof. Usher.    It is the family wish that
                                the body should be buried."

                             And I then adjourned the Inquest and, as was my
                        normal practice, I wrote and checked whether the information
                        was correct and, in fact, Mr. Leslie Jones ---- that is
                        you, I think, is it not       you signed the form and
                        you confirmed that, in fact, the names, addresses, date
                        and place of birth were correct and I think you have now
                        told me that, in fact, your son had a BSc Xirhich I am
                        happy to acknowledge but it is not one of the registration
                        criteria which, we need for the purposes of the Inquest.

                             Blood alcohols \irere estimated in this case as Xirell
                        as, in fact, all the others and Dr. Forrest gave the
                        results for these on the first day, in fact, I think you
                        wore here the first day so you heard him, and the result
                        in the case of Richard was less than 10 mg/100 ml.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  -1 -
                                                                        PROF. A. USHER



                                             PROF. ALAN USHER Called:

                                                 Bv Tim CORONER:

                            Q, Alan Usher, is it not? — A, Yes, it is,

                            Q, Prof, of Forensic Medicine at Sheffield and Home Office
                               Pathologist? - A, Yes,
                        B
                            Q,   And you are going to tell me about a lad who was
                                 identified to you as Richard Jones and you also had
                                 an identification number 6 3 » I believe? — A, les, that
                                 is right,
!
                            Q,    Can 3/-0U tell me then what the pathological findings
                                 are relating to this man? - A, Yes, sir, the bod}^ that
                        C        I examined was that of a heavily-built, brown-haired
                                 3'xnmg white man, 1 7 9 cms in height, weighing 8 7 kgs.
                                 There were obvious signs of traumatic asphyxia both
                                 externally and internally. There was very slight
                                 dila.tation of the heart and some enlargement, I
                                 think that is probably physiological, because he was
                                 not at an age when hypertension is likely to have
                                 caused that. In my view he had an average expectation
                        D        of life and was normally developed,     I give the cause
                                 of death as traumatic asphyxia,

                            Q, And this was another young man who had a tricostate
!                              valve dilated? - A, Yes, X think that may be terminal
                               real3.y in heart failure right at the end,

                            Q, In fact, both the valves were marginally dilated but
                        E      you would sa}>- the same for both - that 3>-ou think it
                               is lilcely to have been terminal? - A, Yes,

                            Q, Now, we have already heard this but loss of
                               consciousness, ¥hat would you say with regard to
                               that? - A, This young man died essentially because
                               he could not move his chest in or out and that meant,
                        F      of course, he could not breathe and that meant oxygen
                               was cut off to his vital organs and, once that chest
                               was fixed, he would have been unconscious in a matter
                               of seconds, probably between 1 0 and 2 0 seconds, and
                               he would be c o m p l e t e ^ unlcnowing of anything that
                               happened subsequent to that, though he would take a
                               matter of minutes, perhaps between 4 and 6 minutes,
                               to die,
                        G
                            Q, But once he was unconscious he \irould not know anything
                               more about it? - A, That is right.

                                                By MR, FRA.SER:

                            Q, Prof, Usher, can you help a. little about the alcohol
                               content. It is recorded in this young man as "less
                    H          than 10 mg'1, is that because the level is so small
                               that it is difficult to measure it accurately? -
                               A, Yes, it is.
    J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                        -2 -
                                                                    PROF. A. USHER



                             Tlii5 young man may have had no alcohol at all but,
                             using the apparatus that they do use - I am not a
                             biochemist - it it quite customary to express it
                             in that vray. "Less than 10" may mean anything up
                             to 10 but it may mean none at all,

                        0, But if it were none at all, presumably it would show
                           as a distinct negative? What I have in mind is the
                    B      evidence that we heard on the first day about sometimes
                           when somebody loses their life there is almost a
                           spontaneous production of alcohol within the body
                           and could the operation of that produce a reading of
                           a very small alcohol level within the body? — A. Yes,
                           I suppose it could but only a very small level,

                        Q. And that could be less than 10? - A, Oh, yes,
                    c
                        Q. Thank you, Prof, - A. There is no evidence at all to
                           show that this boy had in him any amount of alcohol
                           that would have affected, his judgment or balance or
                           anything like that at all,

                        Q, It certainly played no part in his death so far as you
                           are aware? - A, Absolutely right.
                    D
                                          Further by THE CORONER;

                        0. Prof, Usher, I do want to just clear this up because
                           Dr, Forrest dealt \/ith the question of yeast
                           production of alcohol and in his opinion, my recollection
                           is, because the high alcohol levels were not present
                           he said that he was satisfied that indigenous produc­
                    E      tion ofa3.coh.ol had not occurred because he could not
                           find any of the higher alcohols? - A, Yes,

                        Q.   Now, I want to be quite sure - do you disagree with
                             Dr. Forrest? - A. No.

                        Q, Or not, with regard to the possibility .... - A. No,
                    F      I do not disagree with him. He knows about the higher
                           alcohols. I did not know that. I have onl}'- been
                           given the figures with regard to ethyl alcohol but I
                           would accept that argument from him.

                        0   , ¥ould it be right that what you are really saying is
                              that it is true that indigenous production of
                              alcohol can occur in the body? - A. Yes, I agreewith
                    G         that.

                        Q. You are not saying that, in this particular instance,
                           it did occur? - A. No, I could not say that.

                        0   . I'Jhat you are saying is that measuring less than 10
                              might mean anything from the minutest amount up to
                              10 basically? - A. Or to nothing.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       PROF. A. U3TIER
                                                                       J. EILLOOE


                                  TIES CORGI TER:    Anything else arising   out of that?

                                  MR. FRASER:       Ho, 'thank you, sir.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Thank you, Prof. Usher. lie will
                             need you again at about 2 o ’clock. - A. Tlicjak you, sir.

                                       POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK Called:
                    B
                                                    By TEE CORONER:

                        Q. Yes? - A. Police Sergeant John Killock, sir, of the
                           1-Jest Midlands Police. I have previously taken the oath.

                        Q. Can you take me through the summary, please? -
                           A. At 1410 hours on Sa.turday, 1 5 th April, 1oQ9»
                    C      Richard Jones left his home in Sheffield with his
                           sister, Miss Stephanie Linda Jones together with
                           Tracey Elizabeth Cox. The Court has already hoard,
                           sir, that Tracey also lost her life at Hillsborough.
                           It was their intention to attend the Semi Final football
                           match which was to be played at the Ilillsbox’ough
                           Stadium that day. All three persons had tickets for
                           the terraces at th3 TJest Stand.
                    D
                             On arrival at the stadium they joined a large crowd
                             outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles. After some
                             minutes they entered the stadium via Gate C and walked
                             together along the tunnel beneath the West Stand and
                             onto the torraces.   Stephanie is unable to say which
                             enclosure they entered but it has now been established
                    E        as Enclosure No. 3 . Stephanie was with her brother
                             and Tracey a.s they entered the terraces and, after a
                             few seconds, Tracey was subjected to a surge of
                             pressure which forced her towards the front of the
                             terracing. In the crush that followed she was separated
                             from both her brother and Tracey.

                             Following the severe crushing in the Uest Stand
                    F        terracing, Police Constable Paul Bromley went onto
                             the pitch and assisted a number of injured persons.
                             The officer saw that a number of supporters war e
                             carrying a man, now known to be Richard, across the
                             pitch on a hoarding which was being used as a temporary
                             stretcher. The officer assisted to carry Richard to
                             the rear of the North Sta.nd where he attempted
                             resuscitation but without success. The officer was
                    G        assisted to carry Richard into the gymnasium where
                             a temporary mortuary had been set up.

                             At 1600 hours Dr. Nicholas Andrei/ Seivenwright ....

                        Q. I think it is a c t u a l ^ Seivewright. I think it is a
                           typing error. The 1n 1 should not be there. - A. Sorry,
                           sir.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                        -4 -
                                                                         J. KIT.-LOOK
                                                                         FTTXaTt S F ”


                              .... examined Richard in the temporary mortuary and
                              certified life extinct.

                              At 0245 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1 9 8 9 Mr. Leslie
                              Jones identified the body of his son to Police
                              Constable Bromley at the temporary mortuary.

                              The officer later escorted Richard's body to the
                    B         Medico Legal Centre and confirmed that identification
                              to Detective Constable vJeigold.

                              On 17th April, 1 9 8 9 , following the identification by
                              Detective Constable TJeigold, Prof. Alan Usher carried
                              out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of
                              death.

                              .Evidence is included, sir, regarding the analysis of
                              the blood sample taken from Richard where the presence
                              of ethanol was detected. The witnesses proving
                              continuity of that sample are Detective Constable Green,
                              Detective Sergeant Turner and Detective Sergeant
                              Fletcher. The analysis was carried out by Dr.
                              Alexander Robert Forrest.
                    D         Found in the personal effects of Richard were three
                              full match tickets.    This supports the evidence,
                              sir, that he entered the stadium via Gate C together
                              with Stephanie and Trace};".

                                   That concludes my evidence, sir.        There is visual
                              evidence.
                    E              THE CORONER:       No questions from me.     Mr. Fraser?

                                   MR. FRASER:       No, thank you, sir.

                                   MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, sir.

                                   MR. CATCIIPOLE:      No, thank you, sir.

                                        POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                                       By THE CORONER:

                        Q ,   Yes? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                              West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination has been
                              made of video film and photographic evidence and
                              Richard has been identified alive outside the ground
                              and also in Enclosure No. 3> and then subsequently
                              later lying on the pitch.

                              Sir, a photograph referenced MWL10/34A, Richard is
                              shown, together with his sister, Stephanie, and Tracey
                              Cox about to enter the ground via Gate C and that
                              photograph is timed at 1455*
                H
                              On a BBC video tape, referenced MAP 1, timed at
                              1456:31:04, Ri&hard is shown alive in Enclosure No.
                              3 and, at this point, he is, in fact, together with
J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                        -5 -
                                                                      M.   LA Y TO N




                           Tracey Cox.

                           Sir, there are three photographs, including a
                           photograph referenced DE1/6, which show Richard
                           lying on the pitch being tended to by supporters.

                           Mr. and Mrs. Jones have, in fact, viewed visual
                           evidence, sir, and they have been able to assist us
                    B      in confirming that evidence.

                           PC Bromley has signed a plan of the pitch indicating
                           where he first saw Richard and that plan is referenced
                           PB/1 .
                           Sir, if I can, first of all, refer you to a plan which
                           has been given the reference number M¥JL 1 6 7 .

                        Q. That will be C228. - A. And then a further plan,
                           Mr/JL 113, \tfhich is a plan of the terraces.

                        Q. That will be C229. - A. And, sir, PB/1, which is PC
                           Bromley’s plan.

                        Q. That will be C230. - A. Sir, first of all, in respect
                    D      of the plan M¥JL 167, regarding the identification
                           outside the ground, referring to this plan, the point
                           at which that photograph is shown is in this location
                           here, which, as you have already heard, is, in fact,
                           very close to Ga.te C. In respect of the video
                           identification inside the ground I refer to plan
                           Ml/JL 113* This is Enclosure No. 3 an<i the video
                    E      identification on BBC tape MAP 1, we believe, is in
                           this position here. As I have said, at that time,
                           Richard is still alive and with Tracey.

                        Q. Did we use the same plan in Tracey’s case, do you know? -
                           A. We did not use the same plan, sir ....

                        Q. I am sorry, I meant the same video? - A. They are
                           acti’ally together, yes. Sir, PC Bromley's plan,
                           PB/1, the plan of the pitch, the location shown is
                           in this position here, at the Leppings Lane end but
                           further doxm the pitch.

                        Q. And remind me,     that is a recollection, is it not? -
                           A. It is, sir,     yes.  Sir, unfortunately, in respect of
                           the photograph     where Richard is shown actually being
                    G      treated on the     pitch, it is not possible to say from
                           the photograph     where it is on the pitch. There is
                           not sufficient     detail to identify it.

                        Q. Yes, there is a photograph shoxiring him but you cannot
                           locate it because there are no landmarks? - A. No.

                                  MR. FRASER:     No questions for the Officer, thank
                H          you,

                                  MR. LIMB:     No, thank you, sir,
J. L. Harpham Ltd
     MR. FRASER:  Sir, will you just give me a minute
before you conclude this particular Inquest?

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

      HR. FRASER:   Sir, there are two matters which
concern the family which do not directly arise from the
summaries which have been presented but which they would
like, if at all possible, 3^ou to dea.1 with to satisfy
them.

     THE CORONER:    Put the first one then.

     HR. FRASER:    Sir, it is clear from the very
detailed report of Lord Justice Taylox” that his findings
were that alcohol played no significant part in the
disaster on the 15th April. Tha.t report has been widely
published and this family would like perhaps to
understand a little more why such emphasis seems to
have been placed on the alcohol anakysis.    Certainly on
the opening day of these ....

     TITS CORONER:   Can I interrupt you? I think I did
say right at the beginning that we were not going to
deal with the question of how and I think it is only fair
to say that w e have not introduced Lord Justice Taylor’s
report into this Inquiry and whilst, of course, that
report is public property, so to speak, I would not want
it to be pitt to the Jury that that is the conclusion of
Lord Justice Taylor’s report.   It may be or it may not
be. vJTien the time comes, if it is relevant, we will
deal with it so I cannot accept as a submission that
that is correct. You may put it forward as a view but
I am not accepting it as a proposition or as evidence
of that fact, tha.t he concluded this or tha.t about
alcohol. I am sorry but I have got to say that.

       Your second point, I think I have understood your
second point. If I have not, of course, you will correct
me. The second point is they say why are %\re dealing
%'/ith the question of alcohol levels. That is right, is
it not?

     MR. FRASER:   Perhaps more why such emphasis appears
to have been placed upon it.

     THE CORONER:    The decision as to what evidence to
call, of course, is mine. I do not think we have placed
any undue emphasis on alcohol, on the contrary, I think
at this stage we have not because all I am doing is
recording the fact, not drawing any conclusions, because
that would impinge on the issues of how or why which I,
as you know, specifically excluded. Perhaps I ought to
just say, Mr. Fraser - and forgive me if I say that -
that the issue of alcohol has been a matter of great
moment to a. lot of the families. They %fs.nted the figures.
They wanted to know it. If I had suppressed the
information I think I would have been open to very serious
criticism and so I do not actually accept the proposition

                           -7 -
that we are giving it undue emphasis but I do accept
that, within each and ©very case, we give the figure
because that is part of the evidence. "That relevance,
if any, it has we will deal with when we come ----
when I decide, if we go to ar^ further hearings, what
further evidence to call and I will then call whatever
witnesses we need to deal with that question. Does
that help '/ou or your clients?

     MR. FRASER:   I hope so, sir, yes.

     The second point reaily relates to the condition
of many of the fans who appear to have died.   On the
day there wore no mutilated - if I can use that word -
bodies and we have heard evidence that the majority of
fans had some blue discolouration but there was no
apparent accurate diagnosis made at the ground and
Richard* s family would like to know why perhaps their
son was not taken to hospital and just assumed that he
was dead and resuscitation attempts made at the
hospital.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, I understand their
concern behind the question but I think that each and
every fan, as you know, every one of the people who
died, was certified dead either at the hospital or at
the ground by a properly qualified medical man. That
is the first point. That has to be appreciated. It
is not a question of people just saying "He’s dead".
Every single one was looked at medically.   Secondly,
one has to think back to the situation. In an ideal
world it ir^y be that everybody should finish up in
hospital but, from a pi’actical point of view - I do
not want to deal with this any further because I do
not think we can - but from a pra.ctical point of view
it is, with all due respect to your clients, an
unrealistic expectation in the situation in which
everybody found themselves on that day and it is no
use mincing words and seeing anything different.    I
think that that is the truth of the matter.

     Thirdly, I cannot say what people’s judgments
were at the time. If that is a relevant point, and it
might be when we come to deal with the question of how,
then again we will deal with it at that stage but it
is not appropriate to deal with it now. I am concerned
in a sense, about the question because I think it shows
with the greatest of respect, a misconception as to
the practicalities of the situation and also the truth
of the matter. ¥e have heard from Prof. Usher and what
he said about loss of consciousness, duration, length
of time that it might take for somebody" to die - even
if they had gone to hospital half-an-hour or an hour
later it would not have made any difference.   I think
we have got to face it. That is the truth. I am not
very helpful but I think that that is the best I can do
Anyway we will have to deal with that, if we deal with
it, as part and parcel of the how.
                             Mr. Jones, I know you were here when we dealt with
                        Tracey’s death and I appreciated your presence then.
                        If you remember I said that and, in fact, that was true.
                        I also knew that you would be coming again because we
                        knew we were going to have Richard’s case a little bit
                        later. I quite, quite understand what a dreadful blow
                        this must be ---- well, I keep on saying I quite
                        understand —    I correct myself - how can I possibly
                    B   understand what a dreadful blow this must be to you.
                        The best I can do is to imagine it wore one of my sons
                        and I can then imagine what I would feel like, so I
                        understand, to a certain extent, the pain and the
                        concern which you are feeling.

                             I have tried to answer the points    you have
                        raised fairly firmly really, I think, because I think
                    C   what I was saying has to be said. I do not see there
                        is any point in doing anything else. At least that is
                        my judgment.  Subject to that, I feel for you and for
                        the rest of your family in the loss that you have
                        suffered.

                             Ladies and gentlemen, we are going to rise. I
                        think we must have a reasonable time.  Shall we say
                    D   ten-past-two? vJould that be all right? Thank you
                        very much.

                                          (Lunche on Ad .journm ent)



                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  •9-
