    111.,, EILL3BC ROUGH    IbfbnSdS




                                     In                                        d^ted X/lO/90

you state ~hat 'fee evidence ’will

generally and, will be exploring the question of how the deceased came about
their deaths,1

how it is that the i                                                has been dominated

by a succession of 'coppers narks’             spreading tales of ditinheness and

hooliganism ?       I surely do not need to toll you that                these we:rs cot

                    a contributing factor         ,                      , '

•.fitnesses were    credible. As 1 see it         the sole purpose of        such raid slinging
is to   create an impression of

while drawing attention away from the inadequatea of 3« Yorks                    Constabiilary,

    I                         ''           that                '
would howe   had blood alcohol levels above the legal liw.it yet                  this is
wit reflected      in                     of          '              -

                                           *                         a. base libel
of all fans who attended the natch         end. are clearly        fueled by the

nonoenoe currently masquerading as 'evidence* As yon are responsible for the call­

ing of witnesses you must shoulder nneh of                the blanefor this,

        I do hone the inquest will proceed along a sore balanced and                   rational

line ond will not       confirm ny

piwdnce o wendiet none palatable to the establishment than that                    arrived at



                                                             hoisis Sincere!:
FILE NOTE DATED 14.11.90.    TELEPHONE CALL WITH DR. KNAPMAN.



I asked him whether he had ever had a problem with

criticism from    his local authority.   He said no but he

knew that other coroners had and he thought that it was

probably Philip Gill.

I explained to him about the letter from the Home Office

and Mr. Hughes.    He was initially concerned because Simon

Hughes is apparently an M.P. who covers the area where the

Marchioness incident occurred.     I told him that I thought

he had probably been involved because he was a Liberal and

it was a Liberal Counsellor who was raising the issue.

We discussed the reply.     Dr. Knapman pointed out that even

the Lord Chancellor who was the head of the Independent

Judiciary was in fact a political appointee and if one

wanted to argue that the executive therefore had control

over the Judiciary,   one no doubt could.   The issue is who

watches the watchers and in the end one had to draw the

line somewhere.




BADAAW
                                                   fiZ47




                                                       /?/*

FILE NOTE SUNDAY 11th OF NOVEMBER ABOUT 2.30p.m.

Knock at my home door.   There was a young m a n who

introduced himself as a reported from the Daily Mirror.       He

inquired whether I would be willing to talk to him about a

matter related to Hillsborough.    I said no and explained

that in principle all communications regarding Hillsborough

were dealt with through the Press Office in Birmingham.       He

explained that he hadn't realised that.    He asked for the

number, which I gave him.    He then asked me whether I knew

that Mr. Hughes,   a Liberal M.P. had written to Mr.

Waddington to suggest that I should not be the Coroner in

this case.    I said that I did not know anything about that.

He then went on to tell me that what they had ascertained

was this'.'" A Councillor from Sheffield had suggested that

I with the agreement of the Council had undertaken various

activities despite the fact that I was holding a whole-time

appointment as a Coroner,   I was in some way beholden to

them and would therefore be prejudiced in the w a y in which

I conducted                                 the Council*

I replied that I was not aware of the contents of this

letter but that I was not prepared to dicuss or comment on

it either. That he should get in touch with the Press

Office.   I explained that I did not think that they would

be there this afternoon and no doubt if there was anything

to be said,   it would be said through them and that^/I did

not wish him to feel that I was likely to say much if

anything.




 BADAAP
I explained to him that my reaction had nothing whatever to

do with him personally or with the paper he represented

but simply that that was the way I wanted to deal with the

Press,   and this is what we had laid down.




I contacted Mervyn with a vie w to discussing with him

arrangements for an appropriate reponse when the matter

broke on Monday. Mervyn rang back.    He was in the car.   He

said he would ring me later on in the evening.




BADAAP
                      "SO**
PILE NOTE. DATED-f?th Jtfty 1989.

MEETING WITH MR. STURT OH IPRTTMY/OF JUNE 1989.

ALSO PRESENT FOR PART OP THE TIME WAS BILL MADDOX HIS CORONER’S OFFICER
AND JOHNNY ‘THE LADY WHO APPARENTLY HAD A LOT TO DO WITH THE ADMIN
AND ORGANISATION OF THE TRANSACTIONS'.


Mr. Sturt was exceedingly helpful, and with guidance and help in
connection with the work and help in connection with the work
which he did on Zebrugge, which might be relevant to me.

We discussed the ambit of how.      He let me have a copy of the judicial
review in which he was supported and also photocopied and extracted
out of his direction to Jury which he explained the general proposition
on which he had proceeded.     In principal he distinguished between
the background circumstances                was more in the nature of
setting the scene and explaining the situation so that the actions themselves
i.e., the how could be understood.

He felt that it was exceedingly important to try and establish the
when and where of the deceased, and entirely agreed with the amount
of work which was being put in.     Although we didn't discuss it
in absolute detail, my impression was that he felt it was necessary
to deal with the surrounding circumstances, for example arrests for
drunkenness and so on, and what had happened outside the ground
immediatdly prior to the event.      He had in general dealt in great
detail with the 24 hour period over which the disaster had occurred.

We discussed the question of Jury.      He pointed out that we had to be
careful about the conflict of interests, not only for myself, but
also for them.   In particular they might be related or associated
in some way with some of the deceased.      This was a point which had
to be watched.   Basically he had been advised by Counsel that his
job was to minimis£ the disruptions rather than to maximise them.

We discussed the question of D.P.P. and Manslaughter.      He poiMed
out that under Rule 28 the D.P.P. could authorise an Inquest to
proceed, even if evidence were being produced which might give rise
to charge of Unlawful Killing.

He pointed out that the D.P.P. in his esqpersrssicappreciative of the
problem of aborting the Inquest or even holding it up for any length
of time.


His Inquest lasted about 5ir weeks which wag about as long as he
 thought the Juries and he himself could sustain it.

Families on the whole were represented jointly but there were a few
who individually represented, one of which whom was Mr.             who
represented an individual.
He said the length of the Inquest was to a larg# extent by^ the legal
submissions.    There was one which had lasted at least 2-J- hours.

He tended to retire, even if it was only for coffee before giving a
ruling on anything or any complexity.    He felt that it was exceedingly
important not to make mistakes.

He consulted with Counsel with regard to his advice where necessary
and received some guidance and help from Counsel with regard
to his summing up, though on the whole he felt that this was his
own unaided work.

We discussed transcription.   They had used recordings.    I wasn't
quite clear whether they used two or three tape recorders, but
certainly there was one reel to reel machine which was used as a
overall back-up copy.    They had 1 policewoman whose sole job was to
make sure that the tape recorders were working properly.    They
had used 4 word processors.    Initially they were able to keep'jup
but eventually fells behind because two of the secretaries had left.
Altogether they had about 6 secretarial staff and I think Mr. Sturt
felt that it might have been a little bit on the low side but
Johnny thought that they would have coped if everybody had stayed.
In addition they had a Marshall who performed certain functions,
Solonel McEwan, but he had to leave before the end because of the
length of the Inquest.    Mrs. McEwan would come along as well and
specially made the tea and coffee and generally by the end was
an exceedingly helpful person.    The fact that somebody was there
to 'mother them' so to speak was very useful.

Ordinary 6oronal work was handled by his Deputy.    He had to give up
all his normal legal work (he is a part-time Coroner) for several
months at very severe financial loss.

Johnny had gone through all the transcripts and had flagged and
marked relevant bits of the evidence of each individual»and death,
and this helped him with his summing up.     He did not hand to the Jury
anything other than 3 exhibits, a life jacket aad a plan of the ship. ^
He did not l*t them take in the Jury Boom any documents of their
own but he did give them a pro-forma on which they were able to
record various aspects.

(i think we will have to think about this.     We have pre-paepared
the Inquisitions, which to a cerfain extent covers the pro-forma
which they used, but it is obviously goiiig to be a bit of a complicated
matter, to enable them to remember all the details and facts.      He as
far as I could make out prepared his summing up over the week-end).

He felt that the transcripts had to be read through and corrected
by him before they were released.    They were listened to by members
of his family and also by himself and then the necessary amendments and
corrections were made.
Discussed shorthand writing.     It seemed from what he said that
transcription by recorder would be cheaper (but I aacietssllctempted
with the shorthand, as the standards of the Inquiry seems to be
very high).

 Arrangements were made for the witnesses to be warned in batches.
This was done well ahead of time.    Witnesses notices were sent out
but not summonses and by and large things went quite smoothly.
Expenses were re-funded usually by cheque, but in one case they
had to pair out in cash.   If need be, overnight accommodation was
paid for.
All witnesses were supplied with a plan of Dover showing locations
of site, names and addresses of boarding houses and hotels with
costs and other general information, to make life easier for them.

Provision was made in the building     for tea and coffee, but this was
not provided on a free of charge basis either to families or witnesses.

Arrangements were made for the Jury to be able to take their coffee
breaks on their own.   There was a room which had to be provided, so
that they didn't mingle with the general crowd.      Apart from that,
they were free to go out in the evening, having been warned of course
not to discuss the matter, and similarly at lunch.      Coffee breaks
were arranged in the morning and in the afternoon, and there was
usually an hour for lunch.     The Inquest started, I wasn't sure whether
it was 10 or 10.JO.

They had provided a room in the building as     a   museum for the Inquest
in which they had retained all the various copies of all papers, documents
and newspaper cuttings etc.    This would be open to people who wanted
to do serious research.
Transcripts were in three forms in this room.       The first raw draft, and
then the various aaaaad/^ersions as they were listened to.      All these
had been kept and usefully so, because with the present prosecutions,
some of the details on the original drafts, such as who had typed them etc.
was needed.   TSapes had also been kept.

Mr. Sturt had retained all draft notes that he had made and these had
carefully been bound for historical purposes.

Documentation was neatly bound and presented in good quality binders.


                                            under some pressure as some
of the paper work wasn't completed when they began and they were catching
up as they were going along.     Hopefully that is a problem which we
won't be faced with.

Mr. Sturt made it clear that it was absolutely essential to try to
anticipate the legal problems which might arise, and be able to give
well           guidance and rulings.     It is hispoint of view that the
most difficult question of course is the issue, Unlawful Killing,       He
pointed out that the situation would now be more difficult in view of
the prosecution initiated against P & 0 and various people,
as not surprisingly others would want to seek to follow the
same principle in cases.   This might of course apply at Hillsborough

as well.
I asked how the Jury were sworn in and he pointed out that this was
actually set out in the transcript of the opening which of course
I have already got.    They did it by a very short oath and on the
basis that he would then read out all the names, which is in fact
what he did.
He confirmed that the signing of the verdicts after the Jury had given
their decision took a good two hours.

The Jury once they had been put in charge were kept in a hotel overnight
until they had reached a verdict.    This took over 24 hours to conclude
their deliberations.
FILE NOTE DATED 27.2.90.



I had a telephone call from Dr. Knapman at about 1-0-clock or so.
He wanted to know what was happening about Hillsborough.     I
explained, I said that it was odd that he should be ringing
as we were having an informal meeting with a view to having
a pre-inquest review with the intention of resuming on a
limited basis.    He said this was very interesting because he was
meeting the D.P.P. himself that afternoon as he was very upset
about the present arrangements.    He said as far as Clapham
was concerned, there had been a Public Inquiry and he had taken
evidence of identification and location, but it was now 14
months or io and the D.P.P. had still not made up his mind
and this wasn't very satisfactory, s&the position was even worse
with the Marchioness Disaster, because in that case there hadn't been
a Public Inquiry and because the D.P.P. was considering manslaughter
charges, he was precluded from going ahead entirely.     He had however
decided that he would have a pre-inquest review shortly and to resume
the inquest but he felt he wanted to talk to the D.P.P. and see whether
there wasn't some way in which things could be improved.       I told hia
that we had already discussed it and sorted it out with the D.P.P.
and he asked if I would telex the letter from the D.P.P. giving this
agreement.     I confirmed that I would send it.   He said he would
let me know in due course the outcome of     his conversations.   He
asked me when I was proposing to resume and I said after Easter.
He said would I please not resume on the 23rd of April as that
was when he was starting. I laughed and said that subject to it all
being cleared with the appropriate solicitors etc., and the final
decision being taken, I was aiming for the week immediately after Easter
and hopefully the 18th ( I asked him not to disclose the date)for the
time being).
                                                            /p L ^



                                                                     *****

FILE NOTE DATED 5.11.90. TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH PAUL

KNAPMAN.

After initial pleasantries including Paul telling me that

the position in Australia where he had just been regarding

coroners is rather interesting because there the coroners

are encouraged to comment on public interest matters,      and

indeed the way they exercise their jurisdiction is

tantamount to a standing Public Inquiry.     He also said that

the procedure is different to ours and is much more

analogous to a Public Inquiry,   i.e., with Counsel to the

Inquiry and so on in the bigger cases or with an officer

asking questions and presenting the facts.     Paul in fact

thought it might have been an idea if one could have

persuaded the appropriate authorities to try and run the

inquest in this w a y but clearly it was too late now because

Counsel wouldn't be in a position to prepare.     Whilst on

the topic of Counsel,   Paul wasn't terribly keen on having

him there as an amicus because it might give the

imnpression that it was Counsel who was taking the

decisions rather than me, but on the other hand he felt it

depended on how it was done.

We then discussed several other aspects including the

following:-

     a.    Documentation.   Paul thought that although he

           accepted that all the documents were available

           to me, that it might be a good idea if I had

           a complete set delivered to m y home and that




BACABS
                                2



          I should retain these for a week or so.     I could

          then look at whatever or not I wanted as the case

          m a y be but at least they would have actually been

          under m y control so to speak.    This would obviate

          any suggestion that I did not have the opportunity

          of selection even thought I might presently not be

          able to go through every single item,

     b.   We discussed the question of Juries and what would

          happen if somebody fell sick.     He pointed out that

          the statutory authority for running wit h a

          smoother Jury was restricted to the Crown Court.       I

          said that if the position were to happen,     and if I

          were challenged I would suggest that they go for

          Judicial Review and it was in the discretion of

          the Divisional Court whether or not they thought

          some miscarriage of justice had occurred if in the

          events we didn't continue with the initial

          complete Jury.     Paul said that was right but he

          thought that there was a better argument namely,

          that the statutory provision applied to general

          Juries whereas coroners Juries were more analogous

          to a grand Jury.     Grand Juries had initially been

          24 and they fall so that in his v i e w from time

          memorial people had been allowed to drop out

          subject to it not              below a certain

          m inimum number.    On that basis of course there

          would be no problem w ith adjustments to Juries.




BACABS
                      -    3   -

         I discussed with him what would happen if one

         of m y Jurors had a trivial illness.     I said that

         I felt in those circumstances I would probably

         wis h to adjourn the Inquest until the Juror was

         better,   as I was concerned that if I didn't do

         this I might find that other Jurors who developed

         relatively trivial illnesses would also expect to

         be           ijhe point at issue was whether the Jury

         who were adjourned for a couple of days out of a

         long session should be paid or not.       Paul said

         that he didn't really have any problems wit h his

         authority.       If he felt that they should be paid

         then they were and on balance he thought that this

         was the right thing that should happen because it

         was unreasonable to expect Juries who had been

         told that they would be away from wor k for weeks

         on end to expect to go back for the odd day.          We

         then discussed the problem wit h Unlawfully

         Killed and in particular in the       light of the

         Zebruggen comments by the Judge.       Paul reminded

         m e that it was of course appropriate to withdraw

         this verdict from the Jury.       Clearly this is

         something I cannot possibly decide until I have

         heard the evidence.       I did however ask him what

         he thought about the possibility on the assumption

         that there was evidence to show either that there

         had been a deliberate consegfeeti plan to force h          ^-i/^

                      )r that people had behaved in such a




BACABS
                            -   4   -



         manner that they could be described as              'reckless'

         within the                 direction.       Whether in those

         circumstances, even though one did not know who

         these people were,         it might be possible to give an

         appropriate direction subject to the usual

         safeguards.-bjL                ferity—   Paul thought that

         this was certainly possible and an interesting

         thought though .jE&tTmight mu d d y the waters as far

         as responsibility was concerned.               This is either

         an advantage or a disadvantage depending whichever

         w a y you wished to look at it, but is inherent in

         the presenter &Z provisions regarding coroner's

         verdicts.     Obviously,       one can't make any judgement

         or take any decisions as to what form a direction

         should be or whether something should be withdrawn

         from the Jury or not, or in respect of which

         groups or other it should be withdrawn until

         the evidence has been heard.

         I talked to him about Mr.            Edey and told him that

         he was going for Judicial Review or the D.P.P's

         decision.     I assumed that if the matter got so

         far that the D.P.P.        had to respond i.e.,       if Mr.

         Edey got beyond the first hurdle that he would

         probably say that he had taken his decisions

         based on what he knew but if anything new came

         out of the inquest then obviously he would

         reconsider.       Paul thought this was very likely,




BACABS
                                   -   5   -



         but he also reminded me that if need be,            I could

         of course adjourn the inquests if I thought the

         matter should go back to the D.P.P.            (We didn't

         discuss this but I think on reflection bearing

         in mind that the D.P.P.           has already taken a view

         on this, that it was probably more sensible to see

         the inquests through now rather than try and stop

         half w a y ) .       I asked him how he had organised
                       ./ A
         his V itu J          Marchioness case and whether he

         thought I should accompany the Jury.            He said

         definitely not.           In his v iew one needed three

         vehicles.        One for the Jury, one for lawyers and

         others and preferably a car for myself,

         preferably a car for myself.            Secondly it should

         be instructed that they were not to ask any

         questions.           That they should be in the charge of

         the Jury Officer who should not of course give

         them any evidence either.             I asked him about what

         he thought about using an agreed statement to

         point out certain features, e.g., where the pubs

         w ere e t c . He thought on balance that that was

         probably satisfactory,            but he was inclined to the

         vie w that Jury, Lawyers and Coroner should all be

         separate and great care should be taken that they

         weren't given any evidence.




BACABS
                                                               O ft*

FILE NOTE DATED 6.11.90. TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MERVYN

jones   ._____ ;
               _______________________________________________________

He said he had had a letter from Miss Steele in the same

w ay as I did.     He was replying.     The South Yorkshire Police

were getting Counsel's opinion on disclosure as far as

their documentation was concerned.         The position with

regard to me is really that we were actually going to let

them see the statements anyway because we were going to let

them refresh their m e mory and what Miss.       Steele was asking

for was statements of individuals not the whole shooting

match so the problem might not be quite as large as it

would appear.      On the other hand, we were rather stretched

at the moment.      I said I would be replying in the course of

the next few d a y s .

I suggested to Mervyn that he should arrange to let me have

a set of all the documentation for a few days at home so

that there could be no argument that not only was it

available to me but in fact I had access to it.           I wasnt

proposing to read it all but I thought that this would be

sensible, particularly in the light of what Dr.           Knapman

has suggested.      Mervyn said he would inquire.       He rang back

later and said that they were going to deliver a van load

on Friday.      They would then collect it again and take it to

Furnival House so that it would still be available during

the Inquests.      Collection would be the following week-end

i.e.,    17th or 18th.

We agreed that I would have an office at Furnival House in




BACACG
fact I would be sharing his which would of course mean that

I would still have access to all the documents.      We agreed

that he would get in touch wit h the D.P.P.   to find out

whether they could get a transcript of the judgement of Mr.

Turner in the Zebruggen prosecution.    I said I wasnt

interested in legal advice,   simply what he said.

Mervyn said that he didnt think we could possibly finish

before February and he didnt think we would finish until

early March.   I said I hope not.   He agreed fervently.




BACACG
FILE NOTE BATED 7.^.90.
DICTATED 8.3.90.   LONG TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH DR. KNAPMAN
(FROM A CALL BOX   - COST £2.80).______________ ______________________


He told me about the D.P.P.    The upshot of what he said was that the
D.P.P. didn't really object to a limited Inquest in the form of which
I was proposing to hold it and he was intending to do the same.
I think he was still in some difficulty because the D.P.P. have not
yet decided what to so and I think he was concerned that the decision
might be announced before he could get off the ground, or alternatively
the D.P.P. might ask him to adjourn.   His plan was to announce his Inquest
for the 23rd of April.    If he was asked to adjourn, he would do so for 28
days and then resume but that he would seek to limit the Inquiry to
matters which would not infringe the D.P.P's legitimate interests.
I discussed the question of Jury with him.     He felt that we definitely
had to have one and that he would do so too.     I expressed my concerns
that the Jury would of course find this quite a difficult task.    He
didn't really think that there was any alternative.
He pointed out to me that there was the risk that the families would
be dissatisfied with the limited nature of the Inquiry.     I said I realised
that, but we would seek to answer as many questions as we reasonably
could and we were bound to have some who wouldn't be entirely happy.
I said that we could only do the best we could.
He asked how long I thought I would take and I said I expected to do about
8 a day.   I think he was rather surprised at this.   They managed apparently
5 an hour for the Clapham Train Disaster but as far as I was able to
understand him the proceedings were very very brief with just identification
and one person saying that the body had been found in such and such a place.
It seemed to me that the Hillsborough situation was totally different,
and that the relatives had legitimate interest in doing rather more than that.
FILE NOTE 15.10.90.    TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WIT H DR. GASKELL

OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL PSYCOLOGY,     LONDON SCHOOL OF

ECONOMICS,   TELEPHONE NO. 071-4057686._________________________

I explained to Dr. Gaskell who I was and asked him whether

he thought there was any mileage in exploring the question

of the effect of alcohol at various levels,     say 40,   60, 80

120mgs or so on behaviour,    response to authority,   attitude

e t c . My second question was whether the fact that the

person was in a crowd made any difference to the w a y they

behaved.     Dr. Gaskell said that he would have a look to see

what papers he could find but on the whole he felt that

there wouldn't be very m u c h on these behaviourial aspects.

He thought that a lot of research had been done on motor

skills on which the blood alcohol for driving had been set

but he didn't think all that m u c h work had been done on

behaviour.     He said it was a very complex and difficult

problem because tolerance was different for different

people.    Furthermore he said you might well be able to find

examples where there was crowds,             levels of alcohol

and yet no problems,    so the issue wasn't just that but one

would have to try and find out the uniqueness or the event

which made Hillsborough different to others.

We spent a little while talking about the parties putting

their own respective points of view.      I explained to him

that I had no axe to grind.     That I was simply trying to

make sure that I wasn't-missing anything which would

usefully help the Jury in reaching their decision.        He said




LESACS
that he would send me a book and some p a p e r s , but the

general impression I got was that probably there wasn't

m uc h point in pursuing this.   He did however say that if we

had an agreed statement of facts,     he would have a look at

it and let me know whether he thought there was anything

that ought to be dealt wit h further.     He also suggested

that another useful thing might have been if somebody had

sat in at the Inquest or had some knowledge of other events

say Ibrox and then commented on what he heard in relation

to his knowledge,   but this was not really a practical

proposition in vie w of the length of time that things would

take.

He was very helpful and said that if I had any further

problems and wanted to discuss anything else,      I should not

hesitate to get in touch w ith him.




LESACS
CONFIDENTIAL

Mr Stephen Walker                                         JMJ/HJ/253
Solicitor
South Yorkshire Police Authority                            October 1990
P 0 Box 37
Regent Street
Barnsley
S70 2PQ




DISCLOSURE OF EVIDENCE - HILLSBOROUGH INVESTIGATION

Further to our meeting on 24 September and subsequent correspondence s 1 have
now carried out the necessary research into the product of our investigation
which hopefully will help you prepare a suitable brief for Counsel. Briefly we
Eee the position as follows
The disaster, as you know, occurred on the afternoon of Saturday, 15 April
1989,   On the morning of Sunday, 16 April 1989, Mr Geoffrey Dear was
contacted and was asked by Sir Richard Barratt, then Chief Inspector of
Constabulary, either to undertake the role of A ssessor to a Judicial Enquiry on
the Hillsborough disaster or to lead an investigation into the circumstances of
the disaster. About the same time, I understand that Mr Peter Wright, then
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, made contact with Mr Dear and also
asked him to carry out an investigation into the policing aspects. That same
morning Mr Deaf contacted roe about 11.00 a.Tn. and advised me of the request
that had been made to him and asked if I would be prepared to either lead the
investigation in my own right or do so on a full time basis on his behalf.

Shortly afterwards, the press picked up the story and there ran for some
considerable time a belief in public p ress circles that there were two
investigations running independently of each other. This was never the case
and certainly was never mine or Mr Dear's understanding. Consequently, for
some considerable time we were at pains to remind the press that there were
not two separate investigations.
On Tuesday, 18 April 1989, Mr Dear and myself visited Sheffield and met with
Mr Wright and his senior officers at Police Headquarters, Snig Hill. It was my
recollection at that time that Mr Dear had by then been recognised as the
Investigating Officer and that his role was to service the needs ot the Judge,
who had by that time been identified as Lord Justice Taylor, 1 am sure that
Mr Wright fully appreciated this.

                                                            / C ontinued . . •


                                        Chester
Jjater that some day Mr Dear and myself met with Lord Justice Taylor and
toured the Ground. Lord Justice Taylor made it quite clear that Mr Dear was
working directly to him and the product of the investigation would be made
available to him.    At lunchtime that day, Her Majesty's Coroner for South
Yorkshire (W est), Dr S L Popper, attended at Police Headquarters, Snig Hill,
Sheffield, and spoke to Lord Justice Taylor and to myself.          Dr Popper
exchanged a few words about the disaster with Lord Justice Taylor and agreed
that he would co-operate with the Judge's w ishes. I interpreted this later to
Lord Justice Taylor that in gathering evidence for the investigation we would
do this both for the benefit of Lord Justice Taylor as well as Her Majesty's
Coroner knowing that ultimately an Inquest would have to take place. Lord
Justice Taylor appreciated this point.
The remainder of that week following the disaster was consumed by me and my
West Midlands colleagues in taking over the investigation already in hand by the
South Yorkshire Police as well as preparing our own arrangements. The second
week following the disaster we deployed officers to various parts of the country
but in particular to Sheffield and Liverpool to start gathering the evidence.
The evidence took two basic forms. Firstly, where West Midlands Police officers
interviewed w itnesses statements were taken under the provisions of the
Criminal Justice Act. Secondly, where South Yorkshire Police Officers were
concerned requests were made through the South Yorkshire Police Liaison
Officer for "recollections" to be provided on what had occurred b y all those
who had been involved; there were no exceptions to this request. These "re­
collections" were not pre-fixed by any form of caution or warning, nor were
they correct under the provisions of the Criminal Justice Act,         A similar
request for "recollections" was also made to the Solicitors representing the
interests of the Sheffield Wednesday Football club, Eastwoods Engineers and
Sheffield City Council.
All this evidence was gathered over the following weeks and on 15 May 1989
Lord Justice Taylor opened his public hearing at the Town Hall In Sheffield.
We had already supplied him with the evidence that had been obtained;
however, wc still continued to gather statements, recollections, as well as
documents. Lord Justice Taylor continued to hear oral evidence for 31 working
days and eventually on 4 August he published his Interim Report. By that
time we had registered on our computer 2,710 documents, 4,216 questionnaires
and 3,941 statements.
On 4 August 1989 Mr Peter Wright, who had had earlier sight of Lord Justice
Taylor's Interim Report, announced that he had sent a copy of the report to
the Director of Public Prosecutions and asked him to consider whether there
were any criminal issu es to be resolved. In making that announcement, Mr
Wright indicated to Mr Dear that he would like him to carry out a criminal
investigation if that was thought appropriate b y the Director of Public
Prosecutions.
On 11 August 1989 Mr Dear and myself visited the office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions in London and met with Mr Christopher Newell, Assistant
Director. At this meeting Mr Newell made it quite clear that he believed a
criminal investigation should follow and that Mr Alan Green, the Director, would
agree.

                                                            }Continued
p
P
p
                                                -3-

^       Following that meeting Mr Dear wrote to Mr Wright indicating that we would
        conduct a criminal investigation following Mr Wright's previous request. It was
!       also indicated in that letter that we would continue to service the needs of Her
        Majesty’s Coroner whilst carrying out the criminal investigation.

        Consequently, we continued to gather evidence and over the coming months
        after 4 August we registered 1,170 documents, 182 questionnaires and 1,411
        statements.
’
Jfi'  A note of caution. These figures do not truly define the date before or after
31$
M      the statement, the questionnaire or the document was obtained.              The
      information requests the date on which they were registered and therefore they
      can only be treated as a guide. In order to understand the origin of the piece
    | of evidence and the timing of its collection each item would have to bo examined
81    individually. I think you will agree that would be an inappropriate exercise to
  ,   embark upon at this sta g e .

fc;     We continued our criminal investigation work, keeping the Coroner fully
        informed of our p rogress, which was obviously to his benefit as well.        On
I,      30 March 1990 we concluded the file to the Director of Public Prosecutions which
IJ      was sent to him on that day. At the same time we supplied the Coroner with °
        copy of the statements which supported the report but for obvious reasons, and
V       at the Coroner's request, we did not supply him with any of the reports.
'*
        On formally taking up the criminal investigation, the appointment of Mr Dear as
        Investigating Officer was formally ratified by the Police Complaints Authority
        and Mr Noel Taylor was appointed as the Supervisor, the investigation being
        defined as one suitable for direct supervision. Throughout that investigation
        the Police Complaints Authority followed a "hands on" supervisory role.     On
        behalf of Mr Dear I had regular meetings with Mr Taylor and followed his
        instructions.
         On moving to the criminal investigation in August of last year, Lord Justice
         Taylor made it quite clear that the material that he had gathered but had not
         used should be made available both to the Coroner as originally understood as
         well as to the criminal investigation. At that time Mr Dear assumed all that
         material to be part of the criminal investigation and as a consequence its
         confidentiality was sustained.    In addition, all the material that had been
         supplied to Lord Justice Taylor was also retained as confidential, the only
         material being made available publicly being the transcripts and the supporting
         documents and video/photographic evidence which had been received in the
         openness of the public enquiry.        As a consequence I continued to resist
         applications from all manner of parties for copy material and the like. This
         policy has been maintained throughout and is still operative until su ch time that
         the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police decides what he wishes to do.
         After the Director of Public prosecutions had received the report the
         investigation continued to prepare for the interviews of certain p e rso n s who
         played a principal part in the events on the day. At the same time Mr Dear
         left the West Midlands Police to take up an appointment as Her Majesty’s
         Inspector of Constabulary with effect from 1 April 1990. It was assumed that
         the new Chief Constable, Mr Ronald Hadfield, would be able to take up the
         responsibility as Investigating Officer. However, because Mr Hadfield had been
       f at the match and had made a statement relative to his ob servations it was quite     tS S till
         rightly thought inappropriate that he should take up this responsibility.
       ! Consequently eventually Mr Leslie Sharp, Chief Constable of Cumbria, was
         invited and accepted the responsibility.
                                                                      I Continued si.lt?!

                                                   mmmamms SlliiSt
                                                              ■mm
The "West Midlands Police team, under Mr Sharp’s direction, eventually
interviewed certain key personnel about the circumstances of the disaster. The
product of those interviews was forwarded to the Diroctor of Public
Prosecutions an an Annex to the earlier report.
The Director of Public Prosecutions announced his decision not to take any
proceedings in the criminal courts on 30 August 19S0.
After the a n n o u n c e m e n t Mr Sharp, who had concluded th e police discipline
investigations as well as the criminal investigations, prepared his reports for
South Yorkshire Police. It was decided at that time to send a copy of the
Director of Public Prosecutions’ report and the related discipline reports to the
delegated discipline authority in South Yorkshire, Mr Stewart Anderson, This
decision was actioned in early September after consideration had been given to
the Coroner's concern that to pass the information at that time may cause
difficulties later.       However, as you know, the file was passed to South
Yorkshire Police.
Up until this time I had continued a policy of non-disclosure based on the belief
that the usual practice would apply, i . e. that the Coroner would not like any
evidence to be released until such a time that the Inquests had returned their
verdicts. However, as a result of one of the "parties" to the disaster being
afforded that information (even though the audience within that organisation is
extremely limited) he would not issue a direction to me to continue a policy of
non-disclosure.   Consequently, there are no directions I can follow at the
present time which would prevent me from responding to requests for such
information,   1 have already sent to you photocopies of those current and
earlier requests.
As I see it, and a view shared by Mr Sharp, the product of the investigation
was initially that of Lord Justice Taylor and Her Majesty's Coroner. In early
August that product passed from Lord Justice Taylor to the Director of Public
Prosecutions for the criminal investigation with the continuing interest of the
Coroner. At the same time the Police Complaints Authority had a supervisory
responsibility but did not, as far as I can recollect, require any statements
specifically to be taken for their purposes. Indeed, all the information had
been gathered earlier and their role was specifically directed to ensure that this
information was properly analysed and presented.            However, the Police
Complaints Authority do have a responsibility in directing who should be
interviewed, as far as police are concerned, about the disaster. Separately, it
was a decision of Mr Sharp that Mr McCrell of Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club should be interviewed.
Finally, the product of all the investigations must come back to the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire Police who was one of the original sponsors of the
investigation in April 1989 and followed through in August 1989. He is the
"owner" of all the information and ultimately - perhaps after the Coroner’s
Inquests have concluded - will resume complete responsibility and possession of
all the information. It is a matter for him to decide whether he wishes to
respond to such requests at this time.
The only additional point 1 would like to add is possibly to give you a definitive
list of everything contained within the product of the investigation.

                                                               /Continued
However, the following are the broad categories of information that ultim ately in
deciding to accede to a req uest, each, in my view, will have to be looked at on
its own merits:
     (a)    Criminal Justice Act statements from witnesses taken for Lord Justice
            Taylor and Her Majesty's Coroner.

     (b)    Documents seized on his behalf.
     (c)    71 hours of video film, (Most of the material is from the BBC and
            there are obvious copyright considerations).
     (d)    2,411 photographs drawn from the p ress, South Yorkshire Police and
            private sources. (There are obvious copyright considerations).

     (e)    Recollections from witnesses not taken under caution or within the
            provisions of the Criminal Justice Act.
     (f)    Statements taken specifically on the directions of the Police Complaints
            Authority as part of the criminal investigation.
     (g )   Statements specifically obtained for the Coroner for the purposes of
            continuity and death enquiries, etc.

     (h)    Statements or transcripts taken under caution.
     (i)    Video/audio recordings of the interviews at (h) above.

I trust this rather lengthy and complicated letter is of some assistance. I must
confess it has taken some unravelling to get to this particular point which you
might declare has not taken your deliberations a great deal further. With that
in mind I would suggest that you do not hesitate to make contact with me
further to discuss this issu e.
You may also find it appropriate for us to meet with Counsel to answer any
questions that he has specifically on this subject. In that respect you may find
it useful, if such a meeting is to take place, for it to be convened at the
Incident Room in Birmingham where I can have a representative of my senior
officers to answer any specific enquiries as well as produce examples.
I look forward to hearing from you in due course. In the meantime I have
taken the liberty of forwarding a copy of this letter to Mr Stewart Anderson.
REGISTRATION LEGISLATION.

Whilst talking to Jim Turnbull on 11.9.90 I took the

opportunity to discuss with him what John Burton had said

at the meeting at Broughton Abbey,   in particular with

regard to Pink Part A's.    I reminded Jim that in effect,we

would be taking responsibility for certification as opposed

to the G.P. or clinician at the moment.

Jim could not see any particular problems with this

did say that he would'nt of course do it unless he obtained

a proper report from the doctor.    In other words,   he would

put the clinician in the same position as the pathologist.

I pointed out that this might well cause delay because at

the moment it was possible to proceed on telephone

conversations.    Jim agreed that there might be a delay but

he thought that funerals were being delayed anyway these

days.    He also said that he felt that a lot of p.m's were

being done at the moment because we had no option but to do

them but as the new procedure might enable us to listen say

to partners or other people and if we were satisfied with

the information to issue a Pink Part A.     I said that I

feared that in fact they would be an increase in p.m's

though obviously time would tell.     I explained to him

that I would probably be writing about this but that I

didn't quite agree with what he was saying though I could

see the point that he was making.




LESAAE
                                                              'f i b




FILE NOTE DATED 9.8.90.     MEETING WITH PROFESSOR GREEN,

DESIGNATE.



1.   Professor Green and I met over lunch on 9.8.90.

2.   Professor Green told me that he now had authority to

     appoint 1 Senior Lecturer and 2 Lecturers to the

     Department.     Ads were going out in August,   and he

     hoped that he would be in a position to fill the posts

     relatively soon.     He had a number of people in mind

     who might be suitable if they applied, but he would

     wait and see.

3.   He felt that once the staff complement was complete,

     they should be able to cope with all the Forensic and

     coroner's wor k very adequately.

4.   He was expecting to continue to do Forensic,      i.e.,

     Homicidal wor k for West Yorkshire and Humberside.            He

     was negotiating with the police a global sum per

     suspicious death on top of the standard special fee

     from the coroner.

5.   He hoped that it would be possible to continue      to use

     hospital doctors for coronal work.

6.   I discussed w ith him the issue of histology.     Prof.

     Green understood the position i.e., where does

     histology for a normal p.m. end and the special fee

     arise.   He understood that one of the problems was the

     ^.H.S.-ST. who had regulations regarding what

     constituted N.H.S. work as opposed to Category 2 work.




BABABA
It appeared to me that it was his v i e w that there

was a level of histology which should definitely

have to be included,    that at some point,   extra payment

might be required otherwise it would erode the fees

too much.

Apparently Mr. Gill has some arrangement whereby he

pays something over the top of the standard fee to

compensate in those cases where heavy histological

costs occur.

He felt that it might be necessary at some point to

agree the number of blocks which would be included

within the normal p.m. but that any excess blocks over
                                              &J- L o c .
that would have to be paid for on some sort of^basis.

He felt that probably these cases could be dealt with

               basis as and whe n they occurred.



He also briefly discussed the obtaining of consents

for the use of human tissue.     I explained that my

officers had already considered this and had turned it

down.   I drew his attention to the fact that we had

actually drafted a special consent form for use in the

hospital but unfortunately that does not appear to

have been taken up by the medics which rather

disappointed me.

Prof. Green said that in Australia the coronal

districts had appointed a special social worker
who was a specialist in bereavement counselling and

who also dealt with the obtaining of consents.           He

said he was ver y impressed to see how well that

worked.    He also pointed out that by 1992 whe n the

arrangements with the Northern General were working

well, we would probably be inundated with requests for

tissue.    Prof. Green wondered whether,       bearing in mind

the Council and the experience with Hillsborough,             it

might be possible to agree with them to employ a

dedicated social worker attached to the Medico Legal

Centre, whose task it was to deal with relatives etc.,

and these other m a t t e r s .   I said that I did not know

what their views would be but it was certainly

something that we could explore at some convenient

point.

Prof Green expressed the v iew that he had been so

pleasantly surprised by how kind everybody had been to

to him and how smoothly all the arrangements were

going.    He was confident        that things would wor k out

well though he did say that he would expect some

problems at some point as it was unrealistic to assume

nothing adverse would ever crop up.
FILE NOTE DATED 12.6.90.



At 20 past 4 Barry Devonside phoned.    He wanted to know
how much his transcript for his Inquest would cost.     I said
I didn’t know but I thought probably around the £8.00 mark.
He asked whether he could have it.     He had asked his solicitor
for a copy who said they were not ready yet.    He said that
he had heard that some people had already received theirs.       I
replied that as far as I knew this was incorreoct.    The only
person who had received a transcript was Mr. Frazer for whom
we had done it as a special one off to assist him and the
bereaved families.

Mr. Devonside then wanted to know whether if the D.P.P. did not
issue proceedings, it would be possible for him to have a full Inquest
on his son.   I said that if the D.P.P. did not have proceedings and
the Inquests would resume, it would be my decision as to how the
Inquest would be run and who would be called.     I did not, it would
not be possible for him to organise the Inquest.     In particular,
he wanted to know if the South Yorkshire Police Officers would be
called and questioned.     I replied that it was a matter for me.     That
I was exercising my mind, notwithstanding that I had had no
information because of the D.P.P's position, but I was thinking
about the format should he decide not to proceed.
FILE NOTE - TELEPHONE CALL FROM DON MCCLEOD, REG TRAINING OFFICER IN CRISIS PSYCHOLOGY
REs HILLSBOROUGH - 051 521 3181

He told me that they were having a meeting on 5th April to discuss certain procedural
matters. Mr Fraser would be there, some W Midlands Police Officers would be there, some
of the deceaseds would be there, did I want to come.     I said that a) I w a s n’t sure if I
would have the time and b) and I w a sn ’t certain whether it would be the right thing to
do. He quite understood and in fact agreed, particularly with the latter, and accepted,
what I said. He felt, however, he had to tell me about the meeting in case I had a
burning desire to be there.




        INIAAI
FILE NOTE - 4.4.90

John Shortland came in, in his capacity as Regional Superintendent, St John’s Ambulance.
He had been asked to speak at some national conference on 20th April at Nottingham.
Apparently, he had been told that the intention had been to ask Lord Justice Taylor to
speak on Hillsborough and he was merely asked to act as a reserve in case Lord Justice
Taylor couldn’t make it. In the events, Lord Justice Taylor w as n ’t on the programme but
he w a s .

He indicated to me the outline of his talk which basically was really concerned with the
St John’s Ambulance involvement.     He wanted to make clear that the St John’s Ambulance
were on one side of thefanae, and that people were on the other. He wanted to show a
couple of shots of               haemorrhages, cyanosis and so on, to illustrate the
clinical presentation and the pathological findings of traumatic asphyxia. He gave me
categorical assurance that any shots which he used would be unidentifiable to any
individual, would not be reproduced and would only be momentary.     I felt that as this was
Cl
a private meeting for St John’s Ambulance people and was more of a training session and
  paching exercise, that subject to the above, I couldn’t really see any objection to him
  oing that. However, I w a s n’t prepared to supply any photographs, he would have to make
his own arrangements from any sources which he might have.

He also asked whether he could perhaps show a couple of shots of pressure marks on
people, say, cross hatching on chests from the fencing.  I was rather less happy with
that because I felt that even if you didn’t see the individual faces, it might be
possible to reconstruct who the person was.  So I thought that it might be wiser not to
do this. He agreed.

He said that he was doing some research on causation of death due to traumatic asphyxia
and he said it was interesting because in fact there was very little literature on the
subject.  But if he did find something, he would let me have it.

The bulk of the talk was directed to the St John’s Ambulance involvement, the problems
which they had including their own support for their staff.
                                                                              icA
 Finally he mentioned that at that point he didn’t know who had organised it, he thought
Jthe idea of using photographs for identification was a very good one. He understood that
 |here was a long shot of the board without it being possible to identify any individual
 :aces and if he was able to obtain it, would I mind that shot being used.  I said
 providing nobody could be identified, I couldn’t see any particular objection to such an
 illustration of the system employed.




        INIAAI
FILE NOTE - 4.4.90 - TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH PAT COLEMAN (?), ORMSKIRK POLYTECHNIC -
WRITING A DISSERTAION ON HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER

She reminded me that she had spoken to me about September time, that she worked at a
Polytechnic in Lancashire and she was doing a thesis on Hillsborough.      I couldn’t
remember the details of the conversation but I recollected her ringing me.      She said she
was interested in one particular point and she wondered if I could help her.      The
question she posed was; who/why had the decision been taken to have the mortuary at the
gymnasium at Hillsborough rather than at the Medico Legal Centre?      I said, and I
couldn’t really understand her question, was she asking in respect of 3.06, or later on
that evening.   She said she was asking about later on that evening.     I explained to her,
her question still w a s n ’t answerable in the form in which she had put it as the issue
w asn’t, where to have the mortuary but when to move the bodies.     That was a decision
which was taken subsequently when the time was right.
                                                                      a >C-n
She then wanted to know who had decided to move the bodies from the .gynt to the(mortuary)
 I explained that this was my responsibility, that I had authorised it. She then wanted
k o know whether the Pathologists were involved in this decision.    I said that the
Pathologists were there but that it was my decision.     She wanted to know why the bodies
weren’t transferred to the Medico Legal Centre rather than to the gym.     I explained that
we wanted all the bodies together in one place and that to move them to the Medico Legal
Centre would have caused additional delay which we wanted to avoid.     She couldn’t quite
understand this and I explained that we had a great number of unidentified bodies and to
move these in a proper fashion would have required quite a bit of time, they would have
to be documented and numbered and so on, and I w as n ’t really willing to break all normal
 routines otherwise you would have been in an even bigger mess than the situation in which
we already found ourselves.

She wanted to know if the Pathologists had anything to do with the decisions.  I said
that the Pathologists were there, but that it was my decision and that we had obviously
discussed things.  She pressed on with this line of questioning and in the end, I made it
quite clear that the decision as to where the identification took place had nothing
whatever to do with pathological considerations.  She then expressed satisfaction.

I said that she would be at the Inquests on the 18th.




        INIAAI
FILE NOTE 2.4.90


Meeting with Staff of the Medico-Legal Centre at 2.00 p.m.


I outlined basically what was happening i.e.    Hillsborough in the main
court, other cases in the museum, notmal cases to be continued to be
dealt with by Graham and Norman,    Hillsborough people to be dealt with
by West Midlands Police and Social Workers.     I mentioned Portacabins.
David was concerned about car parking,    I said that   I couldn't undertake
that people would not park on the car park, we have no staff to police
it, but we would mention to the press at the opening that the staff
car park was for staff.     A couple of other good points were make which
Joan recorded for me.     Everybody seemed to be quite content and
understood what was going on.
FILE NOTE BATED .38^. ft). TELEPHONE CALL TO PROFESSOR JONES.


Professor Jones confirmed that, or rather his secretary confirmed that they
were there in the morning.   I then spoke to Professor Jones and asked
him about the blood alcohol bottles.   He said that they were put into
the little yellow bott^js^ I then mai tioned that Bob Forrest first of
all thought that the/ had gone into Universal containers and then been
decanted. Professor Jones said that was in fact the standard practice
that blood was put into Universal containers and then decanted from there
into whatever appropriate bottles were needed.   This would either have
been done by him or under his supervision at the time.   He was quite
satisfied that the flijiidated bottles which were received from Dr. Forrest
were those provided by the pathologists.
He also said that it was standard practice to use that type of bottle
for blood alcohols and that the quality of the result is more than adequate.
We then spent a little time discussing major disasters and their
handling and he said that he would let me have a look at the draft paper
which he is preparing.
fcdSfaEBDC
FILE NOTE.


I also had a conversation with Joan, on Wednesday 21.3.90
in which she told me that there was some problem   with the
length of time that the V.D.TJ. typist was allowed to work on the machine
and in addition there was some talk about them wanting this girl
to stand in for the Receptionist.   I said that I couldn't really
see the point in that if the Receptionists were going to work full
time anyway and what is more, we needed her upstairs to do work,
but that I will speak to John when I see him.
FILE NOTE DATED 14.3.90.   TELEPHONE CALL TO JOAN TAYLOR.




I asked her to ring round to the pathologists, namely Professor Usher,
Professor Underwood, Professor Henry, Dr. Shortland, Dr. Slater of
Doncaster, Dr. Denmark and Dr. Seva of Leeds          with Norman
or Graham) Dr. Clarke in Glasgow and Dr. Holt and verify that
they are all in the United Kingdom and available during the
Inquest period.   I asked her to record replies, send them to
Stan Beechey and of course a copy for me.    I also asked her to
fax the letter from the Official Solicitor to Stan Beechey
re the children of Inger Shah (Case No.2).
FILE NOTE - S. 3.90.    TELEPHONE CALL FROM THE STAR.




They had heard a rumour from some freelance reporter that

the blood alcohols had been released to the South Yorkshire

Police but not to the families.      Was that true?



I said I was amazed and that I did not know where on earth

this had come from.     As far as I was concerned the blood

alcohols had not been released generally to anyone and in

particular South Yorkshire.      I directed them to the Press

Office in Birmingham.



Shortly thereafter I had a             from Chief Inspector

Bennet,    South Yorkshire Police, who had had a similar call.

 He wanted to know whether in fact the information was

correct.     I said that as far as I was concerned, the blood

alcohols had not been released to South Yorkshire

(obviously whatever was public knowledge from Lord Justice

Taylor's Inquiry is a different matter).




TELEPHONE CALL TO SUPERINTENDENT STARKEY IN WEST M I D L A N D S ,




POPACH
  I told him about the two conversations and asked him if he

would deal with i t .        I said that they certainly had not

been released by me to South Yorkshire Police and they had

not been released in general to the bereaved families

though in some cases I believe they knew a, because I had

noticed that the blood alcohol levels were mentioned in

some of the post mortem reports and also because in fact I

had told at least one family person, but it was not my

intention to release them generally until the Inquests.

Apparently the rumour was being circulated in the Liverpool

Echo.



Superintendent Starkey mentioned that he thought we were

going to have problems with the press on Day 1 at the

Medico Legal C e n t r e .   I said that he m ay not have spoken to

Mr. Jones yet but in fact we were now thinking of doing Day

1 at the Nelson Mandella Room but obviously this had not

yet been finally confirmed.



He also asked whether I thought we should have a meeting

with the Press initially.        He said he did not quite know

what Mr. Jones's vie w was on this.        I said Mr. Jones and I

had both felt that we needed to do this.         Mr. Jones on the

whole thought we ought to do it on the opening day but I

was more inclined to have an earlier meeting.

Superintendent Starkey's opinion was that w e definitely had

to meet with the Press.        I said that I thought that we




POPACH
 FILE NOTE   7.11.90


 Token conversation with Mr. Sturt.


Mr . Sturt said he was on the point of ringing me to check whether
they could do anything to help me.  He confirmed that if there was
anything or anyway they could help they would be delighted to do so.

I took the opportunity of outlining to him the number of witnesses
we had and the general way in which I wanted to proceed.     I also
thought that the wording of the Act was perhaps a little wider
than the rules as to , the rules were really based on how the
verdict should be drafted.   He felt that that might be so but in
any event the word HOW was a fairly flexible word, on the other
hand he didn't think it was right to deal with issues of WHY
something happened we were/esxaSlish HOW the deceased came by his
death and that of course meant and investigation of the circumstances
as well as the immediate cause of death,   though one had to have
some causal connection. I said that on the whole I agreed with it
but    took the view that in the word HOW wasejicompass- so much of
WHY  and WHOM as was necessary to establish how something had come
about.   I also said that whilst I didn't think that min0r matters
of negligence might be relevent bearing in mind that an unlawfully
killed really was something which the Coroners Jury could determine
had to explore sufficient evidence to establish whether or not      say
recklessness had been made out in the terms of the          direction.
Mr. Sturt agreed.

He asked whether I had had a letter from the D.P.P. to confirm that
it didn't wish me to adjourn if I were to find that there might be
something in the evidence.     I said no because I assumed it was
unnecessary in view of the fact that he had decided not to prosecute.
^ r * Sturt felt that it would be wiser if I did obtain his confirmation
because technically once I heard any evidence which might give rise to
the possibility of a charge I ought to adj o u r n , (that is actually rule
28).    He said that he had obtained such a letter in the Zeebrugge
case in fact he obtained two because in the middle of his case
something had come up which was rather specific to one individual.
He said that I shoiilSSL give the D.P.P. a ring and would not anticipate
any problems.

I discussed with him the scope of the inquiry in particular the events
on the field, i.e. the rescue.      He said that he had got into trouble
with that as well and the way he had dealt with it he had reserved
half a day to deal with the rescue but by and large the reason      he
had done that was so that people had an opportunity of thanking and
acknowledging the great effort which people had done.      I explained
to him that in my case I had difficulty because whereas the same
person may be praised by one and possible condemned by another on the
grounds that they had left their son/ loved one too soon.      Mr. Sturt
fe lt that as indeed I do that even if it were true that in the     heat
of the moment and under pressure somebody had made some error in the
extent of the resuscitation this was not something for which they
could be blamed.      It certainly wasn't an
I thought that was an interesting use of the word because this was     one
of the arguments which I already had in mind about this aspect.      I did
say to Mr. Sturt that I wasn't making a definitive decision until I
had heard the legal arguments and indeed something might be said
whieh I h a d 'nt thought of and which would sway m e .

I then discussed jury visits, he said they had done two, but he had
been very very careful to comply.  The jury had been kept under the
care of the Coroners Officer, very little was said, he made it quite
clear to then that the were not to try and do a reconstruction.  He
hadn't accompanied them and he also made sure that the other parties
were not with them.
                        i
We discussed one or two other matters which were not relevant to
Hillsborough.
FILE NOTE DATED 23.2.90.   TTgLKPHONE CALL TO MR. DEVONSIDE.


I spoke to Mr. Devonside and said that I was disappointed that having
given him in strict confidence the blood alcohol figures on his son,
I was now getting telephone calls from everybody asking for theirs
because he had reported ±t to the meeting.   Mr. Devonside said
he fully agreed that the information I had given to him had been
personal and was intended for his own use.     He had already known it
anyway, but he wanted it confirmed.   He certainly had not intended
to report it to the Committee, but what had happened was that following
Mr. Wright's comments about alcohol, everybody was absolutely incensed
about it.   There were loads of discussions as to what should happen
and the Committee felt that they wanted to get these blood alcohol
figures out in respect of the deceased.   I said that I wasn't
 Qfeally willing to release them at the present time.


He then went on to say that he had been to the Police Committee Meeting
and Mr. Wright had said that there was some further evidence which he hoped
would come out at the Inquest.   He felt it was quite wrongthat allegations
about alcohol in the rest of the crowd should be foisted on to the Inquests.
Did I have any additional information which had not been made public?     I said
I hadn't seen all the information,and wanted to know whether Lord Justice Taylor
had had information which he had chose not to use.      I said I couldn't possibly
comment on that as I had not seen everything Lord Justice Taylor had seen or read.
He wanted to know whether I had read anything which would have supported the
suggestion that there was other information.     I said that I still hadn't
read all the documents and I really did not feel that I could possibly
make any comment.   It would be very improper if I tried to take sides.
That my position was that I wanted to run these Inquests fairly and properly
and it was not therefore possible for me to take sides.     He was very
concerned about the possibility of finding an unbiased Jury because of
the comments of Mr. Wright.   I made no response to that apart from saying
that we would cross that bridge when we came to it.     He asked me how I intended
to do it and I said that or whatever I was intending to do.      I explained that
there was no way I could undo anything that had been publicly said, but
that we had to live within the circumstances in which we found ourselves
ami that I would deal with the matter as and when necessary.      He wanted
to know whether I was in a position to tell him anything about dates.
I said that I was in no position to make any response to that at the moment.
I explained to him that there wasn't any point in him asking me any questions
at the moment.   He accepted this.
He re-confirmed what he had said on the other occasions when I had spoken
to him that he had always found that I was helpful to him.
FILE NOTE BATED 25.2.90. Dictated 27.2.90.


I had a word with Ken Potter to sound him out with regard to running
the interim inquest without a Jury.   Ken, we spent a little while
discussing whether or not we should do it or whether it would be
wiser to wait till after the B.P.P. had reached his decision, but
I felt that in all the circumstances I couldn't really postpone
things now.   Ken Potter on the whole agreed with me that it
would be better if I had a Jury and certainly safer from a legal
point of view.
FILE NOTE DATED 15.20.90.      TELEPHONE CALL FROM PROFESSOR         X-/.

REASON, MANCHESTER UNIVERSITY.                                     fc tiU
'                 '                                               —         jUt>A
He said he had thought about the question which I put to

him and he assumed that I was talking about the senior

officers involved.       I confirmed that that was so but

repeated that I wasn't trying to defend them or attack

them,    I was simply trying to ensure that evidence of a

helpful nature was put before the Jury, so that they could

reach an appropriate verdict.        As one of the possible

verdicts that could be left to the Jury was Unlawful

Killing,   so that it was right to make sure that relevant

evidence was presented. He said he fully appreciated that.

H e said he had given the matter some t h o u g h t .   That there

was some literature but not very much.          Some of it related

to stress situations in Nuclear Power Stations5 w h e r e p r i s e s

could occcur and where people had to think on their feet.

On the whole, what evidence there was was that people were

not very good at t h i s .   Coupled with that was what they

describe as the       'expectation factor'.    In other word*, one

does not expect a particular thing to happen and one is

then faced with a dilemma and on top of that certainly in

the case of some of the officers, one had to take into

account possibility a lack of experience.          Nevertheless,

although he felt that he could perhaps say something, he

did not think that the evidence which was available was

sufficiently hard and crisp enough to do anything other

than possibly even fudge the issues.          We spent a little




LESACK
                         2




while discussing it and in the end I came to the conclusion

with which Professor Reason agreed,    that this was not a

suitable case for trh“e jm-onmnt- i   ,-vf « p ^ ggafataterrwl*




LESACK
12.2.90.              TimPHQNE CONVERSATION WITH “JOBHNY" MR. STURT'S OFFICE.


I asked her whether she could remember whether relatives were paid for
travelling.                  She said no unless they were actually called as witnesses.
It was obviously a very expensive thing to do.
I asked her how many cases they delt with.                                                           She couldn't quite remember
but she thought about 5 or 6 a day (this is for the individual, not for
the general evidence) but she suggested that P.C. Maddox^ on 030424 0055
might be able to help more specifically on this.


TELEPHONE CALL TO P.C. MADDOX. ON THE ABOVE HUMBER.


He was ve;ry helpful.                             He said that it varied but they managed to deal
with 10 deceased on day 1.                                      15 on day 2 and 18 on day 3 so they were
virtually able to increase.                                       On the other hand, for the first two
deceased they only had 4 witnesses and basically it was medical evidence
and identification evidence only.                                               They dealt with location at the
tail end when the pathologist produced a plan saying where he thought
the deceased were in the ship.
4? 4? 4?4? 4?4? 4? 4? 4? 4? 4? 4? 4? 4? 4?4? 4? 4? 4?4? 4? 4?4? 4?4? 4? 4? 4?4? 4?4? 4?4? 4? 4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?4?9




It's obvious that we are going to have a slightly different problem if
we try and deal with location on the terraces and on the field individually
and we will not be able to go quite as fast as that but it may be that
we will be able to get about 3 or 4 a day.                                                           I hope so, otherwise it will
take an -enormous length of time
FILE NOTE DATED 1 2 .2 .9 0 . EE HILLSBOROUGH.   TELEPHONE CONVERSATION
WITH DAVID PUROHON.________________________ ________________


I explained to him that under the coroners provisions, if a person was
called as a witness, then the expenses had to be reimbursed.       I anticipated
that in the case of the Hillsborough deceased that in many cases, we would
not need members of the family to attend as witnesses but I would expect
that they would be told about the Inqueat and I would expect that they
would wish to attend at least that part of the Inquest which was
specific to their own deceased.     If we did not need them as witnesses,
then strictly speaking, they had to come at their own expense^ aaid*r$hat
mightybe the end of the world because there was the Hillsborough
Disaster Fund and there was also the possibility of claiming in the
civil litigation.    On the other hand, it might be thogght appropriate
that some payment ^should be offered to the family, perhaps based upon
train fares for «r number say 2 members of the family to attend
but this was really a political question and I would like to know
what view the Council^ woui^d want to take on this as I would eventually
have to write tcv% *m . and make it clear whether we were going to subsidise
family travdand if so, to what extent.       David said that he wasn't
quite sure what the Council's attitude would be at the moment, but
that he would take it up with the Chair and one or two other counsellors
and come back to me in due course.
I explained to him that there would probably be other situations similar
to this but 'unfortunately we would have to come to them piecemeal as
they occurred.
FILE NOTE DATED 6.2.90. TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR. DEVONSIDE.
AT ABOUT 2.15.-p.m.


He wanted to know what the blood alcohol was.     He had noted that it

was not referred to in the p.m. report . I explaiiel to him that these

had been done separately.   That we hadn't disclosed them as yet.

That. I was a little bit relunctant to do so because if I told him

I would have to tell everyone in all sense.     He explained to me

that this was a purely personal inquiry relating to himself and to

his wife only.   It was just that they were anxious to know what it was.

I asked him to ring back in about half an hour so that I could look it up.



Had a telephone call from Professor Stephen Jones. Apparently Mr. Devonside

had been on to him with the same quiry.   I told Professor Jones what

the figure was and said that if Me. Devonside rang him he wasn't to tell

he was to refer him back to me.



He also mentioned that Mr. Devonside was anxious about the spelling o £

his son's name in the p.m. report, and there was a letter wrong.     I said

that we knew that there had been a mistake with the name at that stage

but this had been corrected.   Professor Jones said that he had written to

me anyway.   This is something which we will be dealing with at the Inquest.
FILE NOTE.   TTjjLTgPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR. DEVONSIDE 14.38.

I told him that his son's alcohol was 32. I said that the legal
      U /u^
limit* would have been 80 and that the amount was insignificant

as far as his lad was concerned.    I explained that we were

anxious not to deal with things on a piecemeal basis but I did

want to be as helpful as I could.    Mr. Devonside said that he

fully appreciated this and indeed had always found ±± to be so.

I also took the opportunity of saying that I knew he had spoken

to Professor Jones and that he was anxious about the name.         I

said we were aware that there was an error with regard to the

spelling on the post mortem report and that all these things,

such as spellings and ages and so on would be corrected at the

hearings on the assumption of course that we had been correctly

informed by the family and I reminded him that we had sent a

circular asking for confirmation of names etc.     Mr. Devonside

said he looked forward to meeting me.
 FILE NOTE DATED *5.2.90. at about 4- or 5 minutes past 4.



I telephoned Peter Wright and spoke to him.   I wished him all the best

upon his retirement and said that I was sorry that I had not had more

opportunity of seeing him but both of us were busy and in any case

he knew the reasons.

I said that hopefully I would see him before he actually left

the Force in May.
Dated 5.2.90.   File Note.

FILE NOTE - GRAHAM CAME IN - HE HAD BEEN IN FOR ASSESSMENT AND HAD SPOKEN

TO I THINK Chief Inspector Jones.____________________________ _ _ ____



Chief Inspector Jones was anxious to know what was happening about Hillsborough

and in particular whether we had fixed a date.   I said "no we hadn't".

He also wanted to know where we were going to hold it, how long it

would take and whether we had considered the logistics of the Inquest

which they had not yet done.   I said that I had thought about it.    It

would be difficult, but it all hinged on the decision of the D.P.P.

The problem was that it depended very much on what decision the D.P.P.

would take as to the scope of the Inquests and where they would be held

and also how long they would take.

Graham informed me that I would receive whatever co-operation was

necessary but they obviously wanted to have as much forewarning as

possible.   I noted this.
FILE NOTE.   HILLSBOROUGH - DATED 3.1U89.


I spoke to Miss J. Wood about the Hillsborough case all of which
will be out of time as far as registration is concerned.   I
inquired whether she could see any objection to the forms being
sent direct to the General Register Office - job lot so to speak
when I came to do the Inquest.   She said she did not really see
any reason why that should'nt occur because they would have to eome
to them before the local registrar could issue death certificates
as they would need authorisation.   She felt that I could discuss
this with her/the local registrar nearer the time.
 PILE NOTE   BATED   23.10.89.


Telephone conversation with Dr. Burton.


I explained that it was intended to take the decisions on the matter
I wanted to discuss with him myself, but that I was interested in
his views.
I wanted to know what he felt about   releasing the police documentation
regarding the deceased prior to the Inquest in order to enable
the respective parties to deal with their civil litigation.
Dr. Burton referred to the Blair Peach case where apparently police
statements couldn't be released, but I'm not quite sure what he
had in mind because eventually he confirmed that provided the police
had no objection and I authorised them to release the information,
there couldn’t be any reason why it shouldn't be done.
He felt that on balance, the best thing to do would be to assist
as far as one was able, subject of course to police agreement,
and certainly not before the D.P.P. had concluded his activities,
he agreed with me that whilst it might still be necessary to hold
an Inquest, the purposes for which it might be used would be substantially
diminished in this particular case if as was the case the public inquiry
had taken place criminal investigation had occurred and the civil
litigation had been concluded before it was held.
Attention Det. Insp. Caroline Perkins

1. I am faxing you a schedule shewing the fax numbers of the
various solicitors who attended on 30th Oct. 1990

2. I am also faxing you letters to 10 solicitors as well as a letter
to Mrs. McBrien a copy of the summaries should be attached to each .
Please post the letter with its enclosures to Mrs. McBrien and fax
the information to the Legal Representatives. .

3. You should have 14 sheets of paper including thisone.
 GR0UP                 SOLICITOR                REF:TEL & FAX NO.

1. BEREAVED            HILLSBOROUGH             Ref: DRF/JD
(Some)                 STEERING COM. c/o        Tel 051 255 0628
                       SILVERMAN & LIVERMORE    Fax 051 236 0047



2 * SYP                HAMMOND SUDDARD          Ref: BN/PCM/PAB
                                                Tel 0274 734700
                                                Fax 0274 737547


3. POLICE FED          RUSSELL JONES &          Ref: NH/LP/Hillsbr/387044
                       WALKER                   Tel 061 832 8877
                                                Fax 061 832 7006



4. SHEFFIELD            DAVIES ARNOLD           Ref: 117/743968/JAD
   WED. CLUB            COOPER                  Tel 071 936 2222
                                                Fax 071 936 2020
                   /




5. SHEFFIELD           KEEBLE HAWSON            Ref: AHG/TPJ
   CITY COUNCIL                                 Tel 0742 722061
                                                Fax 0742 750243 or
                                                     0742 700813


6. CH. SUPT.            HEPWORTH & CHADWICK      Ref: L/CCC/3/MCI/DUCK
   DUCKENFIELD                                   Tel 0532 430391
                                                 Fax 0532 456188



7. SUPT.                BARLOW LYDE & GILBERT    Ref: 7.02/RJH/6362 001
   GREENWOOD                                     Tel 071 247 2277
                                                 Fax 071 782 8500



8. SUPT.                VINCENT HALE             Ref: VH/SEW
   MARSHALL                                      Tel 0742 325842
                                                 Fax 0742 325644


9. SUPT.                WALKER MORRIS SCOTT     Ref: RBM/MT/MURRAY
   MURRAY               & TURNBULL              Tel 0532 832500
                                                Fax 0532 459412


10. FOOTBALL           HILL DICKENSON           Ref: PWJ/KEL/1860-001
    SUPPORTER          DAVIS CAMPBELL           Tel 051 227 3151
    ASSOCIATION                                 Fax 051 227 1352


11. MRS. MCBRIEN       represented herself at the meeting on 30th October 1990
                                                                                                             WG 414
                                                                                                             (S.8.)
                                       West Midlands Police                                                  (Amended 10.87)
                                                                                                  fa * *
                                       STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                           (C.J. Act 1967,s.9i M.C. Act 1980, 3.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


                                                                                               ]/ o
    Name     MICHAEL JON FOSTER
    Age      OVER 21          (Yrs)     Date of Birth
    Occupation CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT                                                        I
    H o m e or business address            FORCE TRAINING, DEPARTMENT
        ., . ,          .                ' POLICE HEADQUARTERS
    and telephone number                         H0DSE




    This statement, consisting o f 16 page (s) each * sifted by me, is true to the best o f my knowledge and belief
    and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated
%   in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.

    Dated the        8 \      day of     OCTOBER             199p .


    Signed                                                    Signature witnessed by

                                                              Officers Name

                                                              Rank                                    No



    At the time of the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989 I was

    Detective Chief Superintendent C.I.D. (Support Services), West Midlands

     Police.



    Mr Geoffrey DEAR, Chief Constable, West Midlands Police,                                   (now H.M.I.) was

     appointed to lead the investigation into the disaster.




     My role in the Hillsborough' Investigation was to work to Mr Mervyn JONES

     (Deputy Chief Constable, Cheshire) then Assistant Chief Constable,

     (Operations), West Midlands Police.                      In essence I became the Senior

     Investigating Officer with regard to the collection of evidence, its

     analysis and dissemination using the Home Office Large Major Enquiry

     System (H.O.L.M.E.S.).




     Signed '                                               Signature witnessed by

      * Delete as appucauie
                                                                                    WG 415   (SO G22)
                            West Midlands Police                                    (Amended 9.SX)


                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,8.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation ofstatementof MICHAEL JON FOSTER        - 2 -

    I
I continued in this role for the duration of Lord Justice Taylor’s

Inquiry, Coronal Inquiries, the Criminal Investigation and in relation to

Police Complaints and Discipline.            The objective was to produce individual

files of evidence for each of the deceased, a full file of evidence for

the Director of Public Prosecutions and the submission of discipline files

to the Police Complaints Authority (P.C.A.).                 The investigation was

supervised by Captain E.N. TAYLOR of the Police Complaints Authority.




A file of evidence was submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions on

31 March 1990.     On 2 April 1990 Mr L. SHARP, Chief Constable, Cumbria

Constabulary, was appointed to continue the investigation to its

conclusion which required the interviewing of certain individuals in order

that a final decision could be made on criminal prosecution by the

Director of Public Prosecutions.            Mr SHARP also undertook the

responsibility for the submission of the complaint and discipline files to

the Police Complaints Authority.



During the course of the investigation it was established that Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club was formed in 1867 and elected to the Football

League in 1892.       Sheffield Wednesday moved to their present ground at

Hillsborough in 1899.        Rubbish was tipped at either end of the pitch to

form banking and a stand moved from their previous ground was erected on

the site of the present South Stand.              This was replaced in 1913 by the

existing South Stand, the Spion Kop being added in 1914, the North Stand

in 1961 and the West Stand in 1965 following the decision to stage a

number of World Cup games at the venue in 1966.




Signed                                       Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                         WG 415   (SO G22)
                                 West Midlands Police                                    (Amended 9.81)


                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                      (C.J. Act 1967,3.9j M.C. Act 1980, 3.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation ofstatement of   MICHAEL JON FOSTER           - 3 -



Since 1912 30 FA Cup Semi-Finals, 19 International and 3 World Cup matches

have been played at this venue.                 In addition the stadium has been used to

stage religious meetings, a basketball display, world class tennis and a

schools display for the Queen in 1954.                   The record crowd for the ground is

72,841 in 1934.




Prior to the designation of the Hillsborough Stadium in 1979 under the

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, an inter-agency group known as the

’Officer Working Party’ was set up to monitor safety aspects of the

stadium.       They met twice-annually or such.shorter periods as were

necessary.        It comprised of the following representatives;




1.    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

2.    South Yorkshire Police

3.    South Yorkshire County Fire Service

4.    South Yorkshire County Council and later City of Sheffield

 _   Metropolitan District Council

5.    Consultant Engineers (Eastwood and Partners).

They would sometimes meet ’on site’ and discuss and. approve alterations

for example, the removal of barrier 144 from Pen:3 in 1986.




The Leppings Lane End of the Ground has been the focus of attention-

throughout the Inquiry.             On 15 April 1989 this End was allocated to the

Liverpool Football Club Supporters and in order to gain entry into the

ground, whether it be to a seating or standing area., supporters first had

to negotiate the iron perimeter gates situated at the funnel entrance to




Signed                                           Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                          WG 415    (SO G22)
                                  West Midlands Police                                    (Amended 9.81)


                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                       (C.J. Act 1967,8.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of   MICHAEL JON FOSTER          - 4 -



the ground immediately before the turnstiles.                       These gates are set out in

a bank of six double gates and are situated across the mouth of

the entrance into the ground from Leppings Lane.                          They are made of wrought

iron and painted blue




Having negotiated these gates the supporters would enter a courtyard.

This area is shaped like a funnel between the outer perimeter gates and

turnstiles 1 to 16 and A to G. In normal league matches access can also be

given to turnstiles 19-22 and 23-28.                    This was not so on 15 April 1989.




The courtyard is divided by a wall of metal construction running from the

perimeter gates to the brick wall of turnstile 16.                          There is also a metal

barrier running almost parallel to this from half way across the courtyard

to the wall adjoining turnstile G.                   The effect of this is to divide the

courtyard between the two "banks of turnstiles 1 to 16 and A to G and

create a funnel for people towards the appropriate turnstiles depending on

which part of the ground they wish to enter.




 The wall of metal construction was built in 1985 to segregate home and

 away supporters.              At about the same time proposals by Eastwood and

 Partners, which would have achieved pens having their own turnstile
                                                                                                   fr
 entrances and individual crowd capacities, were rejected by the ClubyjEor

 financial reasons




 Signed                                            Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                    State2


                            West Midlands Police                                         WG415 <9.81)
                                                                                         (Amended S0G22>
                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,3.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102? M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation ofstatementof MICHAEL JON FOSTER         - 5 -




There are a total of 95 turnstiles at Hillsborough, 12 of which                              (Nos 77 -

88) were not in use for reasons of segregation on 15 April 1989.

Nottingham Forest fans were allocated 60 and Liverpool the remaining 23

all from Leppings Lane.




The 23 turnstiles in Leppings Lane contained in two sections 1 to 16 and A

to G, are divided by the metal wall previously mentioned.                      They were

designed in such'a way that turnstiles 1 to 10 served the West side of the

North Stand seated area, 11 to 16 the West Stand seated area and A to G

the West Stand terraces.         In actual fact turnstiles 11 to 16 and A to G

give access to the same concourse area at the rear of the West Stand.

Confusion was caused by the turnstiles being signed from left to right

A.C.B.     The tickets given to supporters added to the confusion and the

general layout once inside the iron perimeter gates caused congestion if a

supporter needed to get from turnstiles A to G to 1 to 16 or vice versa.




Also in this area are three Exit Gates A, B and C.                   These Gates are large

concertina type metal gates measuring 4.064 metres across and 2.184 metres

high, except ’B* gate which is 3.2 metres high.                    They were built in 1985

during modifications to the turnstiles and concourse area.                      Both sides of

the gates closed towards the centre and are operated from the inside

only.     They were painted, blue and were capable of being locked and

bolted.     In each pair of gates one was fitted with a non-opening glass

observation panel at about eye level.




Signed                                      Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                    S tated
                                                                                          WG 415      (SO G22)
                            West Midlands Police                                              (Amended 9.81)


                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,3.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof MICHAEL JON FOSTER          -   6   -




Looking from Leppings Lane Gate ’A ’ is situated to the left of turnstile 1

and adjoins the outer perimeter wall of the ground running parallel to

Vere Road.    Gate ’B ’ is at the end of the metal wall across the courtyard

and between turnstiles 16 and A.            Gate ’C ’ is located to the right in the

wall running parallel with the River Don beyond turnstiles A to G.




Emergency Gate ’E ’ is a small concertina type gate opening from inside

only and located in the wall running parallel with the River Don,

immediately before it joins the side of the South Stand and behind the

Police Control Box.             ’

     //
 |   U + J                      L jfe A      t,I   OX*
;Beyond the turnstiles and bjjafnd t^he West Stand is a concourse area which

is divided into three sections./ ^Each of these sections serves a different

part of the West and North Stands and the West Terraces.                      The three

sections are created by a metal fence and a brick wall.                       There was no

.access from the central concourse through the metal fence to the North
                           Lj£L l)            ^                   vfe-   (J   (X
 ^jtand section but t h e jg a t e in the bricK wall^did give access throughout

tli^/standing terrace^concourse area.




There were a total of six portacabins on the concourse at the rear of the

West Stand.    Of these, twa serviced the tupnstiles in the northern part of

the concourse at the rear of turnstiles 11-16.^/ The portacabins were

variously used for selling programmes or souvenirs and in one case by the

Police to store property seized from supporters.


                                                                                              <
                                                                                    c_




Signed                                      Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                         Staie2
                                                                                               WG 415   (SO G22)
                                 West Midlands Police                                          (Amended 9.81)


                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                      (C.J. Act 1967,s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation ofstatementof MICHAEL JON FOSTER             - 7 -

                                                                                          X'
Having^gtrt^red through one of the turnstiles A to G and on tjafe souther                                          -1 ^

concours^, supporters could either go to their left through the gate in
         ■'       /
              /

the^wall and into the central concourse-area giving access into pens 6 and

7 or up to the West Stand seating area; straight ahead into the tunnel and

pens 3 and 4; or round to the right and either up another access into the

seated area or alongside the West Stand into pens 1 and 2.




That explained, the main sign for the standing areas, measuring 2.591

metres x .305 metres was immediately above the entrance to the tunnel and

comprised of the word ’STANDING’ in .18 metres letters painted in blue on

a white background.            7o   Ce J L h                                                               0—      ^


    t
The only other sign on this concdarse section indicating a standing area

was a small one at a height of 3.658 metres in letters .09 metres high on

a concrete pillar to the right supporting the West Stand.                           This directs

supporters along the side of the Stand and into pens 1 and 2.                              No signs

existed on this part of the concourse to indicate that access to standing

areas in pens 6 and 7 could be reached by going to the left through the

gate in the wall.




The tunnel is 22.17 metres long and unlit.                     It is located under the

seating area of the West Stand and is used primarily by supporters

entering through turnstiles A to G.                   Rising at first it then levels off

briefly before descending towards the terraces on a gradient of 1 in 6.

The recommended gradient from the Green Guide is 1 in 1 0 .                         The tunnel was
                                           6*? /v-o
of course built prior to the i-mplpmpnt ation of this Guide.




Signed                                           Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                                  WG 415   (SO G22)
                                   West Midlands Police                                           (Amended 9.81)


                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                        (C.J. Act 1967,s.9 j M.C. Act 1980, a.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


 Continuation of statement of   MICHAEL JON FOSTER            - 8 -



 As the tunnel opens out on to the terrace a radial fence divides pens 3

 and 4.       Pen 3 is on the right and Pen 4 on the left as you enter.                               Short

 walls on either side extend out into the pens.                         There are gates at the                     ^j
                                                                            (Jm a                  & fU si ^
 tunnel concourse entrance capable of being c l o s e d I n addition it is

 possible to clo§£ off aach pen (3 and 4) by a gate to each at the pen end

 of the tunnel! ^At the rear of the terraces and where the radial fences

 finish are gates which provide access to those persons wishing tp walk

 along the terraces.              Thus there is unrestricted access/to each pen'if

 these gates are left open.                                     M k,   J V C m / (J A -44 ■
                  M . fesP **G & ?'                 ^                                  J jy r m
tA-TZ&-C£ /ft& l S j-tp o &                                                                                        "/'&%#€&
 Running parallel to the goal line across the front of the West S t a n d ^                                    ^

  seated area, are the terraces with a total of 7 pens, numbered by their

  gates from left to right as you look at them from the pitch, i.e. pen 1 is

  in the South West Corner, immediately under the Police Control box and pen

  7 is in the          North West corner. Both corners are banked higher than the

  rest of the          terracing, with Pen5 being a sterile area or void, unused by

  spectators.          From the tunnel exit down the terracing of Pens 3 and 4 the

  gradient is          1 in 4.5.1




  There are 3 rows of barriers on the terraces in Pens 3 and 4 running

  parallel with the goal line.                 The barriers are of two designs; those

  fitted by Husband and Co., the previous engineers, and those fitted by
                                                                              Os.           fJ*
  Eastwood and Partners the current engineers. In 1986jj3arrier^l44 was




  Signed                                             Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                    WG 415   (SO G22)
                               West Midlands Police                                 (Amended 9.81)


                               STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,319; M.C. Act 1980, 3.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation ofstatementof MICHAEL JON FOSTER         - 9 -


removed from Pen 3 to facilitate easier               crowd movements.         Thishas been

the only significant change in barrier configuration on the Leppings Lane

terraces.




Schedule 2, Paragraph 3, of the Safety Certificate specifies the number of

spectators admitted to the stadium.              Part 1 of Schedule 3 details the

number of spectators permitted in various sections of the ground, a figure

which should not be exceeded.           The relevant capacities are:-

                   1          West terrace                7,200

                              North West terrace          2,900
                       ( jk
In late 1989j it^was discovered tnat the              capacity for the North West

Terrace was wrong having been calculated with the wrong scale.                      The result

was that 2,900 was excessivei^ *The revised figure is now 1,500.




In 1981 when the first radial fences were installed on the terraces,

creating the 3 large pens a crowd capacity of 2,200 was declared for the

centre pen by Dr EASTWOOD based on calculations in the 1976 Green Guide.

When this large pen was divided in 1985 into pens 3 and 4 and the void 5,

Eastwood & Partners split the capacities as follows:- 1,200 into pen 3 and

1,000 for pen 4.       These new capacities were never referred, it seems, to

the Council or the Club in order that the Safety Certificate could be

amended.    In any event the ability to restrict those pens to those

capacities was not possible with the turnstile system in operation.




It also appears that despite the introduction of these additional radial

fences no amendment was considered to the overall capacity of the West




Signed                                       Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                      WG 4 1 5   (SO G22)
                            West Midlands Police                                      (Amended 9.81)


                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,3.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof MICHAEL JON FOSTER          - 10 -



Terrace even though the barrier configuration remained the same (until

1986       :he void Pen 5 was introduced.




Perimeter fencing was installed in 1977.               At the front of the terrace this

fence is 2.896 metres high, comprising of heavy gauge metal wire supported

at intervals by metal posts set in concrete which in turn are supported on

the pitch side by metal frames.           At the top of each of these fences .381

metres of wire folds inwards.           This is designed to make it harder for fans

to climb over the fence onto the perimeter track or the pitch.                        The wire

is welded to the metal supports for strength and rigidity.




In each of the pens there is a numbered gate to the perimeter track which

is primarily designed for access to the pen in an emergency.                        Eastwood and

Partners have measured the width of Gate 3 as 0.85 metres and Gate 4 as

0.83 metres between the gate posts. These gates are smaller than the Green

Guide recommendation (1.1 m) but they were constructed before this m inimal

width was suggested.! The size difference is minimal and it is believed

would have not affected the rescue operation on 15 April 1989 to any




Originally the West Terrace was completely open.                   Radial fencing between

the perimeter fence and wall of the West Stand, and which created three

large pens, was installed in 1981.            Further radial fencing was added in

1985 dividing the large centre pen into what are now pens 3, 4 and the

void pen 5.    This radial fencing is 1.68 metres high and comprises blue

painted metal bars and was erected at the s                        request of the Police




Signed                                      Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                           WG 415   (SO G22)
                                  West Midlands Police                                     (Amended 9.81)



                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                       (C.J. Act 1967,8.9-, M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of   MICHAEL JON FOSTER              11


                                                               7 .(S3


to facilitate crowd control./ This was agreed by the Officer Working
                                         i
Party.       Pens 1 and 2 and 6 and 7, are riot further subdivided by radial

fences.        In fact they are still the large pens as originally created in

1981



Access to the West Stand which is all seating is by way of turnstiles 11

to 16 and A to 6, using the staircases off the concourse.                              The front of

 the West Stand overlooks the terraces, giving seated spectators a view of

 the terraces.           The West Stand is divided by gangways for safety purposes.

 At the rear of the             West Stand is a refreshment kiosk.




 The Police Control             Box is situated in an elevated position in the South

 West Corner of the ground overlooking the Leppings Lane Terraces.                              The

 Control Box houses             the Police Communications System and Video Monitors                    for

 the five fully remote controlled cameras which are operated from this

 location.         There is also a facility for the Police to over-ride the Ground

 tannoy system usually operated by the disc jockey.




 A Club Control Room is situated on the ground floor at the rear of the

  South Stand, close to the player’s changing rooms.                          There is no view of




  Signed                                             Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                      WG 415   (SO G22)
                            West Midlands Police                                      (Amended 9.81)


                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,a.9? M.C. Act 1980, a.l02( M.C. Rulea 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof MICHAEL JON FOSTER             12




the pitch from this room.         The occupants monitor the entry through the

turnstiles around the ground, with a computer supplying ’print outs’ for

ground management purposes.          The room also contains the TV monitors from

the various cameras located at turnstiles around the ground.                        Recordings

are made on a bank of 16 video recorders.               There is an ability to monitor

any one of the five C.C.T.V.s being operated by the Police from their

control box on request to them.           A telephone connects the Police              Control

to the Club Control Room. ,




In addition this Club Control room acts .as the main base station for the

Club personal radio scheme.          This radio system is used by Senior Stewards,

Security Officers and Management on a talk-through basis.




The Director’s Box is centrally situated overlooking the pitch in the

upper tier of the South Stand.           There is access to the board room, the

office complex below, the Nostalgia Bar and Steps Restaurant to the rear

of the South Stand.




The current tannoy public address system was upgraded in 1988 and

broadcasts to locations in and around the ground, including the Leppings

Lane turnstiles.     Capable of being         directed selectively to areas           of the

ground the system is operated from            the South Stand near to the Police

Control Box, by a Disc Jockey employed by the Club.                   Normally used




Signed                                     Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                    WG 415   (SO G22)
                            West Midlands Police                                    (Amended 9.81)


                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,3.9; M.C. Act 1980, 3.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof MICHAEL JON FOSTER         - 13 -



for Club announcements and musical entertainment, the system can be

over-ridden by the Police from their Ground Control Box.

Situated to the right of tjie Police Control Box, when looking from the

pitch, above the Finlux TV and video sign is an electronic clock.                        A board

is also located their beine canahle of disnlavine messages.




The Police Room is located under the North Stand adjacent to the First Aid

Room.    It is used as the detention and documentation room for persons
                   i

arrested or being ejected from the ground.




A first Aid Room is required under Schedule 2, Paragraph 8(1) of the

Safety Certificate.       This room, which was upgraded in 1979, is manned by

the St. John Ambulance Brigade personnel during matches.                      St. John

Ambulance Staff advise the Club on the purchase of equipment for the room

which is located on the ground floor at the rear of the North Stand

alongside the Police room.         A gymnasium is situated at the rear of the

North Stand.




A purpose built commentary box is located above the South Stand.




As previously mentioned, the Club have staged many large scale functions

at Hillsborough.       These can give some indication of the level of their

experience and that of the other agencies involved.                   That said, during the

course of enquiries in connection with the disaster evidence has emerged

of crushing involving supporters in the West Stand terracing at previous




Signed                                      Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                          WG 415   (SO G22)
                                  West Midlands Police                                    (Amended 9.81)


                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                       (C.J. Act 1967,a.9! M.C. Act 1980, s.l02i M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of   MICHAEL JON FOSTER              14



F.A. Cup Semi Finals.



The Semi-Finals concerned are 1956, 1981, 1987 and 1988.




In 1956 a match was played between Birmingham City and Sunderland and took

place on 17 March 1956, where a surge of people caused crushing on the

West Stand



On 11 April 1981 a Semi-Final was held between Tottenham Hotspur and

Wolverhampton Wanderers.               This is the best documented and the most serious

of the previous incidents.                Tottenham fans arrived late due to a

combination of difficulties on the Ml Motorway and local diversions.

There was crushing on the Leppings Lane terraces and during this match.




 The Police and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club held discussions

 following this incident and the evidence points to the later

 implementation of the radial fences forming eventually Pens 1, 2 3, 4, 5,

 6 and 7, being the action taken to prevent a similar incident.




 On 12 April 1987, a Semi Final between Leeds United and Coventry City was

 played.        Evidence from/             upporter suggests there was overcrowding on

 the Leppings Lane terraces.



 In 1988 the Semi Final took place between Nottingham Forest and

 Liverpool.          Evidence obtained suggests crushing occurred on the Leppings




 Signed                                             Signaturewitnessedby
                            West Midlands Police                                     (Amended 9*81)


                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,a.9; M.C. Act 1980, a.102-, M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof MICHAEL JON FOSTER           - 15 -



Lane terraces.     There is rio evidence, however, to show the 1987 or 1988

incidents were bought to the notice of the Police or Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club




The Hillsborough Football Stadium was designated under the provisions of

the Safety at Sports Ground Act 1975, on 1 January 1979, the Safety

Certificate for Hillsborough was issued by South Yorkshire County Council

on 21 December 1979, on Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s promotion to

the Second Division.        Attached to the Certificate are a number of

Schedules.    Schedule 1 deals with Interpretation; Schedule 2, the General

Terms and Conditions; and Schedule 3, Crowd Capacity and Safety Stewards.




South Yorkshire County Council, as the issuing authority, was responsible

for the administration and supervision of the Certificate until their

demise in 1986 when responsibility was transferred to Sheffield City

Council.                                            the time of this disaster comprised

representatives from Sheffield City Council, Sheffield Wednesday Football

Club, Eastwood and Partners, South Yorkshire Police, South Yorkshire Fire

Brigade and South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.




At the time the County Council transferred responsibility for licensing to

the City Council, there was a prepared schedule of responsibilities under

the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 in existence.                    This document showed

the responsibilities of the County, Police, Fire Brigade and Building

Control Authority.       According to correspondence this schedule was




Signed                                       Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                          MG A15   (SO G22)
                                  West Midlands Police                                    (Amended 9.81)


                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                       (C.J. Act 1967,8.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of   MICHAEL JOHN FOSTER - 16 -



adopted by the City Council which meant they then assumed the former

County and Building Control functions.



In July 1987, these responsibilities were re-drawn by the City Council in

draft form in a document entitled ’Division of Responsibilities between

Authorities’, which proposed responsibilities being divided between the

Building Surveyors (Department of Land and Planning) and the Director of

Environmental Health and Consumer Services.




  Signed                                            Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                                   T aylorstate
                                                                                                              WG 414

                                   West Midlands Police                                                           (S 8}
                                                                                                                  (Amended   10.87)

                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                      (C.J. Act 1967,8.9; M.C. Act 1980, a.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Name     ROY IRVING TAYLOR                                                                                                   /J
Age      OVER 21          (Yrs)      Date of Birth                                                                 V J **" *
Occupation DETECTIVE SUPERINTENDENT
Home or business address                WEST BROMWICH POLICE STATION                     I
and telephone number                          DIVISION                                             /

                                                                                      o n U         o fe w              y




This statement, consisting of 11 page (s) each * signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief
and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, / shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated
in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
Dated the       ^ 1       day of      OCTOBER               1990 .

Signed                                                    Signature witnessed by
                                                          Officers Name
                                                          Rank                                No
States



On 15 April 1989 I was uniformed deputy to the Divisional Commander,                                              *L*

Division, West Midlands Police.                    Prior to taking up that appointment I had

been a Detective Superintendent on the ’B* and ’F* Divisions for a period

of just over 4 years.




My position within the Hillsborough Disaster Investigation Team was that

of deputy to Detective Chief Superintendent FOSTER, both of us working to

Assistant Chief Constable, Mr Mervyn JONES (now Deputy Chief Constable

Cheshire Constabulary).               Initially I worked from an Incident Room based at

Furnival House, Sheffield, mainly controlling operations within the South

Yorkshire Police area.              Detective Chief Inspectors TOPE and ROSS assisted

me with these duties; Detective Chief Inspector TOPE taking particular

responsibility for dealing with enquiries in relation to the dead and


Signed                                                Signature witnessed by

* Delete as applicable
                                                                                      Taylor2

                             West Midlands Police                                          WGA15 <9.81)
                                                                                           (Amended SOG22)
                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,a.9i M.C. Act 1980, a. 102.j M.C. Rulea 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof ROY IRVING TAYLOR - 2 -



and injured and Detective Chief Inspector ROSS, more general enquiries

concerning South Yorkshire Police and other emergency services, the ground

and licensed premises.




In May 1989 I transferred to the main Incident Room based at Nechells

Green Police Station, Birmingham, where I generally assisted Detective

Chief Superintendent FOSTER in the day to day management and running of

the investigation maintaining supervision of various aspects including

those previously mentioned and in relation to traffic delays for Liverpool

supporters.    I also assisted in the compilation of reports for the Coroner

and Director of Public Prosecutions and carried out individual complaint

investigations.




TRAFFIC DELAYS



Enquiries were centred around the road network from Liverpool to

Sheffield.    Before itemising the delays, it is important to clarify that

the motorway road system around Manchester, which now provides a complete

bypass to the south of the City was not complete on 15 April.                           At that

time the M63 finished at Portwood Roundabout, to the east of Stockport at

the junction with the A560.          The final part of the M63 providing the last

link to the M67 at Denton was not opened until 28 April.




ROUTES

The recommended route published in the Liverpool Programme advised

supporters to follow the.M62 east out of Liverpool, north of Manchester,




Signed                                      Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                            Taylor2
                                                                                                 WG A15   (SO G22)
                                    West Midlands Police                                          (Amended 9.81)


                                    STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                         (C.J. Act 1967,a.9j M.C. Act 1980, a.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


        Continuationofstatementof ROY IRVING TAYLOR       - 3 -



        across the Pennines to Junction 42 of the Ml.                 It was then suggested that

        they travel south on the         Ml, leaving at        Junction 35for Sheffield.

        Supporters who followed that          route have       not reportedany great delays.




        It is clear that many Liverpool supporters chose to follow the M62 or M56

        east out of Liverpool, then joining the M63 to the west or south of

        Manchester.     This motorway terminated to the east of Stockport and

        supporters were then required to follow the A560 to Mottram in

        Longdendale, where they could join the A57 over Snake Pass to Sheffield.

        Supporters who chose this route were the ones subjected to long delays.

y t j   However, some of the accuracy of this evidence has to be viewed in the

        context that many people are confused as to their correct location when

        they were delayed and also, they were frustrated by the hold-ups and may

        have understandably felt the period of the delay to be longer than it

        actually was.




        M62, WEST OF JUNCTION 15 EASTBOUND CARRIAGEWAY



        At 1106 hours a damage only road traffic accident occurred between a motor

        cycle and a saloon car.The motorway, which at this                    point has four lanes,

        was reduced by two lanes         for only about       15 minutes. No reports of serious

        delays.




        Signed                                     Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                    Taylor2

                            West Midlands Police                                         WGA15 <9.81)
                                                                                         (Amended SOG22)
                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,s.9j M.C. Act 1980, s.l02i M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof ROY IRVING TAYLOR        - 4 -




M62 JUNCTION 15 EASTBOUND CARRIAGEWAY



Between 0830 and 1345 hours, the three lane motorway at this point was

reduced by one lane, due to a third lane closure for essential central

barrier renovation.       During the closure, traffic was flowing slowly

through the road works and was only delayed for a maximum of 10 minutes.




H62 BETWEEN JUNCTIONS 21 & 22 BOTH CARRIAGEWAYS

Contraflow, two lanes in each direction.               Long term work relating to

widening scheme.     No serious delays reported.




M63 BETWEEN JUNCTIONS 2 & ,3 EASTBOUND CARRIAGEWAY

The three lane motorway at this point was reduced by one lane to direct

traffic into a suitable configuration for approaching contraflow.




M63 BETWEEN JUNCTIONS 3 & 6 BOTH CARRIAGEWAYS

Contraflow, two lanes in each direction.               Long term work relating to

widening scheme.     Long delays reported by supporters and coach drivers.




M63 END OF MOTORWAY PORTWOOD ROUNDABOUT

At that time the motorway terminated at a roundabout, at the junction with

the A560.   Heavy congestion reported due to volume of traffic.                         This delay

varies between a 1/2 hour and 1 hour 10 minutes between 1215 and 1325

hours.




Signed                                     Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                    Tayk>r2

                            West Midlands Police
                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,a.9s M.C. Act 1980, a.102; M.C. Rulea 1981, r.70)


Continuation ofstatementof ROY IRVING TAYLOR       - 5 -



M67 END OF MOTORWAY MOTTRAM IN LONGENDALE

This is a traffic bottleneck caused purely by the combination of a heavy

volume of traffic and the road layout.              At this location the motorway

terminated into a single lane carriageway, close to a crossroads

controlled by traffic lights in a small village centre.                     The A560, which

carried traffic from the M63, joins the M67 at a roundabout at the

terminus of the motorway, just prior to this point and this further

contributes to the bottleneck.




As far as can be ascertained some 102 coaches containing Liverpool                            )   ^      >

supporters travelled to Sheffield on 15 April 1989.                                           ^       ,? j   <4;




To evaluate the number of supporters who travelled to the ground in mini

buses and using their private vehicles is difficult, but all available

parking within a radius of approximately 1 1/2 miles from the ground was

utilised.




Clearly the greater number of supporters travelled to the ground in this

manner and although traffic volume was heavy on all approach routes,

traffic delays were not a significant factor in the late arrival of fans.




Maps showing various routes from Liverpool to Sheffield and identifying

trouble spots are produced.




RAIL TRANSPORT

Two British Rail Stations were used for the transport of supporters, the

Midland an^/ffadsley Bridge.        The former was used for both Liverpool and



Signed                                     Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                    WG A15   (SO G22)
                            West Midlands Police                                    (Amended 9.81)


                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,a.9j M.C. Act 1980, a.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof ROY IRVING TAYLOR           - 6 -



Nottingham Forest supporters and the latter for Liverpool supporters

only.    One special train and three service trains                from         Liverpool conveyed

a total of 825 supporters, 430            to Wadsley Bridge, with               service trainsfrom

other areas bringing this to a total of 1,337.




LICENSED PREMISES



Premises selling alcohol in and around the Sheffield area were identified

and sub-divided into full On licences, that is public houses, and Off

licences, which includes shops and supermarkets.                  The general opening

hours for licensed premises on            this date were for public houses 11 am to

11 pm and off licences 8 am to 11 pm.




193 public houses were visited in an attempt to identify those frequented

by Liverpool supporters on Saturday, 15 April 1989.                   These can be graded

as follows:-

10   Public Houses remained      closed on this date.

72   Public Houses were frequented by local persons only.

37   Public Houses reported      having less than 20 Liverpool supporters.

51   Public Houses reported      having in excess of 20 Liverpool supporters.

23   Public Houses reported      having in excess of 100 Liverpool supporters.




Seventy-four off licenses were identified as open.                  These were also

visited and our enquiries show that some of those closer to the ground

were particularly busy prior to the kick off.                 It is not possible to

quantify t h ^ further.



Signed                                     Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                     Tayk>f2

                             West Midlands Police                                         H1.ZT
                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                  (C.J. Act 1967,S.9j M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


 Continuationofstatementof ROY IRVING TAYLOR        - 7 -



 A map with colour coded stickers showing the location of these premises is

 produced.




 POLICE ARRANGEMENTS

A comparison of the South Yorkshire Police orders for the Cup Semi Finals

1988 and 1989 has been made.




This reveals that the 1989 order was basically a repetition of the 1988

order, although there was a reduction in manpower in some areas.                               Details

are as follows




                                   DISTRIBPTIOH OF MANPOWER



DUTIES                                     1988          1989                 VARIATION



Ground Sector         (Sector 1)              286           266                      - 20

Liverpool Sector      (Sector 2)              376           301                      - 75

Nottingham Sector (Sector 3)                  144           125                      - 19

CID, Dogs and Admin Support                   134           120                      - 14




TOTALS                                     940           812                   - 128



Further analysis of these figures shows the following:-




Signed                                      Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                    Taylor2

                            West Midlands Police
                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,a.9} M.C. Act 1980, a.102} M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof ROY IRVING TAYLOR - 8 -


GROUND CONTROL

A Superintendent, Sergeant and two Police Constables performed the same

duties in 1988 and 1989.




GROUND SECTOR (Sector 1)

DUTIES                                    1988            1989                 VARIATION

Supervision and Control                        20             20

Perimeter track                                19             21                     +2

North Stand                                    34             23                    - 11

South Stand                     ■             23              24                      + 1.

Kop                                              22           22                              -

South Stand Car Park                           33             33

Penistone Road Turnstiles                      22             22

West Stand                                       13           13                              -

Leppings Lane terraces                         23             22                     - 1

Leppings Lane turnstiles                       44             44

Reserve                                        33             22                    - 11




TOTALS                                        286            266                    - 20

A Chief Inspector in charge of Sub Sector l.B and 9 of 20 Constables in

Serial 1 posted to the perimeter track performed the same duties in 1988

and 1989.




Four officers from Serial 1 were posted to the perimeter track directly in

front of the West Stand terrace.           Of these 3 had previously performed the

same duty in 1988.




Signed                                     Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                    Taylor2

                            West Midlands Police                                         ^(Amended
                                                                                             415 <9.81)
                                                                                                   S0G22)
                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,8.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102} M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof ROY IRVING TAYLOR




LIVERPOOL SECTOR (Sector 2)




DUTIES                                      1988                  1989              VARIATION

Supervision                                     17                    14                       - 3

Coach Reception (Claywheels)                    24                    18                       -    6

Coach Reception (Halifax Road)                  22                    18                       - 4

Train Reception                                 22                    18                       - 4

Mini Bus Reception                              11                       9                     -    2

Public Order (Static)                           33                    27                       -    6

Public Order (Mobile)                           42                    36                       -    6

Search Squads                                   22                    22

Coach Reception (Leppings Lane)                 12                    11                       -    1

Leppings Lane (Static)                          11                      9                      -    2

Leppings Lane Roundabout           •            23                    18                       - 5

Penistone Road/Leppings Lane                    22                    18                       - 4

Penistone Road North                            22                    18                       - 4

Middlewood Road                                 44                    27                      - 17

Hillsborough Corner                             18                      9                      - 9

Parkside Road                                   11                      9                      -    2

Mounted                                         20                    20



TOTALS                                        376                    301                           75




The Chief Inspector in charge of Sub Section 2A and an Inspector in charge

of Serials 16, 17, 18 and X9 posted to the front of Leppings Lane

turnstiles performed the same duties in 1988 and 1989.



Signed                                     Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                    Tayior
                                                                                         WG 415      (SO G22)
                            West Midlands Police                                             (Amended 9.81)


                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                 (C.J. Act 1967,8.9? M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuationofstatementof ROY IRVING TAYLOR       -10-



An Inspector in charge of Serials 14 and 15, comprising 2 Sergeants and 20

Constables, was posted to the concourse area behind the West Stand, one

serial to the North and orie South in Phase 1 (before kick off).                             There

were no officers specifically posted to the central tunnel during this

phase.    In Phase 2 (after kick off) Serials 14 and 17 should have taken up

a position in the central tunnel but it appears they were overtaken by

events.




Initially there were 5 mounted officers posted to Leppings Lane area.                                 At

1415 hours approximately this was increased by the arrival of a further 8

mounted officers who had escorted Liverpool fans from Wadsley Bridge

Railway Station.     These can be sub-divided into 4 from South Yorkshire

Police and 8 from Merseyside Police and 1 from the Nottinghamshire

Constabulary.     Between 1440 and 1452 hours this was supplemented by,an

additional 8 mounted officers, 3 South Yorkshire Police, 3 Merseyside and

2 Nottinghamshire Constabulary, making a total of 21 in all.



SHEFFIELD WKTHTKSTlAY FOOTBAT.T. CLUB - GROUND STAFF



376 Stewards, gatemen and turnstile operators were employed for duty on 15

April 1989.     They were deployed as follows:-




                                    NORMAL                 ADDITIONAL               TOTAL



Supervisory                            45                                             45

Gatemen (Turnstile operators)          85                                             85




Signed                                      Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                        T ayloi2
                                                                                              WG 415   (SO G22)
                               West Midlands Police                                            (Amended 9.81)


                               STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                    (C.J. Act 1967,s.9 j M.C. Act 1980, 8.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


    Continuationofstatementof ROY IRVlNG TAYLOR - 11 -



    Additional Gatemen                        5                                               5

    South Stand                              42                          13                 55

    South Stand                              31                          20                51

    West Stand                               26                          11                37

    North Stand                              38                          26                64

    Spion Kop                                25                           9                34



    TOTALS                             297                          79              376



    In addition to these people there were 45 programme sellers, 50 catering

    staff, 15 lottery ticket sellers and 77 additional catering staff.




    Each section of the Football Ground has stewards allocated. In the area of

    Leppings Lane there were 37 stewards covering the West Stand, 23 Turnstile

    operators covering the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.




    As far as can be ascertained manning levels for both semi finals were

    similar in numbers.




                                                  Signaturewitnessedby
T
L tU tN O
             R e c o ^ ^ r x l e d Route


             A lte rn a tiv e Routes


             M otorw ay Junctions




                                                                                                                           M62 June 2 1 - 2 2
                                                                                                                          Contraflow
                                                                                                                          lOoc i5 9 ,S t5 1 7 1




                                                                         M62 June 15
                                                                         3rd Lane closed
                                                                         0 8 3 0 - 1 3 30
                                                                         lOoc 459. St 515,5171

                                                           M62 W of June 15
                                                          R TA 11 06
                                                          lOoe 45 9/
                                                                                                                                   M67 End o f n way
                                                                                                                                   Mottram in Longendate
                                                 M63 June 2 - 3
                                                 3rd Lane closed
                                                 ! Doc 459, St 2H.5171                           MANCHESTER


  LIVERPOOL
            <. 5                           M62


                                                                                                                                                         way las
                                                                                                                                                                                                 SHEFFIELD
                                                                                                                                        Portwood Roundabout
                                                                                                                                        lOoc 325. St 2 1 i.3 3 1 .U 0 l    A 57 Approaches
                                                                                               M63 June 3 -6                                                               to Sheffield
                                                                                             Contraflow                                                                   I S t 781
                                                                                             I Doc 301.326. 459, St 252. 517]




                                                                                                                                                                                         SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                        1--

D Rfi 8 - Recommended and Alternative Routes taken between Liverpool and Sheffield,
                                                                                                                                                                                                   d a at>ob*+*uu
               showing Locations of Delays
-■a JAi.i,uNayx'lV
                     3M 0H   Q3QN3NN0D3H
    '•j *. «
      WJ\
lililiip
    K-,'
       -1:
         .
         <?
          ■
          ,
          i:^V'
              |
              '
              L
              ,
                                                                 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

Stfc               FOR THE ATTENTION OF




                  Date                  to

                  N um ber of pages                             (inc. this)



                   TEXT


                                                   £. a   _c _if i   4-<q.


                          V



                              +   4   /V \> vi 0 . 4 d      c o_r> x> A - f -0 .S                   imp
                                                                                                    Sill
                                                                                                    lit
                                                                                                  I®
                                                                                                  . <>
                                                                     / (a

                                                                                                   iai
T-
lill
f i
1 I
|'^        ■'■■
                  Reply required                  YES/NO
tj. <r!
F' ">

                  FROM    THE DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE, CHESHIRE POLICE
                          (CORONER’S OFFICER)                        311
t<- T
                  TEL. (0244) 350000           EXT.2091
|     1'          FAX NO. (0244) 343197
                                                                                    , OBOffaxAnnfftVO, 1
                                                                                             /i.Vt!!Va
t!L l
                                                                                                                                 -x o




                                                                                ■ ■ ^ 9               < ^ a ju        fk &      J r       3     \ysJ~ C K A   ,

<       A       J ^ t         U ~ j H {m l          v ^ u lx l^ X              , re ^ o -v ^                                  l^ w t ^           c J L J w


    ^                              & L te L e l       ckJ c


                                       C^rU y^JL ^ T K jUA                       [aj ^        t ^L      L c r^ J - tA y \ ' f h l j^ ltO ^ r

                                                    IaT^v-0            { y U ^ y f^ L


    \^ J c               9                                              (a ^ ~ ^                  k u a a ^ A             ^           f   ..
                                                                                                                                                       U \



    t f v i,             a     M       j l f c j        V     * i L -         - fk e J z          C      ^       j i ^    J           ^


        W                     C ^L^cJ. if c t - d c ^ d U                                                    o^JU                         f ^ r
    [a      a   ^   c t c x        ^      ^                                       (      u        w     a        ^        ,




                        X _     O             < * '( , * H / ? " ' / K j£ L           I A A   A   i A   D    v       ir       V 7 \y C i       M a_&




                                         V




                                                                      ” llc w ^          C g r^ & e J ^



                                              Q    su ^ e /      ! A ^ r t~            L ^ tP ^ /y s
                                               7th March         90.


8LP/JT.


Professor Alan Usher,
Medioo-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield.

Sear Alan,

Ret ACCOMMODATION - H m g B Q m ( i L


I am writing to thank yon for your very ready co-operation
in agreeing to let ne have some of the room which you
normally have the use of whilst we will be holding the
Inquests into the Hillsborough Disaster.

You will recollect that I would like to use the Museum
♦for our routine Inquests* and would ale© like to have the
use of the Police Surgeons Hooa for office aooomaodation.

Ve anticipate starting at about the 18th of April and Z
want if at all possible to finish before the Bank Holiday
in May.

It is possible that you might need to run a few Inquests
in the week beginning the 21st of May, but we do not yet know.

I will discuss with you the finer details as soon as I aa
in a position to do so.

I think that we aigit also want to ’borrow* the staff rooa
for the duration, but Z will be taking that up with John Batley.
X realise of course that this is going to cauae inconvenience
far the staff who use this zooa during their lunch break, but
I hope that for the very limited period that we are talking about
that they will oblige by waking the room available if I need it.

Tow s sincerely,



o •JuvJrOppfTf
  *




I had read Mr. Menuir's letter of the 20th of February.
I do not think that there would be any useful purpose in replying
to it and I therefore do not propose to do so.
         /f. M                       C oK ( s y ^ '

M '      S . I                                      •



      % a * £ z^



                                                                                                    (       s              -




                           fid L     ^                   jz u r y -o -is u ^ /fi.

                            ^jp ,s* ~ jC                j Zs U   -C ^ c-ul.^ -           ''                                1

      i *j- c^ 6   £           -Cot,                              0 m i £ f-            ,u Mil (■ npip* .         ^                ^ \^ ^ -d T ^ ~

      s ^ r S IS 'th e t^ C               sjL & ^ y                                           )o -o C ^ .p         4 ^ e y f~        i~c^>

                                         J^x-a L                           .sfcfU .            y        ^                       £)-y—t■£ —             &—>        Cco^u_<l^

   yS ^c.              f~X^A~             i^ y j,         ujr^-j                                                   (L tr r r ^ j i / f '              r t ^ \r y ^ y C ih ~ ^

                                           *-v'-                                                                                                              t~ t r*

       ft.- - T^^-A-n-^d                            f^ J C c n -' ,                                                            n    f                             flc M   u t,

   <
   ^2-Ctsyyi>K                     <<y^cdr                          )''C**_^c-»a*e_ 4

  t f O swu*-?                                                           H -^ as>/L? f             & ~ -* C           vrL < ?C u*/-           o*^>c^                  CK^_



           c ^c A                    n h - t,           (A
           r           /            u T               , j
 H        *    tc                                   y ic ^ e -      ^                        fi ^           lA   r ttjfa             O<a^-o
 \_fij-Cy£&                fa-#-                                                                                   Q~Y*^ft~             f\y i-C v ^        JuA*ts^~

                                                                        ^<T)r~        g\~-                         -&-»—*•>(!                                 h

                                                                                                                   -   C -t-ye-^           ^JUx^-a
                                                                                                             m                 u            tf




IS'BLAST
       ~
            „

            I I£JitSt2Kf
                                  •»    KEVIN LUODEN

                         wWrighJt“ " • W M d hiS VM M -
                          and started a ttorm with a
            H®*borou^i djmter*0eC*r          *' ,h*
            w a ^ „ S 3 ! l i U y ? fl“ , kC h l c f C o m t e k ' s                               fo re                                           "pozzied"
            LiverXl                                              118 “ Whlch 98
             d ie d .
               A nd h e sa id h e was
           • p u z z le d " b y L o rd Ju s-
           ♦ ' ce T a y lo r’s report on
           th e disaster.
                                                          Life insurance
               H e fo un d it d iffic u lt to
         Hn.^e?tand the finding
       r:r&S                   o f the
                                                         for the Over SOs.
                                                         ^ —                      11 liltWTfi                                           :
       :  fens were under the      in-
       ■ nuence _ o f d rin k , but
       ; -hat it immi n o effect on
       : the events.
 .    He added that a differ-
 [S *** picture could emerge
   |= xohen inquestt on the vic­
        tims are held.
            M r W right said: " T h e r e
        will b e a d dition al e v i ­                           feet WalklAlan,dock                             free Telephone
        d en ce. It m ay p u t a d if ­
        fe re n t co m p le x io n o n th e


   :
   :
        e n d p ro d u c t.”
                 Shambles
           S o m e o f th e j u d g e ’s
        c o m m e n ts on th e police
                                                             IT’S A GIFT.
                                                             N o w , a n y o n e b e tw e e n th e ages o f 5 0 a n d
   ;    w ere “ h a rs h '' a n d "sav-
   :   age, h e said.                                8 0 c a n a p p ly fo r e ffec tiv e , low-c ost w h o l e life
   I             a d d ed : “ T h e re a re          in s u ra n c e - s im p ly a n d easily - w ith th e \ A
   :   a lot o f c o m m e n ts I                    O v e r SO Pian.
   :   w ould w a n t to m a k e o n
   :   Lord J u s tic e T ay lo r's re-                      A n d ju s t b y s e n d in g th e no-oblig,,tion
   :   port, b u t in th e c ir c u m ­              < o u p o n b e lo w , y o u ’ll rc c c iv e a W a l l e t Alarm
       sta n c e s I c a n n o t.”
                                                     C lo c k , a b so lu te ly free.
       D L iv e rp o o l c o u n c illo r
       teeter Milled was furio u s                           A n d y o u ’ll d i s c o v e r th a t th e AA O v e r 50
       at       Mr      Wr i g h t ' s
       comments.                                    P lan offers, a m o n g m a n y a d v a n ta g e s, g u a r a n te e d
        He said: “ It's a n a b s o ­               b e n e f i t s .. .i m m e d i a t e life c o v e r w ith o u t th e
     lu te o u trage th a t s o m e ­
     o n e sh o u ld     seek     to                n e e d to ta k e a m e d i c a l .. .a n d th e first m o n t h ’s
 _ tifipugn th e in tegrity o f                     c o v e r free —a sa v in g o f u p to £ 2 4 !
 = th e d ead by e n bloc
 = defam ation.                                             W h a t ’s m o re , y o u ’ll also g e t d e ta ils o f h o w
       “ L ord T ay lo r's re p o rt                to c la im a free T e l e p h o n e R a d io /A la rm C lo ck , to o
_ proved m e c o rrec t — th a t                            T o re q u e s t y o u r & » P e rso n a l iiiu stra ’t ion
=          °P®ration was a total
= sh a m b le s — I was th e re                     Simply c o m p le te all th e d e ta ils b e lo w , a n d post
= a n d saw th e d u b io u s ta c ­                to d a y ( n o s ta m p n e e d e d ). You’ll g e t a W a lle t
    tics o f police.”
=      T re v o r Hicks, spok es-                   A larm C lo ck ju s t for replying.
= J>>an for th e H illsborough
= >arnilies' su p o rt g rou p ,                                                                                                                                    I
= said M r W right w as "in                                                   l.nfldonitMHjv
                                                                              .
— cloud-cuckoo la n d .”                                                      1 IAUIlt(>. AA
      Mr Hicks, w ho lost
   d a u g h te rs Sarah, 19, a n d
   V i c to r i a , 15, in    th e
   disaster, said: “ H e 's a                   N O O B L IG A T IO N • N O S T A M P N E E D E D
   voice in th e w ild ern e ss."                   N O A A M E M B E R S H IP N E E D E D
      Mr W right, 60, who                       P le a s e s e n d m e m y f r e e P e r s o n .,I l l l u s t r . t . o r f..r t h .       W   ( ).   .       ,,
  q uits in May. had his                            . ,n ‘ m v   '''■< ■ W - . l l e , A l , r m   C lo rl   j„v, !„ r                                     .
  o ile r to resign refused                     1        '                .i I f i v r d o p h o n i *           M .u rn      |<„ k .
  last August.
                                                SiirruinH' M< M i ,
       ‘BOMBER’ HELD
   32        DAILY E X P R E S S M onday April 24 1989




                 Stars                                                    'Letters'                                                                                        245 Blacklnars Road. London SEI 9UX




by M arjo rie Orr
      YOUR STARS TODAY. PLUS
      PHONE-IN HOROSCOPE LINE
            Calls cost 38p peak/standard and
                                                                       Don’t kick Liverpool
                                                             K IC K IN G a m a n w h e n h e 's                                                                                                                                   t io n s o f L iv e rp o o l a n d its p e o ­
                25p cheap rate per minute                    d o w n is a l w a y s e a s i e r t h a n                                                                                                                           ple.
                                                             o ffe rin g a h e lp in g h a n d .                                                                                                                                      H o w c a n w e h o p e to a tt r a c t
IF IT'S YOUR BIRTHDAY TODAY: In your year                        C h a r le s M o o re , in h i s F r id a y                                                                                                                      n e w c o m p a n i e s w h e n C h a rle s
ahead much money will be spent on,extravagances,             c o lu m n , s h o u l d h a v e r e s is te d                                                                                                                       M o o r e a n d h i s lik e s e e k s to t u r n
whims and luxuries but you seem to have the funds to         th e t e m p t a t i o n . H i s a t t a c k on                                                                                                                      e v e ry n e w s i te m a b o u t L iv er­
support it. Your ideas are changing rapidly , and from       L iv e rp o o l b r o u g h t n o c r e d i t to                                                                                                                     p o o l in to a n a t t a c k o n its p e o p le
July onwards confidence in communicating will allow          t h i s u s u a lly r e p u ta b l e c o m m e n ­                                                                                                                   a n d o u r m u c h - m a lig n e d city?
you to put across your new views. Partnerships may           ta to r .                                                                                                                                                                Y o u h a v e u s e d t h e tra g e d y to
be tense.                                                         L iv e rp o o l is lik e a n y o t h e r                                                                                                                        s c o r e a p o i n t f o r t h e G overn-
        TAURUS (April 21 • M ay 20) S tarcall:               c o m m u n i t y — w ith s t r e n g th s                                                                                                                         , m e n t ’s r e f o r m s . Y o u s h o u l d b e
        08 98 30 0 44 5 . Today is a day of private          a n d w eaknesses, good a n d bad.                                                                                                                                   a s h a m e d , M r. M oore.
        vulnerabilities and public extravagance. Maybe           F o r 20 y e a r s I h a v e b e e n                                                                                                                                                     Mrs. Kathleen Pybus,
                                                             in v o lv e d in its p o litic a l a n d civic                                                                                                                                             Simonswood, Liverpool.
the latter compensates for the former but you are
certainly allowing your indulgences to run riot. Life        life, fo r te n y e a r s in P a r lia m e n t,
                                                             D u r in g t h a t t im e t h e r e h a s b e e n                                                                                                                           A T a t im e w h e n t h e p e o p le


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 □
appears to be opening up on many different fronts                                                                                                                                                                                        o f L iv e rp o o l a r e still re e lin g
                                                             tr a g e d y a n d grief, s u c c e s s e s a n d
and the winds of change are definitely blowing.              lau g h s.                                                                                                                                                                 fro m sh o c k an d d istress I c an ­
        GEM INI (M ay 21 • June 21) Starcall: 0 8 98             My w ife L izzie a n d I c h o o s e to                                                                                                                                n o t b e lie v e t h e in se n sitiv ity of
        30 0 3 3 4 . Luckily Jupiter in your own sign is     live in L iv e rp o o l a n d v e ry so o n                                                                                                                                C h a r le s M oo re.
        boosting your confidence and enthusiasm              o u r b a b y w ill b e b o r n th e r e .               Tributes to the dead...Liverpool’s goal atthe famous Kop end                                                   T o t h e p e o p le o f L iverp oo l,
because pressures on you from other quarters might               W h y? B e c a u s e , u n l ik e t h e c a r ­                                                                                                                 f r o m t h e m a jo r ity o f d e c e n t a n d
well be dragging you down a touch. Behind-the-               i c a tu r e w h ic h C h a r le s M o o re                                                                                                                         c a r i n g p e o p le in t h i s c o u n try ,
scenes activity could improve your finances quite                                                                  a c h ie v e d a g a in s t a b a c k g r o u n d /    th isi y e a r 's F.A. C u p sem i-final.              o u r h e a r t s a n d p r a y e r s go o u t to
                                                             c a lls “self-p ity a n d r e s e n tm e n t" ,       o f a 30-year s u s ta i n e d r e d u c tio n '       O n t h e s a m e d a y I s e n t tha£
unexpectedly this week. A light is shed on an old            w e h a v e f o u n d a n u n s e lf is h                                                                                                                           yo u.
                                                                                                                   in p o p u l a t i o n a s p e o p le w e re           E x p r e s s r e p o r t to S p o r t s M in is ­                                  Debbie Jackson,
secret.                                                      s p i r i t o f g e n e r o s ity a n d re s il­      f o r c e d to lea v e in s e a r c h of               t e r C o lin M o y n ih a n . H e d id                                          Uxbridge, Middlesex.
        CANCER (June 22 • July 23) S tarcall:                ie n c e b o r n o f a d v e rs ity .                 w o rk .                                               n o t h in g a b o u t it. O n A p ril 15 a
                                                                 S o t h e r e a r e tw o ta le s of o n e                                                                                                                              AS AN e x - L iv e rp u d lia n . I
  m 08     98 30 0 33 5. July 23 A low energy day for                                                                                                                     s e r i e s o f b l u n d e r s a n d m is ta k e s


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 □
                                                             city. And, fo r t h e r e c o r d , le t's get            N o t c o n t e n t w ith p e r p e t u a t ­                                                                    to o feel s h a m e a n d h o r r o r
        slumping not racing, looking after yourself and                                                            in g o ld m y th s h e a ls o a tt a c k s             w e r e m a d e a t H ills b o r o u g h a n d
finding peace. A t times recently you have felt posi­        it s tra ig h t.                                                                                             a s a r e s u l t 95 p e o p le d ied , s o m e              I w h e n I r e t u r n to s e e w h a t h a s
                                                                 C h a r le s M o o re s a y s b ig c o m ­        o u r c h u r c h lea d e rs.                                                                                       h a p p e n e d to m y city.
tively neurotic but curiously at the same time you are                                                                                                                    o f t h e m c h ild r e n .
learning to live with yourself, to like yourself better.     p a n ie s h a v e t u r n e d t h e i r b a c k s        I n a c ity w ith a s e c ta r i a n p a s t \         A S h e ffie ld p r ie s t o n th e                    B u t I a ls o r e m e m b e r t h e L iv ­
Close partners have a pleasant surprise in mind.             o n L iverp oo l.                                     L iv e r p o o l’s e c u m e n i s m is a m i r ­      s t a n d s gave th e la s t r ite s to                e r p o o l o f 50 y e a r s ago. M en, lik e
                                                                 A r e c e n t s u r v e y o f o u r 38            acle, s e t ti n g a n e x a m p le u n p a r a -      m o r e t h a n 50 p e o p le . H e s a y s h e        m y la te f a th e r w e r e in th e S e c ­
        LEO (July 24 • August 23 ) S tarcall: 0 8 98         s to c k e x c h a n g e lis te d c o m p a ­         lelled in t h is c o u n tr y a n d far                h a s n e v e r s e e n s u c h d ig n ity a n d       o n d W o r ld W a r, w o rk in g th e
        30 0 3 3 6. Do not believe all you are told today.   n ie s s h o w e d a 24.2 p e r c e n t               b e y o n d . O n a n a v e ra g e S u n d a y                                                                d o c k s f r o m 7 a m to 7 p m , t h e n
        Friends and team-mates are no doubt well                                                                                                                          c o m p o s u r e in t h e fa c e o f d e a th ..
                                                             i n c r e a s e in t u r n o v e r a n d a 49.7       a b o u t 140,000 C a t h o l i c s a n d                                                                     fire -w a tc h in g h a lf t h e n ig h t.
meaning but they are often naive and over- trusting as                                                             th o u sa n d s m o re fro m p th e r                      T h e yeal q u e s t io n s a r e h o w
                                                             p e r c e n t i n c r e a s e in p ro fits .                                                                 an d w fn f th is d isa ste r n a p -                      T h e r e w e re n o h a n d o u t s th e n ,
well. So check out all facts before you make major           W h e r e else in B r i ta i n c a n m a t c h        d e n o m i n a ti o n s a r e a t c h u r c h .                                                              b u t h e w o u ld h a v e d i e d r a th e r
decisions which might commit you for the future.                                                                   W h e r e e ls e in E n g la n d c a n                 p e n e d ? P le a s e Kir. M o o r e s p a r e
                                                             th a t?                                                                                                      u s t h i s d o u b le tr a g e d y o f m e n ­        t h a n ta k e n c h a r ity .
Your'reputation is due for a sudden boost.                       M r M o o re s a y s o u r p o r t h a s          c h u r c h e s c la im 30 p e r c e n t
                                                                                                                   a tte n d a n c e ?              ______________        d a c io u s p u b lic p illo ry n o w                     P le a s e r e m e m b e r t h e m a n y
        VIRGO (August 24 - S ep tem b e r 23) S ta r­        b e e n s u n k b y id le n e ss. T h e G o v ­                                                              a d d e d t o a c o m m u n i t y ’s grief.            m e n lik e h im . I d o . . . w ith
        call: 0 8 9 8 3 0 0 3 3 7. High praise makes your    e r n m e n t e s t a b l i s h e d six fre e             O n M a r c h 2 2 7 t h e D a i ly                                               David Alton M.P.         p rid e .
        head double in size but you rather wish for a        p o r ts . O n ly on e , L iv e rp o o l, h a s       E x p r e s s c a r r i e d t h e c o m m e n ts                                Mo»sl«y Hili,Liverpool.                                     Audrey Johnson,
m ore secure feeling at home and among family rela­                 n a s u c c e s s . I n 1988 t h e p o r t /   o f L i v e r p o o l F o o t b a l ^ £ l u b ’s                                                                                 Stourbridge, West Midlands.
tionships as well. You are definitely in a period where
you ought to captialise on the esteem in which you are
held by most of your workmates. Love holds a few
stirnrisos in store for you.                                 «      He a p r e - t a x p r o f i t o f /
                                                                    185,000.
                                                                 T h is s u c c e s s s t o r y h a s b een
                                                                                                                   C h ie f E x e c u tiv e P e t e r u ^ n s o n i
                                                                                                                   a b o u t t h e u n s a t i s f a c t o i ^ B p.ture
                                                                                                                   Of H ills h o r o n g h a s a v r n n e fnr
                                                                                                                                                                          □
                                                                                                                                                                                D U R IN G r e c e n t y e a rs I
                                                                                                                                                                                h a v e g ro w n s ic k a n d t ir e d of
                                                                                                                                                                              / r e a d i n g sw ee p in g g e n e ra lis a ­            CHARLES                M O O R E 'S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r e m a r k s a re e x tre m e ly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in s e n s itiv e . H e s h o u l d b e a r in
          C o f'- j                         OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                             WATERY STREET
                                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                             SHEFFIELD
                                                         (West District)
                                                                             S3 7ET
              STEFAN I . POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci.. B.M.. B.S.. M.R.C.G.P.
                                                             CORONER


                                        Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721    20th January.     19.90.




          SLP/JT.




          Dear Mr. Meunier,

          Thank you for your letter of the 15th of January.  I have nothing further to
          add to my letter of the lQth and regret that I do not think that there is any
          point in continuing the correspondence.


          Yours sincerely,




           h ------
          S.L.Popper,
          H.M.Coroner.




POFifBY
  ( tif                      j    f t



                   //- M
   r \c         S - J -              ^ trL h ju r.




     lM < xJZ r< p                   2 ^ U
                                     <            tJ r '

                                               ..S 3           7     ^T


            ( \ jl~          j^ u s C ^ o \}-ir> ^i> -u-^y4’*t

                                                                ^TTV          ^o-c^v-                                  A -A y b t/-*               (6                              lf%

                       \          o ^r.        \^r-L ^~ u             Ouu~-Y'^yyUTXJi-^C             jfc ^ liu h      J t^u                                    ^        ^4**-

  &^X^(Tu~C.           A /y                     ■ ^0                                              t 3tvi 0 ,->          d          /f\     ,JL*i

                       sffa c

                    d ^ i- J ^ - ,                            < yu d r



                    j^CW                */fy~Ln-€-           OvvoCtS~ (lA sd ’~                                                                     A s-<-e^r ; s £ J °*

            \* r h ^             I unsjv/"                           ^ v u -< —                                                                    h ^ /^ /t^             y^T

   j^nyu~c                   Ja          sfci-c          j^AjA^C.                         0*jAy ^j^ty                 j iC+jtL                                               Oj
  /O'MTVt                                                             ^                                                                                                   0^ir~K~

    \ j - \ J t A ^ - y^     so         6)                                                                                                         tsh     /jL s x 'tb * ^ -
                                                               }r^        t      ^            ^       y                                                    /
   0 - ^ /^ -                           I                                                                    0ur'^6*r'-         / &/QJ-4*_

  *yt           yfck                                                                               b i^ J ^ o C                                   frM
                                        ^                     ' -L j                 je              y J     ,
           j - ^ n r - C c t i.          hrf^C                                                                                            /fc b

                                        'b & \A J -*         O- c-^^/v CV^-X?                    <2^"

                           U*~-v~ d tju vr* b y ^ - J —                                    *£$-C          I ~Jffb -< -£ ~ -        t'yv.
           't< A ^ A Z -\s A--0         (^ \      - £ /« -     ^# O(j-- <Le^^>*^o
                                                                        C L e -4 ^ > -o    jL^ H
                                                                                               * &
                                                                                                 - r-r'£
                                                                                                     ^ £z£.
                                                                                                         .         0^ -*v t*     0O')
                                                                                                                                  ^       0''T^'-O'*-*^
                                                                                                                                             » H p ^           *       /

'-~J^ & ^ -c A ~       A A *J%                       y ^ t                                         0 s 4^*~&/ {'^ ,           & -* -/-                   y^-

 ^(5~uco^             t^ c J u Y y t            uV           (~t>v~c          y fc h                           e s v i-~ < ^ -^ -jC «             / ~ '^ -e ^ < _ ,

 e /O L fJ ^       J sk -            i - f ■ fY                                            >0                                            /^* >                     ^ iT    ^ '

  ■^tv>k              O-^x-e^.                 '^ysru^-c                                    ’/y r ~ d te -     ^3-“-x„            ^                       —^        ylc^ -‘^C *-

    La -                          (?                                                       cAs    <*7*a .
                                                           5th June


         SLP/JT.




         MR. L. Sharp,
         Chief Constable,
         Cumbria Constabulary,
         Nechells Green Police Station,
         Fowler Street,
         Birmingham. B7 5DA.


         Dear Mr.Sharp,

         Thank you for your letter of the 23rd of May. On the whole I can see no
         reason why I should object to the preparation of the terraces at Leppings
         Lane, provided of course that the D.P.P. does not mind, you do not mind and
         also all the other interested parties do not object.

         Perhaps one should ask Davies Arnold & Cooper to confirm a little nearer the
         time whether they want to go ahead with the proposed work.


         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.CORONER.




JOAAAI
 H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M


W IS T MIDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52-, Uoyd House
Colrnore Circus Queensway
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                           Your Ref:
Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025
Fax: 021-233 3256                                           Our Ref:    LS/SA

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                               Date:       23 May 1990
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 50A
Telephone: 021-359 3332
Fax: 021-359 6735

FURNIVAL HOUSE
Furnival Gate
Sheffield S1 4QN
Telephone: 0742 731546
Fax:        0742 731483




   Dr S L Popper
   H M Coroner
   Medico-Legal Centre
   Watery Street
   Sheffield
   S3 7ET




   Dear Dr Popper

  Enclosed please find the copy of a letter dated 23 May 1990 from Messrs Davies
  Arnold and Cooper Solicitors, acting for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
  concerning removal of the remaining barriers and safety fence to the Leppings
  Lane terrace before the start of the 1990 football season.

  I have already replied acknowledging receipt of the letter indicating that
  before I respond I would wish to consult you concerning any objections you may
  wish to raise. In this connection will you please let me have your views in
  writing before mid July 1990.

  From my point of view, I can see no valid reason for objecting to the
  proposals.

  Yours sincerely




     kllUUVl
  CHIEF CONSTABLE
  CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY




>. Enc




 PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
    D     a     v    i    e     s
   A r n o L D
    C     o     o    p     e    r
   DAVIES ARNOLD COOPER SOLICITORS 12 BRIDEWELL PLACE LONDON EC4V BAD
   TELEPHONE 071-353 6555 TELEX262894 LDEI72 FAX071-936 2020

  L Sharpe Esq
  Chief Constable
  Cumbria Constabulary
  MechelIs Green Police Station
  Fowler Street
  Birmingham B7 5DA



   OUR REF       il7/743968/SS                                                                     23rd M ay 1990
   YOUR REF      LS/SA


   Dear Sir

   Hillsborough Disaster
   Further to m y letter of the 17th May, I have been informed by
   the Club that it is their intention to remove the remaining
   barriers  and. safety   fence to the Leppings    Lane   terrace
   immediately before the start of the forthcoming season.

   The Club have already agreed to the removal of a further
   barrier from the ground for testing in accordance w i t h the
   agreement reached between the experts in the litigation at
   their meeting on the 5th April.  It is anticipated by the end
   of July/beginning of August, that these experts will have
   completed their enquiries for the purposes of preparing a
   report, and therefore from that point of view, there is no
   need for the Leppings Lane terrace to remain in its present
   state as the parties to the litigation will n o t be prejudiced
   by such works being undertaken.  I have informed the parties'
   Solicitors of the Club's intentions in this regard, and have
   said quite clearly that the whole matter should be reviewed
   once again at the end of July wh e n we have a m u c h clearer
   picture of any potential problems that m ay be caused b y these
   intended w o r k s .

   However, I a m of course extremely conscious of any continuing
   interest your investigation team m a y have in the terrace
   remaining in its. present state, together w i t h that of H.M.
   Coroner and the Crown Prosecution Service.  I would ask you to
   confirm whether there is any objection to these works being
   carried out.    As stated above, the position needs to be
   reviewed at the end of July, but at this stage I woul d be
   grateful if you would indicate whether there is any continuing
   interest in the terrace.



                                                                                                         C o n t d . .

r-j DAVIDA.MclNTQSH JOHNPARKER VINCENTO’CALLAGHAN DAVIDSOGERS MICHAEL H0BIAS SIMONPEARL JOHNCOATOS ANDREWBRITTON JOHN SMITH
    NICHOLASBOCHEZ MARKBEATTIE KENNETHMcKEflZlE ALANFISHER ANNEWARE DANIELGOWAN ANDREW HIGGS GERALDO'MAHONEY MICHAELFLETCHER
A DAVIDM cL ROBERTS DAVIDHEmZELL ROBERTHE MICHAELCOVER JANETMACMILLAN NICHOLASSINFIELB LAURENCEMESSER NIGELMONTGOMERY
r~ JOHNJACKSON MICHAELRHAT1EAN BETHWILKINS GERARDGIBSON                                              CONSULTANT:ANTHONYHARRIS
    LDKDOH MANCHESTER BRUSSELS MADRIDAND ATUOYO’S
                                                 23rd M ay 1990


        I look forward to hearing from y o u .
o > □
        y   /       fh




        R.H.B. STURT, M.A.(CANTAB)                                          34 &36 CASTLE STREET
        H.M. CORONER FOR COUNTY OF KENT                                             DOVER
          (CANTERBURY & DOVER DISTRICT)                                              KENT
                TELEPHONE 0304 240250
                                                                                  CT161PN
                   FAX 0304 240040                                                    ALSO AT
                                                                                  68 CASTLE STREET
                                                                                    CANTERBURY
                                                                                       KENT
                                                                                      CT1 2GB


                         Your R e f :   SLP/JT                                22nd M ay 1990
                         Our R e f :    RS/VL/CORONERSHIP



                         Dear Stefan,




                                Thank you very much for your letter of the 14th May.

                              I hope all went well for you and that you do                      not
                         have the unenviable task of resuming your I n q u e s t .

                              You will remember I mentioned the other day the
                         recent Court of Appeal decision concerning our brother
                         Coroner for Wolverhampton.         There was an interesting
                         article in The Independent about it and also The T i m e s .
                         Were you able to get a transcript of the Judgement of the
                         Court of Appeal decision, because I think it would be
                         very interesting and useful for a number of cases I have
                         coming up?          I will, of course, be delighted to pay
                         copying c h a r g e s .

                                                               Yours sincerely,



*   •                                                             I____________________ I
                                                               R.H.B. Sturt.
                                                               H.M. Coroner for Kent
                                                               Canterbury & Dover District

                         S.L. Popper, Esq., LL.B., B.MED.Sci.,
                           B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.,
                         Coroner
                         Office of H.M. Coroner for
                           South Yorkshire (West District)
                         Medico-Legal Centre
                         Watery Street
                         Sheffield S3 7ET




                                        ifi'
                                               ;   £   V   r
                                             25th April


SLP/JT.
ADOM/DSH/HR.




Mrs. D.S. Harper,
West Midlands Polio**
Polio* Headquarters«
PO Box 52,
Lloyd House,
Golmore Circus,
Queensway,
             M .fflfa.


Dear Mrs. Harper,

Thank you for your letter of the 24th of April inviting me
to the Police Authority Awards Evening on the 1st of May
1990.

I will he delighted to attend.


Yours sinoerely,




S.L.Popper,
faJMBSXmah.
W e s t Midlands Police
                                                                 POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                 PO BOX 52, LLOYD HOUSE
                                                                 COLMORE CIRCUS, QUEENSWAY
                                                                 BIRMINGHAM B4 6NQ
                                                                 TELEPHONE: 021 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0
                                                                 TELEX: 33 7 3 2 1
                                                                 ALL C O M M U N IC ATIO N S SHOULD BE AD DRESSED TO “ THE C HIEF CONSTABLE “




r                                                    n
           Dr S L Popper                                        your reference

           HM Coroner
           Medico Legal Centre                                  our reference                  ADM/DSH/MR
           Watery Street
           Sheffield                                            date                            24 April 1990
           S3 7ET
L                                                    J




t          Dear Dr Popper

           POLICY AUTHORITY AWARDS EVENING - 1 MAY 1990

           On the 1 May 1990, the Chairman of the Police Authority will be hosting an
           Awards Evening in the Ballroom at Tally Ho! Birmingham. During the evening
           presentation will be made to a number of officers, including those commended
           following their involvement in the Hillisborough Investigation.

           On behalf of the Chairman, Councillor D M Ablett, you are cordially invited
           to attend the Ceremony. Arrangements have been made for the presentation to
           be preceeded by a light meal and, as you will be travelling from Sheffield
           that afternoon, the Chairman would be delighted if you would join him and a
           small number of guests for dinner at 6.30 pm.

           I understand that Mr Jones will be making the necessary arrangements for

«          travel and overnight accommodation.


           I trust you will be able t-<~>     i-hia invitation and would be grateful if
           you would liaise with Mrs Harper (021 626 5000 extension 2010) in the event
           of any difficulties.

           Yours sincerely




      jLr  CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER




                                                         ..
    THE OFFICER DEALING WITH THE CORRESPONDENCE IS
                                                         Mrs ^D „S TT
                                                                   Harper                           EXTENSIO N                 on-in
                                                                                                                                2010
f<Z*€h            i




                                           11th April        90.

SLlP/JT.

Mr. P. Snapaan,
HT.M.Coroner,
Westainster Coroner's Court,
Horseferry Hoad,
London.SVI.




Bear Paul,

Re MAECHIOMjbbS

I hope your preparation is going well and that things will
go saoothly for you whan you open.

I would be aoat grateful if you would let ae have a
copy of the transcript of the first day's proceedings,
particularly of course your opening address, as I would
very ouoh like to see how you handled the Inquest.

Obviously if you would find it helpful, I would be pleased
to let you have a copy of «y opening remarks by way of
reciprocity.

Yours sincerely,



StLtFoypn,
B.M.Coroner.

Dictated by S. L.Popper, H«K.Go*oi»r.
 DRAFT PRESS RELEASE

Her Majesty's Coroner for South Yorkshire (West District) wishes to
announce that he has decided to havg a meeting with with the legal
representatives of interested parties on         M anch 1990.
 The purpose of this meeting is jro consider the £^asability of
resuming the Inquests into the ydeaths of the pejreons who died as a
result of the tragedy at Hillsborough on 15tly&pril 1989 for the
purposes of taking evidence d i a limited nature prior to the
conclusion of the Directoryof Public Prosecutions enquiries.

It must be clearly understood thi&#any evidence which were to taken
at such interim inquest/would be'faesigfied to ensure that it does not
in anyway impede the ongoing ftwesti^ation being undertaken by the
Director of Public ProsecutiM.

It is the intentionr ofJ0n.e H.M. JZoroner as soon as may be practical
after the holdins/of        aboveymeeting to announce whether or not
a resumption of jche Inquests Jor the above mentioned purpose are
to take place and iJ| the decision is to proceed the date for the
resumption of y th e Inquests/

Further enquiries regarding this should be addressed to:




                                                              END
Notes for Press Officer: (if further information required).

Additional information:

1. Location of meeting:   Medico-Legal Centre , Watery St., Sheffield.

2. Time of meeting   2.pm.

3. In addition to above matters it is anticipated that administrative
matters such as the duration of the proceeds, location etc will be
discussed.

4. Issues if any of representation will be sorted out.
     DRAFT LETTER TO HAMMQMD RTTDDAftDR.




     Dear Sirs,

     Re: HILLSBOROUGH.

     Thank you for your letter of the 29th of J a x iu s x y f I note tha
     you are instructed to act on behalf of the Ohio/ Constable >Ct the
     forthcoming Inquests.

    ^ I note what you say with regard to the conj Licting views as to
J     the civil proceedings.

     With regard to the questions which youy«ave raisejjn-

         1.   I am not in a position to gi^e you anyindication when
              the Inquests are likely toy€e held, o j the extent and scope.
              This depends upon the completion of JEile investigations
              currently being undertatofo by tKfe Wgst Midlands Police
              and the decision of thy D.P.^f Bg^h these matters are
              not within my control,

         2.   Whilst I think it i.4 noiftrflly jfractice for civil proceedings
              to follow the InqTMsts\4rmere/have been occasions when the civil
              liability has been s o r M otuf prior to an Inquest. Admittedly
              these are cases J|ulte vZX& rJ where injury has resulted, possibly
              many years prior t6 the d§ath, and the civil litigation has
              been completed. \
                           7         /
              I therefore/ao not hav$?' any Tery strong views on this matter
              except ins^afatqrks I f^el that to conduct civil litigation
              at a poin# in time wHen the evidence is not freely available
              does present problems, both for the plaintiffs as well as for
              the dependents. /

              I ha^e no obje< §.on to this information being disclosed to the
              oth/r parties,j r indeed to the Court.


     Yours £ § Lthfully,



     S.L/Popper,
        I.Coroner.
  Telephone No:




                                                             15 March 1 990

 Medico-Legal Centre
 Watery Street
 SHEFFIELD
 S3 7ET

 For the attention of Dr S L Popper - H M Coroner

 Dear Dr Popper

 Re:   Complaints against Mr

 Thank you    for your   letter of   7 March   1990   for which   I am most
 grateful.

 I did not expect or intend to solicit any comment from you, my
 purpose in copying you in was purely to make you aware of the
 circumsta nce s.

 I am generally concerned at M r       _____ behaviour and will of
 course deal with this through the South Yorkshire Police Authority
 in the normal way. I am sure my views were evident to you from the
 copy letter you received, and need no further elaboration.    What
 action you wish to take is purely a matter for yourself and I
 understand the extremely delicate situation that exists.

 May I take this opportunity of thanking you for your time when we
 visited Sheffield for the meeting and I very much appreciate both
 on a personal level and in my capacity as Chairman of the Support
 Group the fair and sensitive way that you are proposing to conduct
 the Inquests.

 It will not be an easy time for any of us, including yourself, your
 staff and the Jurors but having sat through the meeting and met you
 personally, I am convinced that you are doing everything possible
 to minimise the distress and I would commend you for taking this
 difficult but humane route.

 Youry^aitlyflfriLly




   revor Hicks




P v y ' T o
 ^    /.       O’      f i t u   b f            f a   I f I   f




                                              13th March          990,

SLP/JT.


David Alton MP,
Hons* of Commons,



Bear Hr. Allen,

Thank you for your letter of the 28th of February. You will
no doubt be aware that events are overtaking us and In faot
it is proposed to resxne the Inquests into the Hillsborougi
deceased on a limited basis starting on the 18th of April,
at which time the evidence relating to tile alcohol levels
will formally be produced.

In fact you may be interested to learn that it is my intention
to write to the solicitors for the bereaved prior to that
resumption, and send them a copy of a euraaary which will be
produced in evidence and which at the present time we anticipate
will inolude the alcohol levels of the individual deceased.
Consequently- I anticipate that in the very near future all the
bereaved families will have this information to hand.

It is oorreot that X have refused to disclose this information
to the bereaved families for various reasons but sot least v
because it is not a practical proposition to try and ran 95
Inquests either by poet or on the telephone.

Mr. Berry Bevonside as you know is a prominent member of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group and I have had conversations with
him from time to time. He did contact ms on one occasion and
in the course of that conversation requested the alcohol level
in respect of his son (who incidentally we have recorded as
Christopher and not sub Trevor). I explained to Hr. Devonside
my reluctance to do so, but in the end I allowed my heart
to rule my head and I did give him the information. I think
it is probably right to say that I am not likely to make that
error again in the near future.

Tours sincerely,



J&LJSFopper,
gffligSaMfa
o.c. Harry Barnes M.P.
     Lawrence Cunliffe M.P.
                            H O U SE OF C O M M O N S
                                LONDON SW1A0AA
                                              February 28th 1990.



Mr.Stefan Popper,
County Coroner,
South Y o r k s h i r e .


Dear Mr.Popper,

  We are writing to you following a meeting held last night at
the House of Commons between ourselves and families who lost
relatives in the Hilsborough Stadium Disaster.
  In particular, we were concerned to learn that details of blood
samples taken by yourself have not been made available to all
parents. Mr.Barry Devonside confirmed that you did provide
details in the case of his son, Trevor. However, other parents
said that they had been refused this information. Please would
you be kind enough to clarify the position?
   With thanks,
   Yours sincerely,



   vid Alton MP.             Harry Barnes MP.      Lawrence Cunliffe MP.
Tel:- 01- 428 -7313




  South Yorkshire Police Authority,
  PO Box 37,
  Regent S t r ee t,
  Barnsley,
  South Yorkshire
  S70 2 P Q .


  fao:- R .C .Johnston- Clerk & Financial Officer.          7th February 1990


  Dear Mr. Johnston,

  re: Chief Constable

  I wish to file a complaint against        _
  I would ask you to      cause this   to be   recorded and, in view of his
 (forthcoming "retirement", request urgent attention to its resolution.

  Despite "setting aside" the national press   on the  basis that  they are
  reporting second hand, I consider his    actions and  comments during the
  interview with the "Sheffield Star" of the 5th  instant to be at   best a
  breach of  his privileged position and at worst a deliberate attempt to
  divert the cause of justice.

  As some comments can be considered as being actions designed to influence
  the  outcome  of  the Coroners   Inquest,  I have copied this letter to
  Dr.Popper at the Medico-Legal Centre for his attention.

  Similarily, a copy will be forwarded to the West Midlands Police
  Investigation Team and because of |              |, The Police Complaints
  Authority.

  My specific complaints are as f o l l o ws :-

     1) _____________ is guilty of abuse of the privilege of his position in
     suggesting to the media he was   aware that  information would  come to
     light in the Inquest,that would present "a different picture".

     He infers this relates to drink and or its effects.
     Assuming Mr.Wright  has seen such "evidence" it is"confidential" until
     deemed otherwise by H.M.Coroner and should remain that way. Clearly a
     breach of priviledge.

     2)By  suggesting that   this   "puts    a different complexion on the end
     product" he prejudges the verdict    of   the  Coroner.  This  is clearly
     outside his authority and    insults the    juristiction of the coroner's
     office.

     3)1 believe  that his pronouncements could prejudice Inquest Jurors,
     who will  of course  be drawn from the  area covered by the newpaper
     cited.
     4)He goes on to infer that Lord Justice Taylor was not aware of all of
     the facts and "that there is a lot   of information that has not yet
     come out."  He has  therefore, by his own admission, failed to do his
     job. If he is aware of  information that  is material  to Lord Justice
     Taylor's conclusions he should have ensured it was placed before him.

     5)If,  as             claims,   this material   relates  to  drink then
     presumably it is additional to that contained in the summary document
     produced by Professor Usher    for Justice  Taylor ( the one withdrawn
     from circulation) and to the post   mortem reports,-  in which  case we
     shall be  asking our  lawyers to obtain details of it and to establish
     why this was with-held from us.

     6)I f ,      as  I suspect,   this   is merely   the   same     information, then
                „      is well  aware   that this   has   been     available   for many
     m o n t h s .Clearly it cannot be "new" or "additional"to      that considered by
     Taylor.
     Under these circumstances        his actions constitute a     deliberate attempt
     to mislead- an offence under the discipline code or           worse.

                 claims to accept   the findings  of The  Taylor Report, and
     even calls it "a superb document'
     Yet he persists in claiming the primary conclusion is wrong. That is
     as clear an example of "double   standards" as  one could  ever see and
     serves to underline questions regarding what his motives are.


I*    is my complaint   that  in making these claims now and publicly Mr.
       has committed a disgraceful act.  That this  act is quite clearly
not what   should be  expected from a Chief Officer, that it could effect
the Inquest's impartiality and finally it appears to be a blatant attempt
to distort the course of justice.

As  stated earlier,in view of                   rank  and the time cycles
involved I have forwarded a copy of this     letter (and the article) to
Captain Taylor   at   The Police Complaints Authority for their immediate
attention and action.

kl appreciate that the normal protocols will    need  to be   observed but
 suggest that the 1st May deadline leaves little time for delay.

                                 Yours Faj^hfi/Lj^y




                                    Trevor   h i c k s   .
Chief Constable denies soccer tragedy


        ' - : : t i'tt
          (f    T lD
        ■ :x a                                                                       By Bob Westerdale, Chief Reporter
                                                                   SOUTH Yorkshire Chief Constable Peter Wright is to step
                                                                   down from his £50,000-a-year job bn May 1 — but denied
                                                                   today he is leaving because of the traumas of the Hills­
                                                                   borough disaster.
                                                                     The police boss insists he had planned to announce his retirement at
                                                           ,60, but delayed it six m onths after.fais birth d ay to guide the force during
                                                           th e 1investigation in to ('thje.?5 d e a th s . "[ \                  _ v ■ ’»
                                                              N o w , h e says, t h e f o r c e can “ m o v e forw ard'
                                                           w ith c e r t a i n t y ” w i t h a new figurehead
                                                              S p e a k in g fro m th e force HQ in Sheffield, a so m ­
: R E A C T IO N differed sharply th is afternoon to chief b re M r W rig h t sa id h e h a d sta y e d o n to “ p ro v id e th e
  constable Peter W right’s shock retirement lea d e rsh ip ” in th e a f te r m a th o f th e T a y lo r R e p o rt.
!announcement.                                                Then, he added: “ I think there is a very strong feeling of
                                                            resentment and injustice as a result o f Hillsborough.**
     The majority feeling among the 3,000-strong force
, js one of sadness that the end of his career has been T n m m s m                                                         B
j!overshadowed by Lord Justice Taylor’s criticism.
    One officer said: “It is a      |} y B o b W esterd ale         He found it hard to accept Taylor’s conclusion that
pity that be wiB go down in                                       drink had no bearing on the run-up to the 95 deaths.
history as the chief conrtaMe     after the remarks from            “ There is a coroner’s h e a rin g . , . and I think perhaps a
at tbe time of Hillsborough.      Justice Taylor but being the different picture will emerge,” he said today.
There was so much more be         man tin t be is be rtaycd t a g   His resignation was accepted with **great personal
achieved.”                        enough to restore the morale regret” by Police A uthority chairm an Sir Jack Layden.
   Police Authority chairman      of the police,” he Mid.
                                                                       It was his committee that ripped up M r W right’s resig­
Sir Jack Layden spoke of his          “ The Chief Constable
                                                                   nation note just six m onths earlier.
“great personal regret” but       took criticism of some of the
said be had been expecting        force’s actions on tbe chin         Then, M r W right said he took full responsibility for the
the resignation.                  and offered to resign if we on   actions o f his men.
   H e a p p r e c ia te d M r    «b*                     wanted      Taylor’s final report, published last week, did nothing to
Wright’s loyalty and dedi-        lum to but I am glad we stood    retract any o f the earlier indictments o f m atch security
cation in seeing tbe force        by him. He performed bril-;      management.
through the Taylor inquiry. •     Uantly during tbe pit strike         M r W right’s resignation letter said: “ I t had always been
   And the only Conservative      and he protected the people,     my intention to leave the force on reaching 60 years o f age,
member of South Yorkshire’s           “His replacement will have   but my personal resolve was overtaken by the tragic events
police committee, Sheffield       to be a good man to match up     a t Hillsborough.
c ity c o u n cillo r D anny      to Peter Wright.”                    “ It seemed to m e the proper course o f action would be to
George said: “I am very sad-          But Hillsborough Labour      await the outcome o f Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry and to
dened to hear that he is retir-    MP Martin Flannery said: “I     deal, as I thought appropriate, with w hat emerged in the
tag — but not surprised.           welcome his retirement, even    findings.”                                                ’
   “He could have resigned         if it is belated.____________       The inquiry was now concluded and “ all the necessap'
                                                                   police actions arising from it have been largely concluded” ,
                                                                                                  “ he added.
                                                                                                       H e said the inquiries by
                                                                                                     the Director o f Public Pros­
                                                                                                     ecutions and the coroner
                                                                                                     being carried out by West
                                                                                                     M idlands police are likely to
                                                                                                     be completed in April
                                                                                                       “ I have m ade every effort
                                                                                                    to ensure th at all available
                                                                                                    evidence and information
                                                                                                     has been brought to the
                                                                                                    attention o f investigating
                                                                                                    officers.        •          -
                                                                                                    Coroner wll reveal
                                                                                                    the true story:'?4
                                                                                                      “ The time o f my retire­
                                                                                                    ment should ensure th at I
                                                                                                    am in post to deal with any
                                                                                                    queries raised by the invest!'
                                                                                                    gation
                                                                                                       “ I have had the honour
                                                                                                    and privilege to comm and
                                                                                                    South Yorkshire police foi
                                                                                                    the past seven years and,
                                                                                                    despite the tribulations of
                                                                                                    recent m o nths,-1- have no
                                                                                                    hesitation in saying that
                                                                                                    m orale is high and the force
                                                                                                    is in good heart. >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            s.
              THE STA R, Monday, February 5. 1W




Police chief’s
                                                                                              Coroner wi    m        s s g
                                                                                                                         ' m                .
                                                                                                                                                               Peter Wright talks frankly about city
sad farewell
TODAY'S news that Peter Wright, Chief Con­
stable of South Yorkshire, is retiring will be
met with very mixed feelings in this region.
                                                                  1
                                                                                                            Mmriffi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tragedy
                                                         AFTER 36 years as a
     He is the man who has borne the brunt of            policem an, the lowest                        TODAY Peter Wright, South Yorkshire's Chlel Constable,                                                                                                                                                                                              Lord Justice Talyor’s report, but in     misbehaviour will not be altered by
devastating criticism after the Hillsborough                                                           announced that he will toUre on May 1 this year.                                                                                                                                                                                                    the circumstances I can't.               sitting down."
disaster. His force was tondemned for ineffi-,           point o f Peter Wright’s
                                                         career — the deaths o f                         In an exclusive interview with The Star, he speaks of the                                                                                                                                                                                            “ There is a lot o f information to      Mr Wright said he had not yet,
clency and its senior officers came In for                                                             aftermath ol the Hillsborough disaster.                                                                                                                                                                                                             come out-that has not already come       decided whether to take up work
especially severe criticism.                             95 p e o p l e a t H i l l s ­                  He says that, so far, only the police have shown the cour­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           o ut."                                   outside the police after his retire­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M r Wright welcomed Lord Jus­         ment on May l.
    The final report by Lord Justice Taylor              borough — overshad­                           age to shoulder blame for (he tragic events.
has not retracted any of that criticism.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tice Taylor’s recommendations that          "Obviously the events since Hills­
                                                         ows his achievements.                           He says his officers regard as unfair the ‘'harsh” criticism                                                                                                                                                                                      in future socccr stadiums should be      borough have been the worst part of
     Today, although still under legal con­                                                            voiced by Lord Justice Taylor, who Investigated the disaster.                                                                                                                                                                                       all-sealer, with terrace areas being     my a career in terms of its impact on
straints,, he has spoken out more frankly than .           He r e c o g n ise s th is, and.              Mr Wright suggests that additional evidence, particularly                                                                                                                                                                                         banned.                                  me as aprofessional.”
ever, before/ He- has jpade clear that he                announcing; Bis
                                                                      his retirement
                                                                           i          today
                                                                                                       about the effect of alcohol on fans, will present “a different                                                                                                                             "V t f f i r                                                “ I think we have got to go that         He feels that , despite, Hills­
accepts the Taylor report. He even caUcjt a              he spotce frankly about the trau-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 way. There are some people who will      borough, the morale o f his force is-
                                                         may^'force has suffered since                 picture" at the coroners Inquest Into the 95 Hillsborough
‘‘superb document”                   .v                                                                deaths, yet to be held.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             argue that those who are prone to        high.'.                               •
                                                         the     .cful. Cup sem i-final
     He IS sympathetic towards his ofiicers              tragedy, on April 15 last year.
who were under tremendous pressure, both
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                m sm
                                                          I f th e d is a s t e r had not                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tough-talking Peter Wright
oh the day and at the Inquiry.. He under­
stands their feeling of/resentment and Injus­           occurred, Mr Wright would                    did everything right, but sini|              “All th£ experts in football had                                                                                                                                                                               gives his views In no
                                                        have retired in October 1989, the            nobody seems to have grasped               had time^fo drink about that, and
tice. But he believes a very different picture          end o f his presidency o f the
will emerge when thecpronerV hearing Is
                                                                                                   ' full picture." .             .             Had donefcothing about it because;                                                                                                                                                                                   uncertain terms
                                                        Association, o f Chief Police                                                           they had    perceived any problem..
held. -        : • '•'• ;%                              Officers.
                                                                                                      . He says the,circumstances o fth e
                                                                                                     public inquiry put great pressure on            “And «%en the probleni emerges."
     To bis credit, Peter-Wright offered to ;             He decided, to remain in his               his senior officers, who werecross-        ..the only. ones, who seemed to be
resign , after Hillsborough but councillors?            post ^uatil Lord Justice Taylor              exa mined by barristers.     ;;             :standing (here to take responsibility;
 persuaded him to stay. That was a measure'             published his final report on the              “ I have tried to put myself iritheir      -were police officers who had at the .
of their respect for his qualities.; He has.            tragedy.''                                   positon. There they were, the senior : '.most a quarter o f an hour or 20,;;
stayed on “to pull the force together" for a                                                         Officers whohad taken action on the'          minutes to deal with a situation in "•
 new leader, so that It can goforward with                  The judge, in hij interim report,        day, being questioned in great detail • very traumatic drcumstances." ••-'                                                                                                                         'T'£"■*"£•
                                                       . published last August, said its main        over a period o f six weeks about the •'        He sai&.ofthe public inquiry: “It;-
certainty. ;        •                  •                 cauiie was “the failure o f police          events that took place in IO minutes         took sott« .lawyers that long to get                                    Harrowing scenes from the Hillsborough disaster
      During his years In .charge of South"              control"-                                   quarter o f an hour.               '      ’ to the polfit o f a question."
 Yorkshire's force he has. fought.consisteritly           , The judge, after hearing evidence                                                                                               undertsand was the finding that                                                                            “We have taken a high profile we
                                                         a t a -six-w eek p u b lic inquiry,            ‘‘Perhaps i f you had ma<le.                 Mr Wright said he nevertheless ■                                                         “There will be a lot o f additonal
 for more manpower, so that .standards of                                                            decisions to take action or -nuide- • accepted L»rd Justice Taylor's find­             there was drinking among a percent­            evidence presented to the comer’s,                        have not sought to evade the issue,”
 policing could be Improved.. He. has made               critisiscd senior police officers for                                                                                              age o f the fans, and that they were
                                                       ■•“evasive a n d defensive" answers to        dedsoris not to take action, and 95 - ings.                                     >■                                                    inquiry which was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 not presented at                        said Mr Wright.         ; . . .j
 safety in the streets his special target and                                                      . people had been killed, would you                                                      under the influence o f drink, but             Lordrd Justice Talyor’s inquiry, which
                                                         questions.;                                                                                 But the chief constable also nude      that it had iio effect on the events.                                                                      The authority then intends to iuc<
 has Initiated many Improvements arid                                                                not feel a little inhibited in terms Of'■ ;..clear he Relieves the coroner’s                                                          may put a different complexion on
                                                          ' M r Wright said today: “I think          answering questions?” •.                                                                                                                                                                       the Sheffield Wednesday Club, the;
 innovations.                                   •;                                                                                             .;.-inquest into, the disaster, w hidfis                                                    the end product."                                        city council and the cluo’s consult-"'
                                                       .there is a very strong feeling o f                                                                                                    “I found that a little difficult to
   : It is(-therefore, sad that;a dlstinoshed            resentnjerit and injustice in the force        Mr VVright said he thought sortie-.,                                                                                                  The South Yorkshire police auth­                      ant engineers, so a cou rt can
                                                                                                                                                                                            come to terms with.                            ority, while not formally, admitting                     apportion the blame.
 career of devoted public service 6 h /        end:      as t      v.of Hillsborough.                o f Lord Justice Taylor’r comments.
                                                                                                    •were“harsh” and savage.”                                               picture.           “What I am anxious to do is to              that police had some responsibility
 in this way, with a c1oud of cMtlcisn( 4hat                “Tu-tS what I pick up going                                                                                                                                                                                                                This could lead to the compen­
                                                         round the force spealdng to officers,                                                                                               make sure that all tbe evidence,               for the disaster, have beguh talks
 could easily obscure the gopd achieved.:          ■                                                .. “People have had time to think           “Lord Jpslice Taylor was dealing             whether it is for the police or                                                                         sation payments being shared.
                                                         trying to keep sounding? o f what the                                                                                                                                             with lawyers representing with
      Peter Wright is an honourable man and a                                                        about the safety o f Hillsborough ' with evidence and he was emphasis­                 whether it is criticial of the police,         bereaved relatives and injured fans,                        Mr Wright said: “There is a lot I
                                                         feelings are.        C .                    over generations — the safety o f the;, in g the E v id e n c e w hich w as
 dedicated professional. He Is right to.go but                                                                                                                                               goes forward, because if things have          and are prepared to make out-of-                          would want to say about Hills­
                                                       . “And there is this feeling of injus-        turnstiles, the numbers going           -available.^*-'.                               •been done wrongly then they must                                                                        borough. There a r e a lot o f com­
 it is also right to thank him for all he has done                                                                                                                                                                                         court settlements,, if damages can be
                                                        •tice about It, not in a sense that we       through, the crush.                        “Whatv'I. found difficult to to :           -never happen again.                                                                                     ments I would want to make on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           agreed.
 for South Yorkshire and to wish him happi­
 ness In his retirement . . .

 One of the great<S                                              A YEAR Oi= TURMOIL AND TRAUMA FOR ‘BOBBY’S BOBBY’
 THE FACT that Peter Elliott won a gold medal
  In the Commonwealth;Games 1i500 metres
  In the early hours 'of ■-.Saturday morning Is
  now history — but It must npt.be allowed to
  passasslrtiplyasthat
    ■ This was a truly great performance by e
  great athlete who has gone unrecognised,
  nationally and Internationally, for too long.           O'
      He deserves all tHe recognition, glory,'
                                                                                                                                                       ■?
  sponsorship and cash he will now get— and
  a big salute from all in South Yorkshire‘for                                                                                                                                       ing stream o f allegations contin-
                                                         By Bob Westerdale, chief                                                                                                . uwl to weigh heavily on him.
  their home-grown hero. Congratulations     1 U II9
                                                         r e p o r t e r , and P au l                                                                                                   Now'Peter Wright has dedded
  Peter Elliott— you also happen to be a veryvery                 Whltehouse_____                                                                                                   enough is enough^ He has seen
  pleasant bloke and It couldn't happen                                                                                                                                             his South Y orkshire force                   TELEPHONE:                                                                          SOI TH YORKSHIRE fOUCE
.nicer one. - • . .     :                    * ‘1       IT SHOULD have been the                                                                                                     through the aftermath o f tbe dis­           SHUniLD 117431 HIS]]                                                                 MX ICE Hl'ADQlAITEXS
                                                        crowning year in the career of                                                                                              aster and its implications. Now              TELEX: U W t                                                                           SMC HILL
                                                        one o f Britain’s best chief                                                                                                he feels it is appropriate to hand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TAX: 10741) SU24J                                                                        SHE/HELD SJ iu r
                                                        constables.                                                                                                                 oyer the reins to another.
                                                                                                                                                                                        The Stockpprt:bom ex-Navy
                                                        . The year 1989 was to be the ';                                                                                          ’ seaman joined'his. home Man­                 r WJUCtfTCIE .
                                                        . time when Peter Wright would '■                                                                                           chester forcc#^ 1954;-aged 24.
                                                         ; look away from the sometimes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •J l'J jn u » ry : 1**0
                                                                                                                                                                                   •Within five years;he was in CID,                                 T .-
                                                           parochial aspect o f polidng one                                                                                                                                  .               ■ •• v.:-;. U.;   •                 •
                                                                                                                                                                                     later spedaluing inlfraud investi­           »■
                                                           area and exert real influence on                                                                                          gation. .                                   C o u n c illo r S i r J o t a l»yd«a
                                                           the overall state o f British law                                                                                                                                     C h a im s
                                                           and order.                                                                                                                  Promotion brought him a new               South Yorkthlr* F o lic* A u t h o r i ty
                                                                                                                                                                                    challenge with neighbouring                  t L l l t e Crov*
                                                             Mr W right a ccep ted the                                                                                              Merseyside— wheie he faced the
                                                          mantle o f P resid en t-o f the'                                                                                                                                       H»ltby- • -. ■
                                                                                                                                                                                    fiiry o f petrol-bomb rioters at             Rochtrhia             '    - -:
                                                          A ssocation o f C hief P olice                                                                                           Toxteth.                   i •
                                                          Ofnp"''\ with great pride and                                                                                                                                          S t t 8BX       -
                                                          exp1       bn:                                                                                                               The experience stood him in
                                                             UtUejfiMe know thatinafeyv                                                                                            good stead on this side o f the
                                                       ; monmsf there would be a local"''                                                                                          Pennine*, where as boss o f South
                                                       ifjrefft.^C su^K catastrop h ic                                                                                             Yorkshire, he inherited the bitter
                                                       <importance that would mpnopol- •'                                                                                          year-long pit strike. .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I < ■ w r i t i n g t o glv« grot ( o r u l no t l e t of ay l m t n t l o n t * r t t l r a ’ oa
                                                       i ise his thoughts for the rest of his                                                                                               CONFLICT                             1 H»y l» *0 .
                                                          service.-;                                                                                                                   His officers had fought fire
                                                             April IS, 1989. 2J5pm. inth-'                                                                                          with-fire..on .the picket lines.             A« you kftov I t had « lv ty »                 ay t a t a a t l o n t o l»»v« t h a . f o r c a on r a i c h l a c
                                                          borough. The first o f the 95                                                                                             Sometimes their actions were                 40 yaars "of a f t , but ay p t r i o m l r«»olv« v a i o v artak an by t h a t r a g i c a v t a t t
                                                          Liverpool football supporters                                                                                                                                          a t H lll> b o ro u |h . It. a a t a a d ' t o aa th * propxr c o u n a of a c t i o n would ba t o
                                                                                                                                                                                   harshly examined by TV cameras
                                                         started to die.in the crush.                                                                                                                                            aw ait t h t o u tco at of l o r d 'J um tlc a T a y l o r ’a I n q u i r y a i d t o d t a l , a* I
                                                                                                                                                                                   narrowing in on individual ind-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 thought a p p r o p r i a t e , w ith what a a c r g t d l a th * f in d in g * .
                                                             Mr.Wright was. hot at the .                                                                                           dents — like the occasion at
                                                         semi-final; He had not b een .                                                                                            Orgreave where one miner was '                Lord J u i t l c * ' T a y l o r ' * I n q u i r y 1* now c o a p l t t * and a l l tha n * c * i i a r y p o l l c * ■
                                                         involved in the fine detail of                                                                                            repeatedly coshed.                            a c t i o n * a r i s i n g f r o a . l t hav* b t * a coaal* *lo n td and l a r g t l y co n clu d td .
                                                         planning security for the match.                                                                                            _His handling of the dispute left
                                                         But he regarded himself respons­                                                                                          him in bitter conflict with his rul­          Th* t n q u l r l t a on b a h a lf o f th * D i r e c t o r of f u b l l c f r o s t c u t l o n * and D*r
                                                         ible for the conduct o f every                                                                                            ing body, the police committee.               K a j t s t y ' * Corontr b t l n s c a r r l t d o ut by th* V t i t Hldland* f o l i c * ar * l l k t l y           -
                                                         officer on duty that fateful day.                                                                                          _ Rows developed over revela­                t o b* c o a p i t t t d I n . A p r i l , and I hav* a a d t t v t r y t f f o r t t o t nsu r* t h a t a l l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a v a l l a b l * t v l d t i c t and l n f o r a a t l o n ha* b t t n b r o u j h t t o th* a t t t n t l o a of
                                                                                                                                                                                   tions that "police held stocks of             Hr Dtar and hi* l n v t t t l j a t l n g o f f l c t i r * . Tht t l a l n g o f ay r t t l r t a t n t
                                                               RUM O URS                                   Chief Constable Peter Wright In uniform                                CS gas. rocketing crime figures,               should t n s u r t t h a t I aa In po st t o d t a l v l l h any q u t r l t s r a l s t d by th*.
                                                                                                                                                                                  were blamed on the manpower                    l n v * s t l ( t t l o n and t o j n l l c l p a t * . so f a r s* I aa a b l * , tk* conclusion of
                                                           His offer o f resignation was         ient and cost-efTective forces in       witnesses" at the public inquiry.        drain'to the picket lines, and                 th* I n v e s t i g a t i o n I I n s t i t u t e d .                                                             .
                                                        ripped to shreds by the Police           the country.”                                                                    spending on the dispute was des­
                                                                                                                                           The quality o f their evidence
                                                        Authority. But over the months             Nobody would have disputed            was in inverse proportion to their       cribed as exhorbitant.                         I hav* had th* honour and p r l v l l * s * t o coaaand th* South Torkshlr* F o lic*
                                                        ahead, tne prospect o f retiring         that until theTaylor report made      „ rank, he said. Mr Wright had not            _There were even calls then for             f o r th* past s*v*n y ears and d a s p l t * th * t r i b u l a t i o n * of r*c*nt aonth* I
                                                        from the hottest seat in British'        such damning criticism, that it         given evidence. But the slight on        his resignation: But the damage                hav* no h e s i t a t i o n In sa y ing t h a t a o r a l * 1* h l t h and th* Fore* 1* In good
                                                        policing became more and more            shook the force to its roots.                                                                                                   h e a r t . Vhotvtr I s f o r t u n a t t tnough t o b t ap po lnttd t h t n txt Chief
                                                                                                                                       . his hand-picked men must have            with the authority improved over
                                                                                                                                         hurt.                                    the years as some of his biggest               C o n s ta b lt v l l l rec e iv e th e f u l l su pp o rt of what by any n o r u l stand ard* 1*
                                                                                                   The main cause o f H ills­                                                                                                    • b o s t * f t * c t l v * and e f f i c i e n t Fore *.
                                                        _vj .. . .here had been no sign of       borough was “ the failure o f                                                    adversaries left.
                                                       him leaving, tbe job he loved             police control’*. Senior officers         It was over this period that Mr
                                                                                                                                         Wright— theperson, not just the              He still has enemies — Hills­
                                                       before. Two years ago this               had failed to stop the overcrowd­                                                 borough campaigners will be
                                                       month, Peter Wrig' 'right sat behind     ing. It was their job and they           public figure — must have felt at
                                                                                                                                         the lowest ebb in his life.              delighted at today’s announce­
                                                       the desk in his of]affice and talked     didn't do it. As simple and as                                                    ment for examaple. He is one of
                                                       candidly of his future.                  clinical as that.                                                                 the few chief officers without a
                                                                                                                                           People who knew him realised
                                                         In spite o f rumours that he was          T he cri tic is m was not             he had all the steely qualities to       Queen’s Police Medal — indicat­
                                                       being tipped for bigger and better       restricted to the events at the          survive the ordeal. . . but there        ing to some that he is not univer­
                                                       things,-he stated: “I love every         stadium either.                          were times when it looked like it        sally liked in the Home Office.
                                                       minute o f my job and I will finish                                               was taking its toll on him.                  But the average bobby on the            Copy t o X C Johnatoa Esq SA IFFA
                                                       my career here.                             Taylor ajso said that, with
                                                                                                some exceptions, senior police in          The enormous workload, the             beat will be sorry to lose a man
                                                         “What is important is that I           command at the fateful semi-             pressures o f leadership, the            the^ regard as a “ b ob by’s
                                                       am running one o f the most effic-       final were “defensive and evasive        national spotlight and unrelent-                                                                  The letter of resignation sent to Sir Jack Layden
            City o f Sheffield
Family and Community Services Dept.
  H ILLSBOROUGH TA SK TEAM
        Hillsborough Library
        M iddlewood Road
        Sheffield 6
        T el: 734666(7)
  Office Hours
  9 am - 5 pm M on - Thurs
  9 am - 4.45 pm Friday
                                                    1st February   90.

SLP/JT.

Tour Refs
HTT.Afi.MH.


Miss. A. Rowlands,
Hillsborough Task Team,
Hillsborough Library,
Middlewood Hoad,
Sheffield.6 .

Dear Hiss Howlands,

Thank you for your letter of the 25th of January.   I hare
noted what you say.

Yours sincerely,




S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner
City of Sheffield     M e tro p o lita n D istric t
                                                                                       ©


                 Dr S Popper,                          Family & Community S ervices
                 Coroner, South Yorkshire (West DistricPppartment
                 Medico-Legal Centre,                 MrNVKAY-MA
                 Watery Street,                       Director of Social Services
                 SHEFFIELD, 3 .                       H illsb o ro u g h Task 'lean
                                                                              hi 11 shormjgh Library
                                                                                       Middlewood Road
                                                                              Sheffield

Your reference                  Our reference         HTT.AR.MH              Date             25 th January, 1990


 Dear Dr Popper,

  I hope that this letter finds you well.                     I am writing to let you know the
  future of the Hillsborough Task Team.

  The Team will be reduced from 4 to 2 social workers from 31st January, 1990.
  I will be leaving the Task Team to take up another appointment in the Council
  offices at Grenoside on 5th February, 1990, but will be keeping in touch with
  the Team on a regular basis.

  Mrs Russell McSweeney and Mr Alan   Gerrard will remain on the teamuntil 4th May
  when it is anticipated that the Team will finish.

  One of the remaining tasks will involve some preparation andplanning as                                    far as
  is possible at the present time, for the Hillsborough Inquests.

  Given the likely delay in holding   the Inquests, it is possible that aspecial
  team of social workers will need to be re-established when a date is known.
  Alan or Russell will be in touch with you before the end of April to discuss
  the implications of this.

  The documentation from the Inquest Training Day is currently being prepared
  and will be posted on to you within the next few weeks.

  If you have any queries about this, or any other matter,                                 please do nothesitate
  to contact Alan or Russell.

  Yours sincerely,




  Angela Rowland
  Hillsborough Task Team




                                  All communications to be addressed "Director of Social Services"

                             For telephone enquiries on this matter dial Sheffield   ...7-34666..........
                                                                        fr o * -



TPTTJE NOTE T>AtTl«IT> PI.1.90. TOT.BPHONE CALL FROM ANGELA ROWLANDS■


She had heard a rumour that the D.P.P. was going to make an announcement
regarding criminal proceedings towards the end of January.         I said
that I didn't think it could possibly be right.        I said that I
didn't know when it would be but I didn't expect it to be in the
near future.
J M ER VYN JONES M S c                                                                  F U R N IV A L H O U S E
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                               Furnival Gate
                                                                                        Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                                        Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
W E S T M ID L A N D S PO LIC E H Q                                                     Fax:          0742 731483
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                                  M e d ic o Legal Centre
Colmore Circus Queensway                                                                Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                                       Fax:         0742 726247
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5

N E C H E LLS G REEN PO LIC E S T A T IO N                                              Your Ref:         SLP /JT
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                                       Our Ref:          JMJ/DH
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                                        Date:             15 J a n u a r y 1990




           D r S Popper
           HM C o r o n e r
           M e d ic o -L e g a l C e n tre
           W a te r y S t r e e t
           S h e ffie ld
           S3 7ET




           I r e f e r t o y o u r l e t t e r o f 10 J a n u a r y 1990 i n w h i c h y o u e n c l o s e t h e
           l e t t e r f r o m Mr M e u n i e r . I h a ve r e a d y o u r r e s p o n s e , w h ic h I t h i n k i s
           about r ig h t.       We h ave had s i m i l a r c o r r e s p o n d e n c e i n t h e p a s t f r o m t h i s
           g e n tle m a n and have r e p l i e d i n a s i m i l a r v e i n .

           Once a g a i n I f o u n d o u r m e e t i n g l a s t F r i d a y m o s t u s e f u l . I e n c lo s e f o r
           y o u r r e t e n t i o n a c o p y o f t h e a b ove n o t e s I made on t h e i t e m s we
           d is c u s s e d .




   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                                    B ir m in g h a m
J M ERVYN JONES M S c                                     F U R N IV A L H O U S E
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                 Furnival Gate
 H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M               Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2 731 546
                                                          Fax:          0742 731483
W E S T M ID L A N D S PO LIC E H Q
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                    M e d ic o Legal Centre
Colmore Circus Queensway                          „,T4„   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                         Fax:         0742 726247
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                          Your Ref:
N EC H E LLS GREEN PO LIC E S T A T IO N
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                         Our Ref:
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                          Date:          January 1990




 RE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989

 I have previously written to you concerning the investigation into the
 Hillsborough disaster and perhaps now is an appropriate time to update you.

 We are currently investigating all possible criminal action that may have
 been committed under the guidance of the Director of Public Prosecutions
 and the supervision of the Police Complaints Authority.

 The extent of this investigation will undoubtably result in a delay in the
 inquests starting. I am not in a position to give you any firm date when
 the inquests will commence.

 You will of course be informed of future developments but if you have any
 queries please contact my officers at Nechells Green Police Station,
 021-359-5555 extension 246.

 Yours sincerely




   PLEASE REPLY T O T H E OFFICE A T
  X. (    O .




           , ,,                    „    fci    10th January       90.

SLP/JT.


Mr. M. Jones,
Assistant Chief Co b s table.
Vest Midlands P&lice HQ,
P.O. Box 52* Lloyd Bouse,
Colaore Cirous Queensway,

 1
j m r nervyn,

11 enclose th® letter froa             1 together with a
                                       I
copy of agr reply. I assume that you do not have a statement
from this gentlen&n, bat if I m wrong perhaps you mould let
ae hare a eight of what he soys.

It does not look -to ae as if he has anything to say which is
relevant to the coroner*s inquiry, but if you feel differently,
you will no doubt let ae know.

Tours sincerely,




S.L.Popper,
HJt.Coroner.
                              _____                                               &       ~ j-     9 o

     k L - b L ---

     J ? Q(J J~M • ^ LtrM.-'i&L'c

      ( "hs&uf- TX^'iZLc^')




             _________ -_____ D ^ v - ___ h f £ / _

                                                                                JL

.J Z c r X                                                                           jl   / '

             —   y ? x jjJ L > h u                                                                         s &<-



                              J.
                 'Vt-vp

                     a    J L L

                          _A a       ^ k *                        O ^ t t ■
                                                                          -~3        <*'VkC      c^Vv

         -                               ^              _____________ ^-c       <j'-€ -ir-y

—& [-________               /£ /7___^ w r > v - ^ - >        U s-JJ$ £ .   ^l Z ^ w < /           P-*-*.
 l>
                                         ie,.   £lA ~
                                                   10th January

SLP/JT




Deei

Thank yon for your letter of the 5th of January*

I can not of coarse consent cm what action or otherwise
the Publio Inquiry took in relation to the natters whieh
you aention.

Friaa facie* it seem to ae that what yon describe is not
a natter which would fall within the terns of the coroner*s
Inquest and in those oircuBstanoes I do not think that there
would be any opportunity for you io be invited to give evidence*

Bascially the Inquest is concerned with establishing who the
deceased was* when they died* where they died and how they died*
Unless you are able to convince ae that evidence which you t a e
is relefeant* Z do not see how I can help you*

Tours sincerely*



S. L.Popper,
H*M.fo>roner.


c.c. Mr. M. Jones*
     West Midlands Police.
FILS NOTE BATED 7.9.89. MEETING WITH ANGELA BfiWLAUDS AMD A COLLEAGUE,

FROM SOCIAL SERVICES.

We discussed the study day.    I saidI would try and arrange for Mr. Potter
to come and give an opening    addressas they wanted somebody to
talk to them about coroners.
I explained to them some ofthe problems of   fixing the Inquest both
with regard to scope and timing was because of the uncertainty as
to what the D.P.P. would do.
It was clear that they were anxious to support, in fact people with
Social Service in put at the times of the Inquests.
PILE NOTE.


Had a telephone conversation from Ibe Slar on 7.9.89. They wanted
to know when the Inquests would be.    I said that I wasn't able
to tell them.   They asked if it would be after the West Midlands
report had been submitted but before the D.P.P. had taken a
decision.    I said that was not my understanding of the situation.
The reporter said that this was what the Press Officer was
giving out in West Midlands.    I said I didn't think that was
right.




I went to see Malcolm    and asked him to sort out what was
happening in West Midlands.
FILE NOTE.   TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR. POTTER 7.9.89.




I asked him whether he would be willing to speak to the
Study Day of the Social Workers on 6.10.89 at about
10a.m. at H>dge Moor Hospital Conference Centre.   I explained
that I would be on holiday otherwise I would have been willing
to do it, but I did not want to use my South Yorkshire
Coroner's officers for this.   I explained that what was
wanted was a talk on general work of Coroners together with
an explanation of the effect of Section 16 and an explanation
of how a Jury would work.   I pointeddout to him that this would
be very helpful if he would do it because he could give them
a rough account of the general work of the Coroner, but of
course would not be in a position to deal with specific queries
regarding Hillsborough, as this was not within his remit or
jurisdiction.   Mr. Potter very kindly agreed to undertake this.
FILE NOTE DATED 20.9.89. TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH DETECTIVE SUPT. TAYLOR.


He had two matters to raises-


1.   One of his officers had been to see Mr. Pemberton to try and
     sort out the identifications.         Mr. Pemberton had raised with
     him his concerns regarding a. the height of his son i.e.,                5*1
     as opposed to 6' and b. that there is no reference to diabetic
     n e e d le marks o r fVr> t h a t m a'llai In Irtppc, thnngh hi‘ rtmnirrtfe—m m
        brnrn jj»vnwil tl'iu miwutio ef taWmos.           I told B.C. Taylor
     that I already knew all about this.           That I had written to
     the solicitors and in ifiaurt I had n u t , in fact I read him the
     letter.    I said I explained the reason why discrepancies could
     arise.    I also said that Dr. Clarke was away until the end of
     September.     He suggested (Mr. Taylor) that his officer could
     perhaps get in touch with Dir. Clarke and if he managed to sort
     it out he would try and resolve the issue with Mr. Pemberton.
     I said that I didn't object to that except that I felt we shouldn't
     really have to be in this position Jmst because I had released
     the p.m's.     On the other hand I said that if there was any
     problems obviously they shouldnft do anything, but get in touch
     with me when I return from holiday.           D ^ > Taylor also mentioned
     Mr. Pemberton said that he wonted to take this up with his M.P.
     if he didn't get satisfaction.          I said that I thought that what
     I had already told him was a perfectly acceptable explanation
     of the situation.
     The other matter was that apparently Angela Rowland had been
     in touch with Mr. Jones who is on holiday.             However Mr. Jones said
     he didn't know why on earth she was trying to get in touch with him.
     I told Mr. Taylor that Angela Rowlands was part of the Hillsborough
     Support Team.      That they were arranging to Study Day, that they
     had wanted people from West Midlands there, but I had talked to
     Hr. Jones who had said that it was toj^early, and that in any case
     he didn't feel that it was right that people should be there
     at the present time, but that he was very anxious that they should
     get in touch with him, so that he could explain the reasonings
     himself,                 impression was that Mr. Jones wanted fcr,
     that this wan part of a Public Relations             exercise.
     I said I had a very clear recollection of this because I was surprised
     how keen Mr. Jones had been that Angela Rowlands should get in touch
     with him.
     I also mentioned to D.C. Taylor that if he looked at the p.m. report
     on William Roy Pemberton he would see how exceedingly detailed
     the p.m. in fact was.
FILE NOTE DATED 8.9.86.




I was shown the article by Bob Westerdale in the Star of the
7th of September 1989 headed 'HILLSBOROUGH POLICE MOST WAIT A
YEAR TO HEAR THEIR FATE' penultimate paragraph proports to
be a quotation from myself saying interalia 'Likely to last
3 months'.   This is a totally incorrect statement as I
at no time did I say this to Mr. Westerdale when I spoke to
him the previous day.     I telephoned Mr. Corner who was in
a board meeting.     I spoke to his secretary.    I said I was
very disturbed, not because the sentence itself was necessarily
that crucial, or because-the phrase was that crucial, but because
I objected to having things proporting to         for me which I had
not said at all.
I said there was another matter which disturbed me and that
was that Mr. Westerdale when he rang me on the 7th, put
it to me that West Midlands Police had J.Us± -amounced through
their Press Officer that the timing would be West Midlands
Police to report to D.P.P. Inquest D.P.P. then to consider
the whole of the evidence from West Midlands Police and Inquest
and make decision.     I did say to him that that was not my understanding
of the position.     I have since been informed   that that proposition
put to Mr. Westerdale     was incorrect and that West Midlands Police
had merely put out their statemsnl aseper reply from Mr. Jones
on the faxed sheet which had been handed to me and which I had
marked S.L.P. 7.9.89.    I explained to Mr. Corner's secretary
that it was conceivable that Mr. Westerdale had misunderstood what
was being said in Birmingham or that I even might have misunderstood
him, but that the relationship between myself and the papers had up
to now been very good and that I wanted it to remain so but it all
hinged upon being certain that what was said would be correctly reported etc.
I said otherwise what     would happen is that I would refuse to speakto
Star reporters in the     future.   She said that she would try and sortit out
for me before I left this morning at a quarter to one.
  I I to 3V                                                                                                                                                             a m iw 'f o . v w i v i i u j   a   g iv a i

                   Police said they used tear-          Today’s birthdays: Liverpool I " I f a woman was walking down the street naked, it still                       deal of concern and anxiety
 ibour today    gas,
                  is, rubber bullets and shot-             . tl|)a*ler ^ oh.n nBarnes,
                                                                                  a m e s , 26; iI would not be reasonable to rape her. Kaj
                                                                                                                                          Rape is not under-           about the p o s i t i o n of'
the Govern-       mo. tr\
                guns    to ^ienprcp
                           disperse rplacard-
                                      » l q r/A_        CriCBrura
                                                       and     ^eterS Yarile
                                                                       KeVIfl ClIITait,     30,’ r | vtnnsJnhlo nor
                                                                                  4? aB|i '|M                   nnr aH°wab
                                                                                                                    nttnuinhto"     Labour M
                                                                                                                            l e " — Labour M P Clare Short             children’s broadcasting.
Its “ support   carrying marchers as well as           thropist J P au l G etty’ II 57" Iaddressing a conference on sex offenders.                                               Committed
fs’’ in South   sTonethrovring m obs.                  aactor
                                                         rtn r A Anthony    Quayle, Ht.
                                                                  nthn n v rknni;I<.  76.                                                                                 “ Children’s programmes
                                                                                                                                                                       are not mentioned in the
                                                                                                                                                                       Government White Paper on
                                                                                                                                                                       broadcasting and we do not




                  Hillsbro’ police
                                                                                                                                                                       know yet what the Broad­
                                                                                                                                                                       casting Bill is going to say.
                                                                                                                                                                          “We can only hope that
                                                                                                                                                                       children’s programmes will
                                                                                                                                                                       remain part of the general
                                                                                                                                                                       fabric of British broadcasting
                                                                                                                                                                       for the foreseeable future.
                                                                                                                                                                       Certainly the BBC is com­
                                                                                                                                                                       mitted to this principle and




                 must wait ayear
                                                                                                                                                                       this is borne out by our new
                                                                                                                                                                       package.”




                 to hear their fate
                  By Bob Westerdale
                POLICE chiefs criti­
                                                                                                                                     West M idlands Assistant
                                                                                                                                  C h ie f C o n sta b le M ervyn
                                                                                                                                  Jo n es said to d ay : “ I am           Cooking-.Cheryl Baker
                cised after the Hills­                                                                                            assembling evidence and the
                                                                                                                                  q u e stio n o f w ho w ill be          The new drama is a con­
                borough disaster                                                                                                  interviewed and when has             temporary serial, Byker
                could have the cloud                                                                                              not been decided.                    Grove, an out-of-school
                o f criminal p r o s e ­                                                                                                                               Grange Hill described as
                                                                                                                                            Inquests                   “realistic, challenging and
                cution hanging over                                                                                                                                    funny”.
                them for another year,                                                                                               “This is a norm al criminal
                                                                                                                                  in q u iry a n d I w ould n o t         New series will include an
                it was revealed this                                                                                              start discussing progress of         anarchic comedy written by
                afternoon.                                                                                                        the case a t this stage” .           and starring Tony Robinson
                   T h e n e rv e -ra c k in g                                                                                       T h e in v e s tiv a tio n will   — Baldrick of Blackadder
                                                                                                                                  have a knock-on effect on            fame.
                u n c e r ta in ty a b o u t th e ir
                fu tu re s w ill a ffect several                                                                                  the 95 inquests.                        Among the stars will be
                                                                                                                                     C o u n ty c o ro n e r D r       Barbara Windsor, Michael
                h ig h ra n k in g S o u th                 DPP Allan Green:                       David Duckenfield:                                                  Williams, Jean Boht and
                Y o rk s h ire officers, p a r ­                                                   Still on suspension            Stefan Popper said today he
                                                           The decision is his                                                                                         Michael Barrymore.
                tic u la rly m a tc h d a y c o m -                                                                               still had no idea when he
                                                       a ls o s p o t l ig h t S h e ffie ld   thousands o f pages o f evi­       would be in a position to               Barbara Windsor plays a
                m a n d e r C h ie f S u p t                                                                                                                           retired chorus girl in Bluebird
                                                       Wednesday and city council              dence from the Lord Taylor         organise the hearings, likely
                D a v id D u c k e n fie ld w h o      officials, covers every poten-                                             to last three months.                and Jean Boht, Ma Boswell
                                                                                               hearings.
                re m a in s o n in d e fin ite         t i a l o f fe n c e f ro m m a n ­                                        •     The Director o f Public        from Bread, cooks up plenty
                                                                                                  After that, a decision will
                su sp en sio n .                       slaughter to failure to per­                                               Prosecutions took two years          of healthy culinary entertain­
                                                                                               be taken on whether it is in                                            ment with Cheryl Baker in
                   He and other colleagues             form duties and will drag on            the public interest to bring       to reveal there would be no
                responsible for crowd con­             into the early months o f                                                  prosecution o f British Rail         Eggs ‘n’ Baker. Cheryl also
                                                                                               charges against people or                                               joins Roy Castle for another
                trol when 95 Liverpool fans            next year.                              o rg a n is a tio n s . . . an d   following a fatal train crash
                died have yet to be inter­                                                     whether there is a reason­         in Wales. Their verdict was          series of Record Breakers.
                viewed by West Midlands                   The report will then be              able chance o f conviction.        announced on Tuesday.                 • Tonight’s TV: P2
                officers.                              studied by the Director o f
                   Their inquiry, which will           Public Prosecutions, Allan
                                                       Green QC — along with

                  ‘No Gimmicks, sim ply th e b est
                 uPVC windows around a t th e
                                                                                                   COMPENSATION
                      m ost sensib le price”                                                    As the victim of: ★ A Road Accident       violent Crime     Industnal Disease          Accident At Work
                                                                                                     Or A Fall In The Street
                                 'uv/|ju i n n r w                                                             ■ P M R H P V P H m                  m
increasing demand and predicted expansion.                                                                      annual general meeting in shareholder
                                                                                                                October.                     His wife
    That is the positive side. But it still remains
a sad fact that the Consumers' Association                                DAVE RICHARDS                           Both are Sheffield-born, brought up
sees the need to give advice on when to post                                                                                    m
letters for the best chance of on-time delivery.




                                                         Hopes and
Do not post first class on Friday because only
70 per cent reach on time, it claims. And Wed­
nesday is poorest for second class. One in ten
is not delivered within three days.
    No wonder businessmen reach for their fax
machines and arrange for couriers. They




                                                         of a ‘lost’
simply cannot rely on the post.


 Hillsboro changes
TWO well-known Sheffield Wednesday direct­
ors — Stan Speight and Matt Shephard — are
to leave the club's board and make way for
two new appointments. Both M r Speight and
Mr Shephard have given sterling service to
                                                          By Michael
the club and will be missed.
   The new men arrive at a difficult time. The
club has not had a good start to the season on        “A YEMENI is someone
the field, and the aftermath of the Hillsborough      who wants to get on in
disaster will probably drag on for a long time.
                                                      life, wants to work, loves
                                                      family, loves country,
   These are the most important things now.           loves his religion and
Hillsborough will never lose the stain of the         people.”
disaster, but whatever lessons need to be                 In an upstairs room o f a
learned have to be taken on board by the              s e m i- d e ta c h e d h o u s e in
board. The Owls are the area’s only first divi­       Burngreave Road, Sheffield,
sion side (for the present) and it is important       28-year-old Abdul Shaif and
for the area that they do well. We hope new           a group o f his friends told
                                                      me o f the hopes o f the 2,000
blood helps.                                          Yemenis who live in South
                                                      Yorkshire, most of them in

 Tidy example                                         the city o r in Rotherham.
                                                          As acting chairman o f the
                                                      co m m u n ity ’s A ssociation,
C ONGRATULATIONS to David Booker —                    he knows the aspirations are
Sheffield's one-man Womble who has taken it           o f te n a lo n g w ay fro m
on himself to clean up the litter in his area.        reality.
   What a splendid example of practical                   “ We have been harder hit
                                                      by unemployment than any
action to help the city’s growing problem.            other comm unity,” he said.
   Of course it is not on to expect everyone to       “N ow we face all kinds o f
do the same in their own areas, although laws         problems — no work, poor
in other countries do make householders res­          health, illiteracy, and bad
                                                      housing.”
ponsible for the state of their frontages.
                                                          Yemenis have been com ­
   But if a lot more people showed the care           ing to South Yorkshire since
and concern of M r Booker in keeping the place        about 1920 but the biggest
tidy — even down to always putting your litter        influx arrived in the Fifties
in a bin or taking it home etc — then Sheffield       when Britain needed immi­
                                                      grants as workers.
would offer a much cleaner and brighter

vLmage~
                                                               Problems
                                                        “ They came here to work
                                                      and wasted their youth and
                                                      energy. Now they find them ­                Yemenis outside their community ass*
                                                      selves lo s t,” said N asser
                                                      Hegan, a member o f the
                                                                                                  Sheffield. From left: Nabeel Hamid,
                                                      association’s m anagem ent                                             Kassim Mohammet
                                                      committee                     They were very friendly and people are illiterate in both E n g lish anc
                                                         Bad health, increasing age there were no proboems ”    Arabic and English            guage ctassf
                                                             i (   r   j 7   /
                           WEST MIDLANDS POLTCE


                           HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




ON DEMAND ONLY


ENQUIRE FROM POD WESTERDALE SHEFFIELD STAR (0742 767676)

1.    How many South Yorkshire police officers are expected to be
      Interviewed as part of your criminal inquiry into the Hillsborough
      disaster?  (Approx)

2.    Is it envisaged that the officers likely to face questioning
       represent every rank from PC to ACC?

3.    Will Chief Constable Peter Wright be interviewed?
       Are some or all of the interviews prefaced by a criminal caution?

4.    Has Chief Supt David Duckenfield and ACC Walter Jackson been
       interviewed yet?

5.    When would you estimate that the inquests could now be held in
       Sheffield?

6.    How many officers are now involved in the West Midlands Inquiry?


Reply from Mr Jones, Assistant Chief Constable

At the present time I am assembling the evidence and the question of
who will be interviewed and when they will be interviewed has not
been decided. This is a normal criminal inquiry and I would not
normally start discussing the progress of the case with the media at
this stage in an investigation.  I do not intend to make an exception
on this particular occasion,...




W ?     G£/yv \JI
 FILE NOTE   4 .9.89

 Re- HILLSBOROUGH with ROGER MICHIE


 I explained to Roger that we had now sent off quite a lot of P.M. reports
 to solicitors and had been paid for t h e s e , ::chfeqwe§ made payable to
 "City of Sheffield".  I explained that I had done this because at the time
 when this was initiated I expected to do the inquests in January at which
 point I anticipated that transcripts would be requested and these would
 of course cost a substantial amount.

 However in view of the delay which has now arisen I was having second
 thoughts and I wondered whether in fact it wouldn't be better if we
 allowed the P.M. reports to be supplied on a free of charge basis.   The
 amount of money involved was not very much, maybe £200.00 or so.   I
 feared that possible asverse publicity might arise out of this particularly
 if in the event the D.P.P. issued proceedings and no full inquests were
 held and as a consequence no substantial fee from transcripts would
 arise.

   I said that obviously if there was a full inquest with all the trappings
^ ^ f shorthand writers etc., which would be exceedingly expensive then i_he
^Prees for the transcripts clearly might be very r e l e v e n t .

 Roder could see the p o i n t , he said he would have a word with the Chair
 ans come back to me and advise me on what he wanted to do.

 In a nutshell I said that I had on reflection changed my mind and I
 thought that it might be wiser to allow the P.M. reports to go out free
 and that we should return the cheques rather than cash them.
FILE NOTE   4.9.89


Telephone conversation with Roger Michie


I said that we were apparently   50 tapes behind and we would need
some temporary help.  Somebody   who could do really good audio typing.

I also pointed out to him that   we still hadn't got the Word   Processor
in operation because we didn't   have a desk.

He said that he would look into it and get things sorted out.  He agreed
that he would try and arrange for temporary assistance as soon as possible
FILE NOTE   4.9.89


Telephone conversation with Angela Rowland


She said that she had arranged a Studto Day for 6th October and would
like to come and talk to me about i t . I explained that I would be on
holiday but that I would speak to somebody in the West Midlands to
see i^- somebody from them wish to attend.  We arranged to meet on
Thursday at about 11.45 a.m.
FILE NOTE      23.8.89


TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR. DEVONSIDE

Mr. Devonside said that he had been asked to inquire of me whether
I would be prepared to hold the inquest in a place other than Sheffield.

I said   that while it was in theory possible to hold it somewhere else
in my jurisdiction i didn't really see any good reason for not doing
it here.   Mr. Devonside inquired as to where I would hold it, I said
hopefully the Town Hall but I obviously would have to awaite decisions
as to availability and also requirements.

He thanked me for my help.
   FILE NOTE       22.8.89


   Long conversation with Angela Rowland - Social Worker
   Re; her letter of the 14th August.




   I explained to her that the inquest had been posiponed and that
   might well be a long time before we are in a position to s ay v cr*'She
   said that this was unfortunate because they had to do a report in October
   and might well be disbanded.

   I asked what sort of people she was helping and dealing with, she said
   it wasn't so much SheJrrieid, Liverpool bereaved accept in so far as
   a lot of them were coming over and wanted to see the ground again and
   they had to be taken round, but they were dealing with the local
   population of whom some were traumatised, they were dealing with
   people who had assisted in resuscitation, they were trying to assist
   Sheffield people who had been involved afld were having some difficulty
   in establishing who they were

  We discussed the Study/Training day.  I said it would be difficult for
  me to nominate someone as the chances were that the matter would be dealt
  with by the West Midlands Force and I didn't know yet who would be
  involved or indeed how many.  I did say that my impression was that

• West Midlands were well aware of the need for support for their people.

  I said as to my personal involvement with study day would be something
  which I womld have to thing about because of the need to ensure that
  proprietary was observed.  I said if they knew what they were doing
  perhaps they would let me have some details so that I could take a view
  on i t .

  I suggested that they might like   to consider that they might recommend
  that even if they were disbanded   they could be reconstituted prior
  to the inquest, on the otherhand   of course it wasn't clear what form
  or scope the inquest would take,   this depended on the D.P.P.

  We discussed the sort of people who might need support and help, I
  pointed out that I had it well-in mind that we would need people
  available to assist,, ffa.mong the people mentioned were the bereaved, the
  witnesses and Angela Rowland mentioned the jury,(that is a point which
  I had o v e r l o o k e d ).

^ ^ 1 explained to her that I didn't know that any particular useful
    purpose would be served in having a meeting at the moment but I didn't
    want her to feel that I wasn't willing to either meet with her and
    discuss things if she thought it might be helpfull.
PILE NOTE DATED 21.8.89.

TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR. D. PURCHON.


I confirmed that I was writing to say that I was not proceeding

with the Inquests on the 15th of January.     David Purchon said

that they had guessed that and that they would put theaccommodation

In abeyance.   He mentioned Mr. Podmore suggested thatperhaps      the

Council would make their    chamber/available to me three weeks out

of four, the fourth being required by them for their Council Meeting.

He also thought that this might enable me to deal with my normal

work in that fourth week.

I said that it was an interesting thought.     I wasn't planning

to do my normal work, but to get my Deputy to do it if I had to

do a full Inquest.   I also could see some problems with regard to

the Jury as well as Counfcil/etc, but I would think about it nearer

the time.   I anticipated that there would be along delay, maybe ayear

and then of course it would depend on what the D.P.P. decided as to

what in fact we would have to do.

He said he had let all the relevant parties know.
                      M e tro p o lita n District


H.M. Coroner                                                                   Family & Community Services
S.L. Popper                                                                    Department
Medico-Legal Centre                                                            Mr N V KAY, MA
Watery Street                                                                  Director of Social Services
SHEFFIELD                                                                      HiHs'boroo^ tasAC
S3 7ET                                                                         HilisboroujK         tib m n j
                                                                               ritdcllct’JocdL R.ca«A
                                                                               SheffieldS6 4HD

Your inawnnce                  Ourreference HTT.AR.ME                         Date 14.8.89




Dear Dr. Popper
I am writing to you as a member of and on behalf ofthe Hillsborough Task Team.
Our team has been set up to help people who have been involved in or affected by
the Disaster at the Hillsborough Football Stadium.
One of the things that we propose to do is to set up a Study/Training day to prepare
ourselves and significant others for the Coroners Inquest on the Disaster which I
understand is likely to be later this year or early   in the New Year.
There are several points of information that I need   to know inorder to be able to
prepare for the study day, although I can appreciate that you may not be able to
address all of them at the moment.
It would certainly be helpful to know the venue, the commencement date (or approx­
imate), the proposed structure and order of the 'proceedings' and the names of staff
at the Coroners Court who are likely to be involved with the Inquest.This last piece
of information is required becaase it is our intention to invite some members of
the staff of the Coroners Court to the training day, because it can be expected that
given the magnitude of the Inquest it will create special problems for the staff
and it helps to be prepared for these in advance.
I appreciate that the disaster at the Hillsborough Football Stadium might have
increased the workload of yourself and your staff and that your time is precious
but I would appreciate the opportunity to talk to you in more detail about the work
of the Task Team, the training day and ways in which we can offer support to your­
self, your staff, relatives of the bereaved, and voluntary and statutory support
workers who are likely to be involved in the Inquest.
I am available between the hours of 9 - 5pm Monday to Friday atHillsborough
Library - telephone 734666. I would be able to attend a meeting with you any time
at your convenience and look forward to hearing from you.

Yours Sincerely




Angela Rowland
Social Worker
Hillsborough Task Team




                                            . «i rv/or.s to be addressed "Director of Social Services"
                                                      8th August      89.
'LP/JT.
                                                  Tear Hef * 05/2/9KE/EB.
The "outh Yorkshire County Fire Stavlce,
Comnand H.Q*
’'r-1H.Twrton Street,
"hof field. SI 3FG.



DJar Sir,

Re: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER, SHEFFIELD ’
                                     WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND,
15th etf A:PRIL 1989.________                     ,
                                                  __________


I refer to your letter of th e 27th of July addressed to
The Treasury Boliiitors. I vould he prepared
in -p3±fc$ito let you have a list of the names of
the deceased, hut at the present stage I do not fltafcikit
would he wise or appropriate to disclose the ages and
the types of intfflries sustained even for statistical
purposes only.

Obviously as soon as the Inquests have heen resumed and/
Boncluded, it should be possible to obtain this information
as it will be part of the public record.

If you feel that the list of names would be helpful to you,
please let me know. This letter is written on the assumption
of course that the information would be used simply to update
your statistical records.

Yours faithfully,




S.L.Popper,
H.M.Cftroner.
       ,\
  *




                                                          8th August

SLP/JT,
L89/2117/DB,


.%*. I), Bnamnell,
..'-"■•■ijvlant Treasury Solicitor,
inn reasury Solicitor,
 :ueen Anne’s Chambers,
28 Broadway,
London. GW1H 9JS.

D ear i i r . Brummell,

He; HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.

Thank you for your letter of the 1st of August. I will deal
with the reouest from the Fire Service, in fact I can see
no objection to them having' a li^t of ^ames, but I do not
thin1': the other information s h o u ld be disclosed just yet.

I siiDDOse you must be somevha.t r e l i e v e d that the Public
Inouiry is behind you.

Yours sincerely,



S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
             THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
            'Q ueen A n n e ’s C ham bers
             28 B roadw ay L o n d o n SW1H 9JS
             Telephones D irect Line     01-210 3109
                         Switchboard 01-210 3000
             Telex 917564         GTN 210
             Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
             D X No. 2318 V ictoria

Dr S L Popper                                               Please quote
H M Coroner                                                 L89/2117/DB
Medico - Legal Centre                                       Your reference
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD                                                   Date
S2 7ET                                                      1 August 1989



      tJsr-- £xrpp*r-t
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I enclose a letter I have received from South Yorkshire County Fire Service requesting
details of casualties, together with a copy of my acknowledgment. Given that the
oral hearing stage of the Public Inquiry is now complete, and as I understand you
have the relevant information, I should be grateful if you would deal with the Fire
Service's request. You would presumably still be loth to divulge this kind of
information without the express consent of the bereaved and injured.

                                                   V   .    *




                                                D BRUMMELL
                                         Assistant Treasury Solicitor
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H. E. Wright, Q.F.S.M., M .I.F ira E ., F.B.I.M.                                                 C om m and H.Q.,
             Chief Fire Officer                                                                  Wellington Street,
                                                                                                 Sheffield,
                                                                                                 South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                                 Telephone: Sheffield
                                                                                                 STD (0742) 727202


O ur Ref:    05/2/9 : KE/EB                        Your Ref:                                     Date: 2 7 . 7 . 8 9

This matter is being d eajtw ith by
                                                    K. Evison                                    Ext. No. . -2 ? 1




     The Treasury Solicitors,
     Queen Anne's Chambers,
     28 Broadway,
     LONDON. SW1H 9JS


     For the attention of Dr. Brummel


     Dear Sirs,

     RE:     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER, SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND, 15TH APRIL, 1989

     In order to bring our statistical records up-to-date I would be grateful
     if you could supply the following information regarding casualties:-

             Names

             Ages

             Type of injuries sustained.

     Thank you for your co-operation in this matter.

     Yours faithfully,




     Chief Fire Officer




                                All comm unications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
             THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
             Queen Anne’s Chambers
            '28 Broadway London S W 1 H 9JS
             Telephones Direct Line 01-210 3109
                        Switchboard 01-210 3000
            Telex 917564         GTN 210
            Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
            D X No. 2318 V ictoria
Chief Fire Officer
                                                          Please quote
South Yorkshire County Fire Service                       L89/2117/DB
Command HQ
                                                          Your reference
Wellington Street
Sheffield                                                 Date
South Yorkshire S1 3FG                                    1 August 1989




Dear Sir:

RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER, SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND,            15TH APRIL, 1989

Thank you for your letter of 27 July.  I have passed your letter to Dr S.L.
 opper, H M Coroner, at the Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET
and I expect that he will be in touch with you shortly.

                                           Yours faithfully




                                             D BRUMMELL
                                      Assistant Treasury Solicitor
                                                                     /         c-




                                                        8th August       89.




i-iinr?. A. Pitcher,




Dear Miss. Pitcher,

 ith reference to our warious telephone conversations and
your letter, particularly of the 10th of July, I now
enclose a list of the 95 people ’-.-ho have died at Hillsborough.

This list is being supplied to you for the inclusion in your
book ofl the disaster, the proceed?, of v-hich you have assurdd
me are going to the Disaster Appeal.

Would you also please note that as far as I know, this
list is correct hut until the conclusions of the Inquests
I have to reserve the right to make amendments to names
if these were drawn to ray attention.

You will I am sure appreciate that the supply of this list
must not be and cannot be in any vray construed as an
endorsement or approval of the book of its contents, and
is supplied on the strict understanding that no reference
to me is made# I am sure you vill appreciate the reasons
why this is necessary at this stage.

Yours sincerely,




S.L.Popper,
H.M. Coroner.
Alphabetical list of names of deceased
as a result of the disaster at Hillsborough Football Ground
Sheffield on 15th April 1989.




 Name


ANDERSON    John Alfred
ASHCROFT    Colin Mark
ASPINALL    James Gary


BALL        Kester Roger Marcus
BARON       Gerard Bernard Patrick
BELL        Simon
BENNETT     Barry Sidney
BENSON      David John
BIRTLE      David William
BRADY       Paul     David

BROOKES     Andrew Mark
BROWN       Carl
BROWN       David Steven
BURKE       Henry Thomas
BURKETT     Peter Andrew


CARLILE     Paul William
CHAPMAN     Raymond Thomas
CHURCH      Gary Christopher
CLARK       Joseph
CLARK       Paul
COLLINS     Gary
COPOC       Stephen Paul
COX         Tracey Elizabeth


DELANEY     James Philip
DEVONSIDE    Christopher Barry


EDWARDS     Christopher


FITZSIMMONS Vincent Michael
FOX          Thomas Steven
 ‘GILHOOLEY         Jon Paul
  GLOVER            Barry
  GLOVER            Ian Thomas
  GODWIN         Derrick George


  HAMILTON      Roy Harry
  HAMMOND       Philip
  HANKIN        Eric
 HARRISON      Gary
 HARRISON      Peter Andrew
 HARRISON      Stephen Francis
 HAWLEY        David
 HENNESSY      James Robert
 HEWITSON      Paul Anthony
 HEWITT        Carl Darren
 HEWITT        Nicholas Michael
 HICKS         Sarah Louise
 HICKS         Victoria Jane
 HORN.         Gordon Rodney
 HORROCKS      Arthur
HOWARD        Thomas
HOWARD        Thomas Anthony
HUGHES        Eric George


JONES       Christine Anne
JONES       Gary Philip
JONES       Richard
JOHNSTON     Alan

JOYNES      Nicholas Peter


KELLY       Anthony     Peter
KELLY       Michael David


LEWIS        Carl David
MATHIJR        David William
MATTHEWS       Brian Christopher
M q ALLI^TER Francis Joseph
           4

McBRJEN        John
McCABE         Marian Hazel
McCARTHY       Joseph Daniel
McDONNELL Peter
McGLONE        Alan
McGRATH         Keith
MURRAY          Paul Brian


NICOL          Lee


O'NEILL        Stephen Francis
OWENS      Jonathon


PEMBERTON William Roy


RIMMER     Carl William
RIMMER     David George
ROBERTS Graham John
ROBINSON Steven Joseph
ROGERS         Henry Charles


SEFTON         Colin Andrew Hugh William
SHAH           Inger
SMITH          Paula Ann
SPEARRITT Adam Edward
STEELE         Philip John


THOMAS         David Leonard
THOMPSON Patrick John
THOMPSON Peter Reuben
THOMPSON Stuart Paul William
TOOTLE         Peter Francis
TRAYNOR        Christopher James
TRAYNOR        Martin Kevin
TYRRELL        Kevin


WAFER          Colin
WHELAN         Ian     David
WILD           Martin Kenneth
WILLIAMS Kevin Daniel
WRIGHT         Graham John
              f     t t           ^


 MUajA-           .Cl. Q & s *




                      X V M           \>   •




•ttf./    o   M           m   m            //0

                                                 ^   /
iSiffc:
                                                                                   SiCA.Vi          u A U       ^ C U "VW ^> \ M c N V \ ilAC^ V 6 c^ cW c\ m ^


W l^ ^ \ U u f W ^ o ^ M J e M d W ^ \x n > V ( j WAWV)<v ^                                                 c(\ a ^   U w u i^O ^e A -eA ^             lmW cW         \    wv


^ X o^vs\ av^ c^ OA^OiVvcii^                                                                               cmqX^A/                         ^T f»A ^

                        ^          (^ ^ S L -.                              eA ^^ecvoQ.             nj^\AA<JVv.c£L n| uc^                  u .V H~S        Vx *x U. 4^-

'^H-s \?jS)VC | V\A \M£AMtAv^                                      aQjl -\\-« ^-£6^1-6 UjV-o V> ^ac^oA-V^ c\v£<\ * In^OiAcI^
 X cm W           's o U^vAcX cxA V o                  C & LvM VNNR, &L W                         o^VVtXvAMiD 0 V ll^ . \ v U o v O                            W c~o

 V    a n      a f( ^ a A -< < ^    w v   'IX fc s K x ( |a ^ - £ a P    b J r \      w    ix)- t)v    vaaocA a       v tv N ^ -w       c ^ (2 .V   i^ c O V    V   ) W    ^ c J t

 C \v \( \   W tX \j—e. CX W s \~ ^ fV iM A , \fe >         "SD V A A A ^C A ^ i l a ^       #VU% Ytt lX f i/ ^ “ c tA -C   tA o \,   \ M C i c i f i , \ m W iA A \V .C A .\r ^

G.                  ^       V jA \ S ^ \a< A . ^ o )          cx        c c { ^ «iO "tU.GlV’ l^ oo CUVA Sr<Lft- ^V-O Ui 9 W lH L “S ^ V v-VooV"

ctlso to cWc-V/C '\Vu.V' ctll iS> W-eU.

                             '"T W cawX            ^   cm    S>o        xAaoc U     ^ ov                  V *A ^            do

 $oce£cU a v t ^ o <^o                               IXscvpV-^

                                                                                                                   Ho^VS 9uAt\^y)|o^______________
PILE NOTE DATED   17.8.89.
ABOUT IQ to A p.m. in the afternoon. Mr. De.vengd.ile phoned.


He confirmed that he had heard from his solicitors about trying to get
in touch with him and he thanked me for this.    He still had a number
of queries.    In particular, he was interested to know the form of
an Inquest.
I explained to him that the purpose of an Inquest was to establish
who, when, where and how a person came by his death.    I pointed out
 that usually the who, when and where wasn't likely to be too
difficult, but how could present some problems particularly as it
was sometimes difficult to distinguish it from why.     I said one
 of the Ahings we were not usually interested in was dealing with
why or particularly who was to blame.    I said this did sometimes
 present difficulties for instance an R.T.A. and said that in those
 cases we tended to call some evidence as to the circumstances
 surrounding the incident.    I explained to him following a question
 that because of the involvement of the D.P.P. the inquest would
 probably have to be postponed, and the form and width of the extent
 of it would depend to a certain extent upon what the D.P.P. decides.
 I tried to explain to him that if the D.P.P. did make a charge of
 manslaughter, then the scope of the inquest would be very much more
 limited, whereas if he didn't, we might well have a more wide ranging
 inquest.   I made it clear that I was not in a position to say at this
 state what would happen.


 He wanted to know whether he would be able to ask questions at an
 inquest.   I explained the procedure, that it was I who select*
 the witnesses and also ask the questions, but that interested parties
 would then be given an opportunity to ask.    On the other hand if they
 were represented, one would expect the representatives to do the
 questioning on their behalf.    I also made it clear that the questions
 had to be within the ambit of the inquest and that if I didnt think
 the question was relevant, I could disallow it.
 He wanted to know whether the press would be there and I explained that
 they had a right to be so.
 He wanted to know whether at an inquest the full extent of the injuries
 shown in the post mortem should necessarily be read out.       I explained
 to him that it was not my normal practice to do this, but if somebody
 particularly wanted to hear them I wouldacceed to thatrequest.        I also
 pointed out to him that it might well be that it would help pathologists
 there, and again the pathologist would realise that they had to be careful
 as to how they present the evidence in order to minimise distress.
 On the other hand if once they have satisfied me a member of the family
 wanted to know more details, they could always ask the appropriate
  questions.
 He wanted to know whether a Jury would be involved.     I explained to
  him that if I had proceeded in January then I would undoubtedly
                                          2


have done it with a Jury.    Similarly if the D.P.P. decides not to bring
manslaughter charges, I will probably have the inquest with a jury,
whereas if he did bring such charges, it might be that I would not
because of the nature of the work which would then have to be done.
I explained to him that it was the Jury's job to bring in the appropriate
verdict.   I was there to stun up and give them directions but it was
their responsibility to bring in the verdict.
He asked me on his own personal case why it was that the height     of day li^ iPa
Ox f t . fb*. (^tha_jjojjaxed less than what the true height was.
I explained to him that I couldn't conduct 95 inquests on the telephone and
asked him whether in fact he had identified Barry when he had received
the body back.   He confirmed that it was his son whom he had seen at
the Chapelof Hest. What worried them was whether the p.m. report which

 they had received actually referred to Barry.

 I explained to him that it was quite possible that because of

n^^pr mortis the fact that Barry was lying down, that the measurements

might not be entirely accurate, but that in his case no mistakes had been

made with regard to the numbering and that he and his wife should not worry

on that score.

 [e thanked me for the explanations and we rang off.

Mr. Devonside also wanted to know whether I would deal with each inquest

individually or how I would set about it.     I explained to him that it would

have been my intention to have dealt with each individual case specifically

as far as it related to that person but then to take evidence which was

  neral for all of them together.


P again made it clear that decisions as to how things would be done would have

to be deferred until after the D.P.P. had made his decision.




                                     /
FILE BOTE.                                       HARPHAM
TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR. DAVIDSON OF J.L./ LIMITED.

                that I wasnt absolutely certain yet but
I phoned him and told him/that it looked that I would not be in a position
to recommence the Inquest in January. I would therefore like
him to put against the pencilled insertion several question
marks.   I would let him know as soon as possible.
He asked me otherwise were things O.K. I pointed out to him
that I had thought the folio charge for the one copy was 78.8p
rather than 93.8p from the conversation which I had with
his colleague.   He said it was a mistake if that was what I
had been told the figures that I had been quoted were correct.
I said that we would/inTlnctedto use them had we proceeded in January
but as I didnt know what the D.P.P's decision wouldbe, it might
well be that our requirements would be different in the light
of the D.P.P's decision.   If we had to postpone the Inquest
we would just have to leave everything in abeyance until
such time as I was in a position to proceed.
PILE NOTE DATED 17.8.89.
MESSAGE TO RING MR. DEVONSIBB.

                  lu ffU
I rang the number^ about three or four times but unfortunately
there was no reply. I then rang Mr. Devonside's solicitors,
spoke to their reference. I said would they please inform
Mr. Devonside that I had tried to ring him but had been unable to get
through. I said that it appeared that Mr. Devonside was anxious
to discuss the timing of the Inquest.       I explained to him that
I was awaiting communication from the D.P.P. but on the face of it
it looked as if we would not be in a position to proceed in January
and I pointed out to him the provisions of Rules 26 and 28,
particularly 27 and 28 and Section 16 of the Coroners Act.
I said that I was anxious that this matter should not be discussed
so to speak until after I had a chance to write formal letters,
as I felt that it was invidious that some people should know
by phone and others, not.    I was told that there was a meeting
of the Committee on Wednesday and whilst he would ask Mr. Devonside
to keep th® information confidential, he would know I would want
to say something to the Meeting and I said that I had no objection
if Mr. Devonside was told that subject to formal notification,
my present view was that I would have to/Mfourriecl f t a r & t er
the D.P.P. had concluded his investigations and until after
he had taken a decision which I was aware of.         I would not be
in a position t hnrof oTi1 nlmniit rrrtnl nl y T wvtlfl           a
to proceed in January 1990.
Tel call from Sefton Help Line. 14th Aug. 1989

One of the social workers rang to say that that they had had
requests to arrange for P.M. reports to be released to the bereaved.

I explained that I was not willing to release these direct but that
subject to certain conditions would release them to the families SoL
or their G.P.

The S.W said that they had been asked to request the release to Mr.
Sims a consultant. I said that I had already had such a request and
that subject to my conditions I did not object to releasing the
reports to him.
She said that she would write with the details.

She then asked about case 61. Apparently the family said that they had
rung and been told that we would send the report. I explained the
above again and said that if they^ad been told that it would be sent
direct that was an error. I said that it was because we felt that it
was undesirable that the PM report should be delivered by post and
that I prefered that the bereaved were counselled about these rather
than that they should receive them cold. I t was not that they were
not to see them but that they should not receive then onthe door mat
so to speak She agreed with this.

I asked her to explain this and if they wrote in I would try and deal
with it.

Later on the solcial worker rang again. She had heard from Mrs.
Devonside who had seen or received aa PM report. She was apparently
very upset as the hight of the deceaed was given as 5'9" whilst Mrs.
Devonside said the hight was 6 1. She wanted to know how this could
have happened.

I explained that it was precisely because of this sort of matter that
I had been reluctant to release the reports and that I now regretted
that I had agreed to do so. There was no way in which I was prepared
to conduct 95 inquests on the telephone or even in correspondence.

If there were any queries then they should be put to us in writing and
if they were relevant to the inquest they could be looked at and the
pathologist could deal with them at the Inquest.

We left it that if any queries were raised then these would be put in
writing and |hey could then be considered and dealt with at the
inquest.
 FILE NOTE DATED 4.8.89.
TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR. TURNBULL.


I said that I would like to take him up to try and discuss
with him some of the problems in connection with Hillsborough
and in particular the question of^how.11 Mr. Turnbull
confirmed that he would be willing to meet with me on Monday.
He did make a very helpful suggestion on the phone, namely
that although we had to deal with the four aspects of who,
when,where and how.The Inquest also had to apply itself
to the question of the verdict and given that one of the
verdicts was Unlawful Killing,         this did imriLve a proper explanation
of the circumstances.




FILE NOTE DATED 7.8.89.
MEETING WITH MR. TURNBULL AT BRADFORD.



I visited Mr. Turnbull on Monday at about 11.15a.m.           He made me
very welcome.     We discussed in the main the question of the D.P.P's
involvement and Manslaughter.


1.    I outlined to Mr. Turnbull the proposed letter I was going to
      send and he^elt^hat J^xeyD.P.P. would probably want me to
      go ahead,'unlikely that he woulld take a depi^-on with regard
      to charging wjDbhid^i tfefu l a l ^ ^ f r f ^ ooTtwlnly agrep with
      and I think hg~±p-pa!ol>ablj light ~uli lUu -fuirn.

      We discussed aspects ot Manslaughter and in particular considered
                     *           n                        vp*** 6>     Cx cr
      the various parties,- naswiy, the Tulivie. I felt^thax if one
      looked at the areas of criticism, these probably related to
      a.   the initial operational plan, b.     the control of the
      crowd outside the turnstiles, c. the failure to control the
      tunnel inside the ground after the gates were opened, d. the
      initial overcrowding of the central pens, e.          the failure of
      observation that these were overdrowded from the control box
      or the ground, f. the slowness of awareness of the magnitude
      of the disaster.


With regard to the ground, the areas of criticism in the main centered
 on a lack of notices , b. problems with the turnstiles, c. the barriers
 flnrj in particular their positioning and removal, d. the alternations
 in capacities and e. the monitoring and filling of the pens.


 2.    With regard to the local authority, obviously there are criticisms
                               - 2 -


       relating to the safety certificate and the remarkable slowness
     • of activity.
3.    The Pans.       It is clear from Lord Justice Taylor*s report that
       he describes the_~    .^nmraing as^sSgle minded determination
                                Ib o       u C*
       to get into the groundedirrespective of their alcoholic status.

4.    The P.A.    We thought that this was far too oaoti-
                                                        vo to be
       even considered.           .                                            y

5.    We   concentrated mainly un U i p Inamt involvement and congifleied
       the definitions in Thurston.     It is obviously,a very difficult
       problem to decide whether or not there was- matters to be left
           %h*^Jury though in the end this would depend upon the actual
       evidence that given at the Inquests.     Some of the factors
       which have to be considered in this connection are a. whether
       or not if a person is put into a crisis situation such as
       the necessity to open a gate, which was a most unusual step,
       whether the fact that other consequences are overlooked in that
       situation, can ever constitute that degree of recklessness which
       requires tha|^lt^ the interests of justice, a person should be
       punished£b.      Whether or not a person or persons who are put
       in a position where the primary objective is to ensure the
       wellbeing of the crowds and who fails in that respect should
       in fact be charged with a serious criminal offence.     It seemed
       to me that there might be a difference between say an employee
       or a company and somebody in a position like e.g., a police officer
       or a doctor in a different context whose objective is to assist
       but who may in fact in the process make errors which directly
       or indirectly lead to death or injury.


Mr. Turnbull agreed that these were points which certainly were worth
considering.   The point at issue here was to try and decide as a matter
of law whether irrespective of the evidence and assuming that it was
in it's most damming form(but without express malice) a person
in the situation above described was as a matter of law, capable of
committing the offence of Unlawful Killing.
-                                                  t   »
6.   We then spent a little bit of time discussing how. I asked
*    Mr. Turnbull to look through the      ^    which I had prepared.
      I enquired whether he thought that was too comprehensive.
      He felt that it was impossible to be too comprehensive in
      this situation.     He agreed with me that in his view it would be
      necessary to call evidence on the surrounding circumstances
      such as the local residents, the aspects of behaviour and
      drunkenness.     The problems with the outer gate and in Leppings
      Lane including the Police operation there.     The internal operations
      and of course the direct evidence regarding the individuals.
      He said that even Bradford, there was a lot of repetition

      of the Popplewell report.
His inquiry had taken very much less time than I was anticipating
but he felt that this due to the fact that first of all there
 «
were no suggestions of unlawful killing, there were no real
criticisms and in particular none of the police and that in any
event Hillsborough was more complex if anything than Bradford.

We talked about the transcripts.    He agreed that we ought to go
for the best, even if it was more expensive.

We discussed the question of the Jury.    He could see no objection to
my thinking that if we st|^jte£ wit^ 11 ^^|gmebody fell ill it would
be in order to continue/so long as we did not fall below 7.

We discussed the problems of conflicts of interest with the Jury.
He felt that it might be a good idea if the Jury Officer did the
vetting.     He also thought that on the opening I ought to have
at least 14 or 15 people present so that if need be somebody
could be challenged.

It was my impression and he could see no real objection to the Jury
taking plans and various other things into the Jury Room with them.
Mr. Turnbull mentioned that he had been told that if there was
a police inquiry the Inquest should be postponed until that was
completed.     I said that I hadn't been told that and it wasn't in
the rules and I wasn't really inclined to do that.     The difficulty
really arose from the involvement of the D.P.P.
File Hotes 1 August 1989

Telephone Conversation vith Mr Gdlhooev

He says he wasrepresented by Mr Machin, but did not know whether

he represented him in respect of the inquest.       I explained that

he should take this point up with his solicitor and when he had

sorted this out write to me, so that I might know the position.



Telephone Conversation with Mrs Dawson. Social Worker acting on

behalf of the Kellvs

She said that the Kellys were represented by Mr Machin.       I asked

if she would please arrange for him to write a letter to me giving

me this information and also setting out the solicitors reference

so that we can get in touch with him if necessary.



Telephone Conversation with David Hinchliffe

1) I told him that the appointment of Hugh Halle had gone through

and that he no longer was my deputy.      I said I was very sorry.

He reciprocated and confirmed that he had now been appointed to

West Yorkshire.     I discussed with him the letter I was proposing

to write to Mr Dear.     David felt it would be wise if X made it

absolutely clear that I was expecting the police involvement to

be free » as indeed it has always been.      However I slightly

altered the draft letter in the penultimate paragraph to make

this point clear*



Telephone Conversation with M e rvvn Jones

I telephoned him and asked him if he wanted me to fax the draft

letter to Mr Dear.     He said wN on.   He also said that he had had

the opportunity of speaking to Mr Wright by chance yesterday I

think and Peter was thinking about financial matters and that he

had indicated to him that I was writing to Mr Dear and that I

would send him a copy in due course.       He thought that things

would sort themselves out satisfactorily.
                                                     25th July         89.



 The Attorney General,
 /•.ttor-;->e’.r General *s Office,
.Koycl Courts of Justice,
Ti''-' 'f':ar„d,
 ■liQ•^■OilB ■ J

jrc- the attention of Mr. J. Tester.




     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTERS - Xi: O SSI'L.

I^refer to my telephone conversation vith you on Monday the
17th of July vhen I drev your attention to an article in
the Daily Telegraph of Saturday the 15th of July, and in
particular the second paragraph which reads as follows. "Solicitors
representing the bereaved and the injured believe the Inquest is
likely to return verdicts of .Unlawful rilling".

I am somevhat concerned that this may constitute a Sontempt
of Court. I understand that if it ore deemed desiraWbie to
institute proceedings, then till~ *ould be undertaken by
yourself.

As I mentioned to you on the telephone, I am not particularly
anxious that litigation of any sort should be engaged in,in
connection with this matter, but I am somewhat concerned that
if comments of this nature are made and/or continue to be made,
then it may be.difficult to obtain an unbiased Jury, when the
time comes to hold the Innuest(s).

Mfer present intention is to resume the Inouests into the 95 deaths
on the 15th of January 1990 or thereabouts, but that date may
have to be revievred if the events 0ortem-olated under Section
16 of the Coroners Act 1916 '-ere to occur or the provisions
of Rule 26 to 28 of the Coroners Kule*: 1984 were to be implemented.

I look forward to hearing froia you    it':, regard to your decision
on this aatter in due course.

Yours sincerely,


S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
                            /HAD TO RING
K L B NOTE BATED 24.7.09.             HABBY BE70HSIIS
1TTT.TJ!'ROT?nTTGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP OH 07048 78097
URGENTLY.


I telephoned Hr. Devonside. H£ explained that he was the father
of one of the yoting men who had unfortunately died.     &   told
oe that they were organising a family support group hut it
hadn't yet been folly announced.
He was very concerned because apparently he had discovered
that in the Liverpool Lav Library, there was a document
headed "Pathological Aspects of Disaster" by Professor A. Usher
which had been exhibited and which referred to the Hillsborough
pathology reports and which identified by number several of
the deceased.    This had apparently upset a number of the
relatives.
I explained to Mr. Devonside that I had not released this
document nor indeed had I seen it.      The document had been
produced as I understood it at the request of Lord Justice
Taylor.     I said I knew about that because the issue had been
raised with me and I had suggested that Professor Usher might
be a suitable person for doing an overview of the general pathology,
so to speak.    That it was a matter for Lord Justice Taylor as to
the release of this particular document as I had had no control over it.
Mr. Devonside wanted to know how he could get in touch with Lord
Justice Taylor's inquiry.     I said that he could speak to the
Secretary of the Inquiry, a Mr. Whalley or alternatively he could
speak to the Assistant Secretary a Mr. Jonathan Swift.       I gave
the relevant telephone numbers. Mr. Devonside knew Mr. Swift.
We then discussed for a few moments the post mortem reports.
I explained to Mr. Devonside that it was not my normal practice to
release these but it was my intention in this particular instance
subject to certain     safeguards, to release them to solicitors
or general practitioners.     I was very anxious that they should
not fall so to speak into publics? domain until the Inquests
had been resumed.
Mr. Devonside appeared very happy with the arrangements which
I was describing to him.
I took the opportunity to explore with him what his feelings were
about releasing the post mortem reports to f t * ’           Hospital
for counselling purposes.     He felt that if this was for the purpose
of helping the bereaved, he really couldn't see any objection in it.
I made it clear to him that I was merely wanting his opinion, but
obviously I was going to take my own decision on this matter.
Mr. Devonside wanted to know why the Inquests were being delayed
till January 10th.     I explained that it was probably the 15th
rather than the 10th.     I pointed out to him that first of all I
 wanted to wait for thf interim reportand secondly, that we were not
* quite ready.    He wanted to know what ifelesaiemafciB interim report
  of Lord Justice Taylor had.     I said that I would obviously read it
  but it wasn't directly related but I felt it would be better to
  wait for that to be published before we proceeded with the Inquest
  stnA in any case as X indicated, we were not quite ready to start.
  I indicated that it might have been possible to begin in December
  but that I had felt that it would not be right to do so before
  Christmas.     Mr. Devonside accepte^the point very readily,
  nnd appeared to agree that this/the sensible of dealing with it.
  The conversation ended very amicably with me expressing my
  sympathy to hi m again at his loss and he saying that he was
  sorry that we were meeting in these circumstances but he was
  very glad that he had had the opportunity of talking to me
  and being able to set up a basis of trust.
                    p t- z .
                                                             f i.    J >npP


R.H.B. STURT, M.A.(CANTAB)                                34 &36 CASTLE STREET
H.M. CORONER FOR COUNTY OF KENT                                   DOVER
  (CANTERBURY & DOVER DISTRICT)                                    KENT
     TELEPHONE 0304 240250
                                                                CT16 1PN
        FAX0304 240040                                                   ALSO AT
                                                                    68 CASTLE STREET
                                                                      CANTERBURY
                                                                          KENT
                                                                        CT12QB




       Our ref:  RS/KB/CORONERSHIP                       21st July,              1989
       Your ref: SLP/JT

       Dear Stefan,

           Thank y o u for your   letter of the   13th July and         for your
       kind r e m a r k s .

             We will give you any help we can at any time.

                                      Yours sincerely




                                      R.H.B. Sturt
                                      H.M. Coroner for Kent
                                      Canterbury & Dover District

       H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire
       (West District),
       Medico-Legal Centre,
       W a t e r y Street,
       SHEFFIELD,       S3 7ET
                   /      -g*
TILE TOTE MTOn .)0^~)       h b b i b CQHTOBStTifw v m v r m nmm*.


1.   Be said that he was advertising for extra staff.

2.   He had talked toDavid Fgrchon and whilst they conceded that

     it might be cheaper if we tried to set up our own scheme, bearing

     in mind that we knew that G.H. Harpham worked really well and

     that we might have a hiccup if we tried to do it ourselves,

     it would be better to spend the money and do it properly.

     Will I make the necessary arrangements.

     I pointed out to him that Rodney Shaw had quoted £2,190 as opposed

     to over£5^ thousand a week.   I said I find it really difficult

     to spend the extra cash and Roger Michie felt that it was a

     lot of money but it might be safer in the long run to do that

     rather than have some awful disaster on our hands.

3.   I discussed thisadditional help whilst Pauline ison holiday.

     He suggested that maybe Linda might be willing to do some extra

     hours and perhaps help frith the typing.   I will speak to John

     Batley about this and see what we can arrange.
FILE HOTS DATED 17.7.89.     P.M.
TELEPHONE CQMVERSATIOH WITH MR. TESTER   01936 6000


ATTORNEY GENERALS OFFICE.
I read him the paragraph from the Daily Telegraph and explained
that I was not after "blood or necessarily action, and also
said that the reason why I was ringing him was that it was
difficult to get a letter to him this week "because of the
Strike.   I explained that I was concerned about this
escalating and the difficulty with the Jury.
He said that the Attorney General would obviously have to
take into account the time gap between the publication
and the Inquest.   He would try and get a copy of the
paper and consider it, but would I please write.
FILE MOTE DATED 17.7.89.


TELEPHONE GOHVERSAT3DH WITH DAVID EEHCHLIFF.


I discussed with him the possibility of appointing his firm
to assist me in connection with the Hillsborough Diaster,
rather than Rotheras which is the firm which I had in mind.
He said that whilst he was flattered by this, he felt that
Rotheras being a larger firm, would probably be in a better
position to assist than he, as he was very much a one man
show up in Penistone.
I also told him that Dr. Halle agreed to take the appointment
from the 1st of August.
PILE NOTE DATED 17.7.89.
THLEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH JIM TURNBULL.




I rang   him at home.    I told him that David would "be available
as from the 1st of August all being well.     I also discussed
with him the question of Contempt and in particular, the
paragraph ±i the Daily Telegraph.     He felt that if it wasn't,
it was pretty close and in his view it would be appropriate
for me to refer thfe matter to the Attorney General.
I asked him whether he could see any reason why I should not
meet with Mr. Frazer on Friday and he felt that there
was none that he could think of.     He very kindly offered
to come down and go through the papers with me, and give
me whatever assistance he was able in connection with the
Hillsborough Disaster.     Jim is a very polite and friendly
person, and said that he felt that maybe two heads in
some circumstances were better than one.
PILE NOTE DATED 13.7.89.
DISCUSSIOH WITH ROGER MICHIE.

I explained to him that I would need some extra staff to deal
with the Hillsborough episode.   I said that I thought that
we would locate this person in the file room.   He undertook
to organise things as quickly as possible.
I again discussed the venue and he reminded me that John Poulter
of Admin & Legal was the person for me to contact.
I discussed the transcription.   I explained to him that the
shorthand writers were in fact excellent but expensive.   That
I was trying to obtain a quote for the use of taped recordings
and transcription but that cost alone was not my only criterion,
and that I had discussed this with Mr. Podmore who had agreed
very kindly that he would not try and double-guess, but that he
would accept whatever I thought was necessary in all the circumstances.



                                      /even
The question of transcription becomes/more acute in the light
of the final submissions and comments which were made at the

Public Inquiry.   It is necessary to be absolutely sure that

they are first class, and available.
                                                     12th July     89.
SLP/JT.



Mr. J.M. Jones,
Asnintaut Chief Constable,
Hillsborough Inquiry,
Fumival House,
Furnival Gate,
Sheffield. SI 4QN.




Dear Mervyn,

I would be most grateful if you could pleasd let me have a
copy of the notes of the meeting ^hich I think J^icky took 2 2 ~
laeVThursday,j so that I can have a record of them for
my file.     ^

Yours sincerely,



S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
FILE NOTE DATED 5.11.90

TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH JIM TURNBULL..

I wanted to just re-duscuss some of the aspects of

Hillsborough to    obtain his feelings on the m a t t e r :-



1.I outlined m y proposals for the        format of the Inquest

     including the number of witnesses.        I asked him whether

     he felt that I was going the right thing.          His response

     was that he thought it was absolutely right and

     precisely as it should be done.

2.   I asked him what he thought about the cut-off point at

     3.15 subject of course to any legal submissions which

     might be made on the 19th.       His view was       that my

     feelings on the matter were      in line with his but from

     a pragmatic point of view it might be kind if there

     were just a   few individuals who needed this sort of

     information explored to deal with what         happened even

     after 3.15.   I had already been inclined to perhaps

     do this, so his view confirmed my feelings.          Obviously

     one would have to have proper advance warning of the

     cases where this was likely      to arise.

3.   I discussed the involvement      of Counsel.    He could see

     certain advantages in this but on the whole I think

     he would have preferred if Counsel had been R e t a i n e d in

     London but on the understanding that I could get in

     touch with him on the relevant date and have conference

     on the phone if necessary.      This is for the opening.




BACABR
4.   I asked him what he thought about extending the inquiry

     to include the licensing aspects i.e., Sheffield City

     Council.    He said a similar thing had occurred at

     Bradford though perhaps not quite so acutely with the

     Fire Service.       He thought that it was necessary to deal

     with these a s p e c t s .
          \




BACABR
           '                                                      i




                                                  15th of Su m         09

SLP/JT.
JMJ/VSC.


Mr, M. Jones,
Hillsborogljh, Inquiry Team,
Pumival House,
Fumival Gate,
Sheffield. 31




Thanks for your letter of the 12th of June. I have jfri-tten SspP^3^
to the Building Manager at the Medico Legal Centre, Mr. John
Batley, who is the best person for Sue Harper to oontant,
in order to sort out the details regarding accommodation.

I confirm that as far as I am able, I would like to help
so that your officers can be accommodated within this building,
Quite apart from anything else, I think it would be of
substantial benefit to me.

Yours sincerely,
J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                         FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                   Furnival Gate
  H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                            Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                     SMITHDOWN LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                      Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                    Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 9 0 /7 2 3 1
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                            Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                               Our Ref:                 JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                             Date:                    12 June 1989




                Dr S Popper
                Her Majesty's Coroner
                Medico-Legal Centre
                Watery Street
                Sheffield
                S3 7ET




                I found our meeting on Tuesday most useful and, no doubt, it will be
                one of many over the coming months which, hopefully, you will find
                equally helpful.

                Whilst talking with you on Tuesday I suggested that       we would be looking
                for some accommodation for one or two senior police       liaison officers
                after we vacate Furnival House at the conclusion of       the oral hearings.
                At present our departure date is likely to be early       July.

                It would be helpful if a senior member of my administrative staff could
                liaise with a senior member of yours, with a view to establishing some
                kind of arrangement including any charges you are likely to levy for
                the use of the accommodation, the installation of telephones, access
                to copying facilities, fax machines, etc.

                The Principal Administrative Officer of the West Midlands Police is
                Mrs Sue Harper and in anticipation of a favourable response from you,
                following last Tuesday's discussions, I have asked her to make contact
                with your office some time in the week commencing Monday 12 June.

                Once again thank you for the helpful meeting.

                Best wishes.




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                                                      8th June        89.



SLP/JT.


Chief Superintendent Foster,
Nechells Green Polioe Station,
Fowler Street,
Blnnimfoag. B4 60H.


Dear Kick* S 'ap o x ln te ad sn t,

get GARY PHILIP JOKES.


I enclose a copy of a letter from Morecroft Dawson & Garnetts
which I showed to you at our meeting with Mervyn Jones.

I would be interested in due course to learn whether you
have been able to establish that this is in fact a correct
identification.

Yours sincerely.



            »r,
M d t an a ai f a.



PS.    I have spoken to the Solicitors who tdll me that the family have
       ascertained from the hospital (via ? a Social Worker) that this
       lad died at 4.20p.m. at hospital. Does this tie in with our
       information?
J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                                   FURNIVAL HOUS
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                             Furnival Gate
 H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M
                                                                      Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                      Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9

WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                               SMITHDOWN LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                              Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 7 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5                        Your Ref:

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                                       Our Ref:             JMJ/VSC
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                        Date:                 5 June 1989




            S Cody Esq
            "Open Media"
            Aldine House
            9/15 Aldine Street
            London
            W12 8AW




            Dear Mr Cody

            I am still trying to track down a copy of your Channel Four After Dark
            programme which was transmitted on Saturday 20 May 1989-

            In an early letter Superintendent Burton indicated that it was for my
            personal information that I wished to view a copy of this programme.  In
            fact I was making enquiries on behalf of Dr S Popper, Her Majesty's
            Coroner, who had heard about the programme and understood that some
            criticisms were made about the way in which the deceased were identified.

             Please can I ask             again for you to release a copy so that I can hand it
             to Dr Popper for             viewing.  I understand that you would be prepared to
             show the film in             London, but I am afraid that this is inconvenient at
             the present time             for both Dr Popper and myself.

             I would look forward to your response, in writing, so that I can inform
             Her Majesty's Coroner accordingly.  I look forward to your co-operation
             in this matter.

             Yours sincerely




             Assistant Chief Constable
             (Hillsborough Inquiry)



               Copy To: Dr S Popper, HM Coroner




                                                      Sheffield
     PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                                                           SLP/JT.




FILE NOTE.   DATED 1.6.89. TELEPHONE GALL FROM MR. B&UMMELL.




He phoned back about my letter to Liverpool.   He suggested
that perhaps it would be better if I had not stressed the
overlap, but I pointed out to him that it was too late
as the letter had already been posted.
Mr. Brummell pointed out that the Inquiry was of course
a far more wide ranging investigation than a Coroner's
Inquisition, which I entirely agreed.
He also pointed out that there was farther differences, but
as I had a statutory duty, theirs was in fact extra-statutory,
and that they were not in fact an Inquiry under the 1921
Public Inquiry Act.
    X?
         j




                                                       31at May   89.
     SLP/JT.
^    JES/376JL/JPB.


     Mrs. J.B. Strong,
     Principal Registry of the Family Division,
     Somerset House,
     Strand,
     isateiHUJiE*

     Bear Mrs. Strong,

     ftuuxk you for your letter of the 25th #f May, Z am moat
     grateful to you for your help in this matter.
     I aa very pleased that I have a point of oontact with
     you where I can take up any problems arising out of the
     admirtstration of other deceased people, where |or
     various reasons the actual issue of the Death Certificate
     is delayed.


     Yours sincerely,



     S.L.Popper,
     H.M.Coroner.
L IV E R P O O L C A T H E D R A L , L iv e rp o o l L I 7 A Z

051 709 6271


From the D ean: T he Very R everend D errick W alters



D r S L Popper
M ed ico-L egal Centre
W atery Street
S h effield
S3 7E T


3 0 M ay 1989


D ear D r Popper,

Thank you very m uch for letting m e have a list o f the nam es o f the deceased.
I w ill n ow w rite to each individual fam ily asking them to confirm that that
is the entry that th ey w ish to go in the M em orial B o o k and if w e fin d any
errors w e w ill let your o ffice know.

W ith every go od w ish .

Yours sincerely,_____________________




D ean.
                                                      c.




                                           25th May        89



SLP/PAD
KG/DH


J. Mervyn Jones MSc
Assistant Chief Constable,
Hillsborough Inquiry Team,
Furnival House,
Furnival Gate,
Sheffield,
SI 4QN.


Dear Mervyn,


Thank you very much for the green guide.

I am most obliged to you for trying to get a copy of the Channel 4
tape which I mentioned to you on the telephone.  If you should have
any difficulties about it please don't worry too much I jusd think
it would be interesting to see what the reaction and opinion of
some of the people were with regard to the immediate post incidents/
activities.




Yours sincerely.




S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
y.,.
                  Principal Registry of the Family Division
                  S o m e rs e t H ouse S tran d London W C 2 R 1LP
                                                              DX 396
                                                   Telephone Direct line 01-936
                                                           Switchboard 01-936 6000
                                                                      GTN 3921


                                                                          Your reference
Dr S L Popper
H M Coroner
                                                                          Our reference    JES/S76A/JPB
South Yorkshire (West District) Office
Medico-Legal Centre
                                                                          Date    25 May 1989
Watery Street
Sheffield S3 7ET




Dear Dr Popper

Thank you very much for your letter and enclosures dated 18 May 1989 which I received
today. The details have been noted and a circular is shortly to be circulated
to our probate offices confirming that no further proof of death is necessary.
The Senior Registrar, is not satisfied that there is sufficient evidence to issue
a statement that it cannot be ascertained whether one person died before another
with regard to commorientes.

On the more general matters that we discussed on the telephone I will be happy
to investigate matters where probate registries will not accept interim death
certificates as sufficient proof of death.

I would once again like to thank you for all your help and your speedy response
in the Hillsborough case.

Yours sincerely




J E STRONG (Mrs)
Assistant Secretary
     p* ^         Principal Registry of the Family Division
                  S o m erset H ouse S tran d London W C 2 R 1LP
                                                             DX 396
                                                 Telephone Direct line 01 -93 6
                                                          Switchboard 01 -9 3 6 6000
                                                                  GTN 3921


Dr S L Popper                                                          Your reference

H M Coroner
South Yorkshire (West District), Office                                Our reference    JES/S76A/JPB
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street                                                          Date       25 May 1989
Sheffield S3 7ET




Dear Dr Popper

Thank you very much, for your letter, and enclosures dated 18 May 1989 which I received
today.. The details have-been, noted and a circular is shortly to be circulated
to our probate offices confirming:.that no further proof of death is necessary.
The Senior Registrar, is not satisfied that there is sufficient evidence to issue
a statement, that it cannot be ascertained whether one person died before another
with regard to commorientes.

On the more general matters that we discussed on the telephone I will be happy
to investigate matters where probate registries will not accept interim death
certificates as sufficient proof of death.

I would once again like to thank you for all your help and your speedy response
in the Hillsborough case.

Yours sincerely




J E STRONG (Mrs)
Assistant Secretary
W est M id la n d s P o lic e
          P O LIC E H E A D Q U A R T E R S
          PO B O X 52    L L O Y D HOUSE
          C O LM O R E CIRCUS Q UE E N S W A Y
          B IR M IN G H AM    B4 6NQ
          TELEPHONE          021-236 5000
          TELEX     337321




          W IT H C O M P L IM E N T S
J MERVYN JONES M Sc
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                            FURNIVAL HOUSE
                                                            Furnival Gate
                                                                                      L \ «/ ^

 H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y I I A M                 Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                            Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9

WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                     SMITHDOWN LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                      Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                    Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 7 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5             Your Ref:

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                               Our Ref:                JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                             Date:                   24 May 1989




             Councillor H Chase
             C/0 Room 42
             Municipal Buildings
             Dale Street
             Liverpool   L69 2DH




                                                  y/^ J j
              LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY

              I refer to your letter of 18 May 1989 which identifies your remit from
              the City Council (by decision of 19 April 1989).

              I am grateful for the information which I have noted and also passed onto
              the Secretary of the Inquiry, Mr R M Whalley.

              In closing can I reiterate my earlier spoken and written suggestions that
              anything you learn which is material to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry can
              be forwarded to myself or Mr Whalley at the following address:-

              Room 662
              Home Office
              50 Queen Anne's Gate
              London
              SW1H 9AT

              Can I also point out that I am also carrying out the Inquiry into how
              each of the ninety five killed met with their death on behalf of Her
              Majesty's Coroner.  Regardless of what you choose to forward to Lord
              Justice Taylor's Inquiry, I will still need to be aware of all material
              facts on behalf of the Coroner.

              I am sure I can look forward to your co-operation in this matter.




               Copy to Dr Popper

      PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                                                                        & « * *


                                                      yja .    O   '—    *   ^
    4

                                                     24th May                    89.

SLP/JT.




Councillor B. Q m n ,
City of Livorpool,
o/o Boob 42*
Municipal Buildings,
Halo Straat,
M m m ik * w u m * ..


Saar Councillor Chase,
Thank you for your latter of the 16th of May. As things are, aa
Coroner X have a statutory doty to f p m Inquests irrespective
of whether or not any other judioial or public inquiry la pat
in fas&d, in respect of any iAcidenta

If a judicial or publie Inquiry la ordered in any particular
instance vfcmm deaths have cocurred, it is to be anticipated
that there will be a measure of overlap between the judioial
inquiry and the fiupaata.
Whether that ia desirable or whether any legislative changes
should be Bade ia not a Batter on which X would wish to oa— nnt
at tho present time.

SiBilarly, X do not ffcel that it would be ri#it whilst the
Inquiry ia in being and before the canalusion of the Inquests
ftae     to eeawmt on the dotaiX which you ham requested in
the first of yomt Inquiries. You aay however like to know that
X hmm 1mm ia tosoh both witt* Lord Justice Taylor as voU as
fcesaswejr Solicitors.
With regard to your aeeond question, this ia a Batter which
X m still considering and unfortunately X therefore m unable
to give yen the iafiasaatioii which you have requested.


Tours sincerely,
                                City of Liverpool

                       From City Councillor   ..................................................................

                                          c/o Room 42, Municipal Buildings,
                       Please reply to:                                                                             2DH.


                                                                                                       Date:       16th May, 1989.


Dr. Stephen Popper,
Coroner's Office,
The Medical Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD,
SOUTH YORKSHIRE.


Dear Dr. Popper,

In response to the tragic events at Hillsborough, Liverpool City Council
has formed a Hillsborough Working Party, in co-operation with the Football
Supporters Association, to ensure the submission of proper evidence to Lord
Chief Justice Taylor's Inquiry.

At this stage we are examining the formal processes and procedures put into
operation by a panoply of official bodies and other interested parties
following the events of April 15th.

Our concern, in relation to previous disasters, their inquiries and coroner's
inquests, is that no common pattern for the timetabling of Coroner's Inquests
has emerged.  With this in mind could you please furnish me with your
comments to the following p o i nt s :-

-   Has Lord Justice Taylor or his representative discussed with your office
    a formal timetable regarding your procedure arrangements for the inquests
    into Hillsborough victims?

-   Does your office intend to delay its procedure arrangements until Lord
    Justice Taylor delivers his provisional report and/or full report into
    the Hillsborough disaster? Or will your arrangements proceed independently
    of the Taylor Inquiry?

Yours sincerely,




Cllr. H. Chase,
Chair- Hillsborough Working Party.
 SLP/JT.


 Hr. D, BroaMll,
 Twt&etcry S o licito r,
 Hillsborough Inquiry,
 Tovn Hall,
 S M E W ,

 Boar Hr, Bnagaell,
W*‘:"
 X ancloao tfao r«ply vfaioh X a* deposing to Mod to the City
 of liwspool* X m boldine it book liar a day or so to g km
 you * ohaaoe to slag ■* in oaoo yon wish to aa&» any oomrwmt.
 Xf X ham not boasd froa ytra. tgr Friday X will a a n w that you
 hanre no additional coan*mts nhieh you would 113m pi to ooxtaidor.

 Tonra sinoeroly,

 S.L.Foppar,
                                vteno

                          V



                                                                 h   S   "

                                                          g*q|

SLP/JT,



Ths Sosa of Hvorpool Cothodrol,
lk» Tiaqr Bcvw'sui Dorriok Voltozs,
Livorpool Cfcthodrol,



&MBP 9 M M f

ftetttt® to agr lotto? of H m 11th of Mqrt I   obo Io m   aMot’
of tho naass of tho doooasoi.   As fkr so wo know, thoss



ImrflialMi, I feamt to say that «qpiad«aeo 1m s shown that
      *^T a®* show up until the n a y last w r i t s .


T«wrs sinoorolr,



 •M»l"OppSXf
llaJkSssttss*.




/f»*-U ^ om.o-02.
Ref: Hillsbor002


Alphabetical list of names of deceased as at 20th May 1989
as a result of the disaster at Hillsborough Football Ground
Sheffield on 15th April 1989.


 * = Names not yet confirmed as correct by informant.______


 Name                                Ref No


ANDERSON    John Alfred                76
ASHCROFT    Colin Mark                  9
ASPINALL    James Gary                  5


BALL        Kester Roger Marcus        74
BARON       Gerard Bernard Patrick     69
BELL        Simon                      52
BENNETT     Barry Sidney               88
BENSON      David John                 80
BIRTLE      David William              47
BRADY       Paul     David             84
BROOKES     Andrew Mark                50
BROWN       Carl                       46
BROWN       David Steven               10
BURKE       Henry Thomas               31
BURKETT     Peter Andrew               23


CARLILE     Paul William               73
CHAPMAN     Raymond Thomas             67
CHURCH      Gary Christopher           14
CLARK       Joseph                     25
CLARK       Paul                       58
COLLINS     Gary                       48
COPOC       Stephen Paul               71
COX         Tracey Elizabeth           19


DELANEY     James Philip               33
DEVONSIDE   Christopher Barry          17


EDWARDS     Christopher                38


FITZSIMMONS Vincent Michael            21

FOX         Thomas Steven              66
t




    GILHOOLEY     Jon Paul          83
    GLOVER        Barry             62
    GLOVER       ,Ian Thomas        37
    GODWIN        Derrick George    75


    HAMILTON     Roy Harry          12
    HAMMOND      Philip             93
    HANKIN       Eric               29
    HARRISON     Gary                3
    HARRISON     Peter Andrew       11
    HARRISON     Stephen Francis    91
    HAWLEY       David               8
    HENNESSY     James Robert        7
    HEWITSON     Paul Anthony       42
    HEWITT       Carl Darren        44
    HEWITT       Nicholas Michaei   55
    HICKS        Sarah Louise       64
    HICKS        Victoria Jane      89
    HORN         Gordon Rodney      59
    HORROCKS     Arthur             92
    HOWARD       Thomas             81
    HOWARD       Thomas Anthony      1
    HUGHES       Eric George        41


    JONES       Christine Anne      35
    JONES       Gary Philip         86
    JONES       Richard             63
    JOHNSTON Alan                   30 *
    JOYNES      Nicholas Peter      45


    KELLY       Anthony Peter       54
    KELLY       Michael David       72 *


    LEWIS       Carl David          85
MATHER,    David William

MATTHEWS   Brian Christopher
McALLISTER Francis Joseph
McBRIEN    John
McCABE     Marian Hazel
McCARTHY   Joseph Daniel
McDONNELL Peter
McGLONE    Alan
McGRATH    Keith
MURRAY     Paul Brian


NICOL      Lee


O'NEILL    Stephen Francis
OWENS      Jonathon


PEMBERTON William Roy


RIMMER     Carl William
RIMMER     David George
ROBERTS    Graham John
ROBINSON Steven Joseph
ROGERS     Henry Charles


SEFTON     Colin Andrew Hugh William
SHAH       Inger
SMITH      Paula Ann
SPEARRITT Adam Edward
STEELE     Philip John


THOMAS     David Leonard
THOMPSON Patrick John
THOMPSON Peter Reuben
THOMPSON Stuart Paul William
TOOTLE     Peter Francis
TRAYNOR    Christopher James
TRAYNOR    Martin Kevin
TYRRELL    Kevin


WAFER      Colin
WHELAN     Ian     David
WILD       Martin Kenneth
WILLIAMS Kevin Daniel
WRIGHT     Graham John
                                                     22ad Hfagr          ®f*


SLP/JS.

I5P# Ha flnH M UX i
HSJUUriMcravgjh X^fvSagfi
f im a n y S o lio ito r* ,-
lo iai H all,
ffliylflaM .

i W s < v « jnraHMNuit




As |tm knov« tho Mood aloohol aatlaatlans an all tha I m m m I      mm
4 m » Igr Ba?. Jbrroat at tho Hojfal W in —wHIra Haapital and too
ooplaa o f hia atatainta ham boon paaaad on to ycm via Woat
Mldlanda Bolioo.
Z spdogataal tvm fir. ftai’ost that bo haa rotalnad tha eaaplna
« d Hm* thoro it snoogh saitoi laft fo r ropaata of tha
ostlaatUms, I f these wvro thought la alTaaV la .
Z Minot of course oortaln aa to likd tha intention of I**d
Joatiee Tajrlor i a « t « ro*aard t o those lamia, but it oootcra
t o as that ah«ald yam vdUfc t o ham than repeated at • Itaenaio
Science lil« «taayt this mold to ftcittt* though Z undaratand
that Dear m r io u o roaoona lover lamia aaeo likely to bo w Mrtii
if the estinationa ara repeated at thla stage.
Perhaps Z ehosld asntion that aa far aa I an ooacexned, Z aat
quits aatlaflod with tho data which haa feoaa prepared.

Tours eiaoerely,




«p «• sa,— -—---
AtBmSSBSBBEuk
FILE NOTE 10.5.89

Telephone conversation with Mrs. J. Strong - Assistant Secretary-
Principal Probate Registrar,
Principal Registry Family Division,
Somerset House,
Stand
London, LC2R 1LT.

Tel: 01 9366976

I spoke to Mrs. Strong, she explained to me that if she was given the
information which she had requested, confirmation that these people
were dead, she would make arrangements to inform the appropriate
Registries so that the administration of the estates of the various
people could proceed without having to waite for the formal death
certificate.  We discussed the question of family g r o u p s , I said I was
doubtful whether I would be able to assist at this stage as to who
died when and even at a later stage it might prove to be difficult or
impossible.  She said any help which we could giver her would be
greatly appreciated.

I explained to her that I was very pleased at what she was doing
because it would relieve one of my anxieties, namely the delay which
people faced in getting the estates wound up.

We discussed for a few minutes whether this was a one off thing for
Hillsborough or a general principle i.e. that they would register due
probates without death certification, she explained that generally
speaking they would only do this if there was a major disaster to
make it worthwhile, but if I had any particular cases where there were
likely to be any lengthy delay or particular distress.if I got in
touch with them and let her know the details and in particular if I
could tell them which registry the individual intended to use she
would make the necessary arrangements so that the administration
could proceed.

She also confirmed that when solicitors acted they relied upon the
solicitors to deal with the establishment of the death and as such
death certificates didn't have to be produced to them, and that our
intrim certificates of the statement of death might well be sufficient.

With regard to Hillsborough I said that I hoped that we would have all
this information together shortly, we agreed that we could allow a
few more days to pass but if we hadn't got it all sorted out within the
next fortnight then she would be grateful if I could let her have as
much information as possible so that she could initiate the arrangements
                                                     SLP/JT.



FILE NOTE 4»5*89.   TELEPBOMB CONVERSATION WITH MR. STURT.
FILE NOTE   4.5.89


Spoke to Mr. Whitehurst, Treasury Solicitor, I told him we would let
him have the P.M. reports but that I was very anxious they shouldn't
duplicate work.  Also that I was very keen to be co-operative if I
possibly could and I hoped that they would reciprocate which he
agreed.  He indicated that he didn't think that Mr. Justice Taylor
would be wanting to deal with individual cases but he was at the
moment merely collecting all the information together.  He would get
other things from West Midlands Police.
                                                                                  • (k # .
                                             /m
                                                                                             L S    )
             THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
             Q ueen A n n e ’s C ham bers                                 f                  <£»/       -   S ir
             28 B roadw ay L o n d o n SW1H 9JS
             Telephones  Direct Line  01-210 3 3 7 1   (alt: 210 3109)
                         Switchboard 01-210 3000
             Telex 917564        GTN 210
             Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
             D X No. 2318 Victoria


 Dr S L Popper                                                   Please quote           L89/2117/PFOW/DB
 Medico-Legal Centre
 Watery Street                                                   Your reference
 SHEFFIELD                                                       Date
 S3 7ET                                                                           20th April 1989




  Dear Sir
  HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


  I act for the Inquiry in this matter and would be grateful if you could send to me
  copies of the post mortem reports, statements and any allied documents to assist
  Lord Justice Taylor in preparing his Report.
  Yours faithfully



  for the Treasury Solicitor




O')                       ft I
                                                     -fix' ■£ > = * -   ,

                                               / ,     <_j b r
                                                I



                                                19th May 1989

SLP/PAD
JMJ/SMJ


A.C.C. M. Jones,
Hillsborough Inquiry Team,
Furnival House,
Furnival Gate,
Sheffield,
SI 4QN.


Dear Mervyn,

Re: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


Thank you for your letter of 15th May 1989.  I too can see no
objection in principle why a documentary about the investigation
should not be made on the understanding that it will not be shown
until after the conclusion of the inquests.

I think it ife a very sensible idea that you and Mr. Dear have
reserved the right to view the film before showing, I presume you
have also reserved the right to request amendments if that were
necessary.



Yours sincerely,




S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
                                                                                     p w 1-


fa n   “J. ' Z T e d r t v c            -                          S tO iM fo

  ffV**OuyteA.            P yfh^ia.                          y

  PvlM-Ct|9«A                                T ^/ylu^*J DiiAil'IV J

           ^i^yne^ytr /Itfvt'U.




                     U     2^         ILT

        Ol-              eK L L O n ^                                                   ^   C   p   l C


 C&*Xik          UK.      "irvjpplj A u iJt         *1

                 (T) r^&sm-e^



                 Q)
                 Q                                 fT^*~ ^                       *^


                         3j (£> - v ^




£u*                      iv'-?«X«A      C-tr<r^*JJz         Ctf>r?**~i ^             /W^/

          (|<.    *o         /* A j   ^ < -< ^ 1 1 ^ -   .-A e/ss'f'   ^ X ^ tJ f.
                                     OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                                         MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE            WATERY STREET,
                                                  (West District)        SHEFFIELD
                                                                         S 3 7ET
     STEFAN L POPPER. L L B .,B .M E D .S ci.,B .M .,B .S .,M R .C G P
                                                          CORONER

                               T elephone: SHEFFIELD 107421 738721       18th May           -jg 89

                                                                         Posted 23rd May 1989,
 SLP/PAD

 Mrs. J. Strong,
 Assistant Se c retary,,
 Principal Probate Registrar,
 Principal Registry Family Division,
 Somerset House,
 Strand,
 London,
 LC2R 1 L T .


Dear Mrs Strong,

With reference to our telephone conversation on 10th May, I was very
pleased indeed to learn that you would endeavour to make arrangements
   t,    J-amilies of the deceased to be able to administer the estates
viunout having to wait for the conclusion of the Inquest.    As you
wij.1 appreciate this m a y still be quite a long way off.

I now enclose

1,   Sheets numbered 1 to 95 which give you the names, dates of birth
     and addresses of all the deceased whom we are aware of at che
     present time.

     Would you please note that they all died on the 15th Aoril 1989
     except for Lee Nicol (No. 95) who died on 18th April 1389,

     '/Je nave had verification of perscnal details by means of a signed
     ?nB S t lona;'"re respect of all the deceased except for case 2,17,
     30, 32 and 72.                                                   9  '




     I have included these for the sake of completeness but it mav be
     that we might have co write, to you again should any amendments to
     name or address be required.

     Despite what I have just said I would be very grateful if you
     could let me know if you should learn of any discrepancies in
     any of these cases.

2,   You will notice that the list is in numerical order which is the
     way we are handling matters but I enclose for your assistance a
     photocopy or an internal list which we have prepared for our own
     use listing the people in alphabetical order in case this miqht
     help you.                                                a

3,   I also enclose a list of those cases where we believe people are
     related.                                                 L




     Una.ortun.atly I am not in a position to tell you the order in which
     these people might have died, it may be that when the investigation
     is complete we may be able to shed some l i g h t .on this but I am
     not particularly hopeful.
                                         OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                                             MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE            WATERY STREET,
                                                      (West District)        SHEFFIELD
                                                                             S 3 7ET
            STEFAN L. POPPER. LLB.. B.MED. Sci., B.M.. B.S.. M R.C G P
                                                             CORONER

                                   T e lep ho n e: SHEFFIELD 107421 738721
                                                                                 18th May       19 89


(   2   )


Mrs.          J. Strong


Needless to say I confirm that I opened inquests into the deaths
of all these people and have issued Intrim Certificates of the
Fact of Death in all of these cases.

I would like to write to the bereaved relatives (or their solicitors
where we have been informed of representation) informing them of the
arrangements which you have made regarding probate.-

I V70uld therefore be grateful if you could please let me know as
soon as possible when your administrative arrangements have been
put in place so that I can get the letter off as quickly as-possible.
Ref: Hillsbor002


Alphabetical list of names of deceased as at 20th May 1989
as a result of the disaster at Hillsborough Football Ground
Sheffield on 15th April 1989.


 * s Names not yet confirmed as correct by informant.______


 Name                                Ref No


ANDERSON    John Alfred                76
ASHCROFT    Colin Mark                  9
ASPINALL    James Gary                  5


BALL        Kester Roger Marcus        74
BARON       Gerard Bernard Patrick     69
BELL        Simon                      52
BENNETT     Barry Sidney               88
BENSON      David John                 80
BIRTLE      David William              47
BRADY       Paul     David             84
BROOKES     Andrew Mark                50
BROWN       Carl                       46
BROWN       David Steven               10
BURKE       Henry Thomas               31
BURKETT     Peter Andrew               23


CARLILE     Paul William               73
CHAPMAN     Raymond Thomas             67
CHURCH      Gary Christopher           14
CLARK       Joseph                     25
CLARK       Paul                       58
COLLINS     Gary                       48
COPOC       Stephen Paul               71
COX         Tracey Elizabeth           19


DELANEY     James Philip               33
DEVONSIDE   Christopher Barry          17


EDWARDS     Christopher                38


FITZSIMMONS Vincent Michael            21

FOX         Thomas Steven              66
 GILHOOLEY      Jon Paul
 GLOVER        Barry
 GLOVER       ' Ian Thomas
 GODWIN        Derrick George


 HAMILTON     Roy Harry
 HAMMOND      Philip
 HANKIN       Eric
 HARRISON     Gary
 HARRISON     Peter Andrew
HARRISON      Stephen Francis
HAWLEY        David
HENNESSY      James Robert
HEWITSON      Paul Anthony
HEWITT        Carl Darren
HEWITT        Nicholas Michael
HICKS         Sarah Louise
HICKS         Victoria Jane
HORN          Gordon Rodney
HORROCKS      Arthur
HOWARD        Thomas
HOWARD        Thomas Anthony
HUGHES        Eric George


JONES       Christine Anne
JONES       Gary Philip
JONES       Richard
JOHNSTON     Alan

JOYNES      Nicholas Peter


KELLY       Anthony Peter
KELLY       Michael David


LEWIS       Carl David
MATHER      David William              56
MATTHEWS    Brian Christopher          22
McALLISTER Francis Joseph              '26
McBRIEN     John                       68
McCABE      Marian Hazel               20
McCARTHY    Joseph Daniel              27
McDONNELL Peter                        40
McGLONE     Alan                       70
McGRATH     Keith                      32 *
MURRAY      Paul Brian                 16


NICOL       Lee                        95


O'NEILL    Stephen Francis             87
OWENS      Jonathon                    34


PEMBERTON William Roy                  65


RIMMER     Carl William                15
RIMMER     David George                 4
ROBERTS    Graham John                 79
ROBINSON Steven Joseph                 28
ROGERS     Henry Charles               24


SEFTON     Colin Andrew Hugh William   61
SHAH       Inger                        2 *
SMITH      Paula Ann                   18
SPEARRITT Adam Edward                  94
STEELE     Philip John                 82


THOMAS     David Leonard               90
THOMPSON Patrick John                  49
THOMPSON Peter Reuben                  78
THOMPSON Stuart Paul William           53
TOOTLE     Peter Francis               39
TRAYNOR    Christopher James           60
TRAYNOR    Martin Kevin                57
TYRRELL    Kevin                       36


WAFER     Colin                        13
WHELAN    Ian     David                 6
WILD      Martin Kenneth               77
WILLIAMS Kevin Daniel                  51
WRIGHT    Graham John                  43
' RELATED DECEASED



 64    SARAH, LOUISE HICKS        )
                                  )
 89    VICTORIA JANE HICKS        )




 44    CARL DARREN HEWITT         )
                                  )
 55    NICHOLAS MICHAEL HEWITT    )




  1    THOMAS ANTHONY HOWARD      )




 81    THOMAS HOWARD              )




  3    GARY HARRISON              )
                                  )
                                  )



91    STEPHEN FRANCIS-HARRISON    )




57    MARTIN KEVIN TRAYNOR        )
                                  )



60    CHRISTOPHER JAMES TRAYNOR   )
                                                        / > / r/-^




                                           ' i'
SLP/PAD



Mr. D. Brummell,
Treasury Solicitors,
Hillsborough Inquiry,
Town Hall,
Pinstone Street,
She f f i e l d ,
SI 2 H H .


Dear Mr. Brummell,

It was nice meeting you on the 15th May 1989.

On that same day I had an opportunity to speak with Mr. Andrew Collins
who very kindly offered to arrange with you that a copy of the daily
transcripts would be forwarded to me.

I would be most grateful if you could organise this for me preferably
as they are prepared as it will be a lot easier to assimilate them
as the inquiry proceeds rather than en masse at the end.




Yours sincerely,



S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
                          A    a T                 '4t
                                      Do<-
                                                                C./^~




SLP/PAD


M r . D . B r umme11,
Treasury Solicitor,
Hillsbrough Inquiry,
Town Hall,
Pinstone Street,
Sheffield,
SI 2 H H .



Dear Mr.. Brummell,


I enclose a copy of a letter from City of Liverpool dated 16th May
1989, the contents of which are self explanatory.

Before I reply to them I would be grateful if I could please have
any comments you would like me to consider.

As I do not want to delay a reply in this instance I would be
grateful if I could hear from you as soon as possible.




Yours sincerely,




S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
                                                                                       11              ,J
                                                                                       M                     I   .



                                                                                  c l M                  f 'L

                                                                    16th May 1989
                   ie ie p n o n e :t» M tm tL U (0M 2)   iw
                                                           m u *   . ,— —   ............ - r m - n - r n ,


 SLP/PAD
 BC/JEN


 Mr. B. Campbell,
 Chelsea Football Club,
 Stamford Bridge,
 London, SW6.


 Dear Mr. Campbell,


Your letter of the 5th May has been refered to me by Treasury Solcitors.

I regret that I do not feel at the present time that I can release the
names and addresses of the deceased without express authority from
the respective families.

You will appreciate that it is not practical at this stage to seek to
obtain this.

I am sorry that I cannot help you with the information which you have
requested.



Yours sincerely,




S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER




cc   Mr. D. Brummell.
J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                                    FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                              Furnival Gate
  HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                                            Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                       Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                SMITHDOWN LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                 Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                               Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 9 0 /7 2 3 1
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                                       Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                                          Our Ref:     jmJ/SMJ
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                        Date:
                                                                                     15 May         1989


             Dr S Popper
             H. M. Coro ne r
             South Y o rk sh ir e (West District)
             Medi co Legal Centre
             W at e ry Street
             Shef fi el d 3


             Dear Dr Popper

             H i l l s b or o ug h Disaster.

             The B ri tish B r o a d c a s t i n g Comp an y have a p pr oa ch ed us with
             a view to m a k i n g a d o c u m e n t a r y about the West Midl an ds
             police Inquiry into the disaster.                 Their interest o b vi ou sl y
             is sparked of by the unusual nature as well as the enormity
             of the investigation.

             Lord Just ic e T aylor has said he has no o b j e c ti o n to the
             m a k i n g of such a d o c u m e nt a ry so long as it is not shown
             before the inquiry has complete d its work.              The purpose
             of my w r i t i n g is to e st a bl i sh if you have any objections.
             Again n ot hi ng will be shown unt.il after your inquests
             have c o nc lu de d and Mr Dear and m y se l f resume the right
             w it h the B.B.C. to view the film before showing.

             We feel that such a d o cu m e n t a r y will show the t ho roughness
             of the i n ve s t i g a t i o n on your b eh al f and h op ef u ll y dispel
             the b elief in some people's m inds of a cover-up.

                                             ;o h ea ri ng from you soon.




              J. H . JONES J
                                    I
              A S SI ST AN T CHIEF CONSTABLE.




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                   LIVERPOOL H EALTH A U T H O R IT Y
 ROYAL LIVERPOOL CHILDRENS HOSPITAL
             ALDER HEY
                    Eaton Road, Liverpool L12 2AP
                       Telephone: 051-228 4811
               Our Ref:   W JR .T F .A E D    If tele ph oning please ask for:   2261



Dr. S. L. Popper,
H.M. Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD,
S3 7ET.                                      15th May, 1989.



Dear Dr. Popper,

Thank you for your letter.   I understand your reasons for
not disclosing P.M. reports prior to the inquests.    I would
be grateful if you could forward the reports to me as soon as
possible, as we have already had several inquiries from parents
who wish to know more details of the causes of death.

Yours sincerely,




W. J. ROBSON, F.R.C.S.
Consultant - A.E.D.
                                            11th May      89


SLP/PAD

The Dean of Liverpool Cathedral,
The Very Reverend Derrick Walters,
Liverpool cathedral,
Liverpool,
LI 7AZ.

Dear Dean,

I refer to your letter of 4th May 1989 addressed to Mr. Brumraell a
copy of which has been forwarded to me.
In principal I have no objection in letting you have an updated
list of names.
We are in the process of verifying the information which we have
and as soon as this has been completed we will let you have an
updated list.




Yours sincerely.



S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
   y   ^   y   ,                                    H

                                                        *   I


                                             llth May 1989

SLP/PAD




Mr. D. Brummell,
Treasury Solicitors,
Queen Anne's Gate,
28 Broadway,
LONDON,
SW1H 9JS.


Dear Mr. Brummell,

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY DISASTER-
Re: LIST OF NAMES FOR DEAN OF LIVERPOOL CATHEDRAL


I can see no reason why we should not comply with the request of
the Dean of Liverpool Cathedral.

I was not surprised that there were a few errors with regard to names,
we anticipated this but felt that in the interest of allowing the
families to have their funerals we would cope with it by amendment
at a later date.

The position is that we have sent out a questionaire asking for
names and other data to be verified and in fact have had an exceedingly
good response, at the monent we are only short of about eight names.

I would prefer to wait until we have a complete updated list and then
let the Dean have the information he requests.

I will write to him and put him in the picture as to what is happening.

It was I think very useful having a long conversation with you on
10th May regarding the above but also general points and in particular
the disclosure of post mortem reports to the medical profession for
counselling of relatives of deceased people.

I explained to you that it is my normal practice not to disclose P.M.
reports until the inquest but that I was inclined in this particular
case to breach my normal practice and subject to appropriate provisos
allow various medical authorities e.g. G.P's, Paediatric departments
and so on to have a sight of the post mortem reports in order that
they maybeina better position to advise and counsel relatives of the
deceased.

I did not want to do this without learning what Mr. Justice Taylors
feelings on that might be and I understood from Mr. Jones that on the
whole Treasury Counsel preferred me not to do so at this stage.
                                                   11th May 1989

 ( 2 )

Mr. D. Brummell.



I am hoping as you know to have a discussion with Mr. Justice Taylor
early next week and it may be that we can try and resolve points of
this nature on that occassion.

I am looking forward to hearing from Mr. Justice Taylor to how he
envisages the interaction between his inquiry and my inquest.

I mentioned that I was down in Birmingham yesterday and saw the sort
of effort which was being put into this inquiry by the West Midlands
Force.

Whilst I am not of course an expert of these matters it is my
impression that it will take several months to complete the investigat
and to try and sort  out the various questions which need to be dealt
with.



Yours sincerely,




S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER




P.S.     Incidentally Liverpool Cathedral are not the only ones who
         want lists, I have a letter from a lady who wants to write
         a book on the subject which she intends to sell for raising
         funds for Hillsborough (apparently she has done something
         similar for Lockerbie).

         I am afraid I have at this stage turned her down.
             THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
             Queen Anne’s Chambers
             28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
             Telephones Direct Line 01-210 3109
                         Switchboard 01-210 3000
             Telex 917564        GTN 210
             Fax No, 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
             D X No. 2318 Victoria

Dr S L Popper                                                  Please quote
HM Coroner                                                       L 89/2117/D B
M edico-L egal C entre                                         Your reference
Watery S treet
S h effield S3 7ET                                             Date
                                                                9 May 1989




 b - ”*' A,r . Pxr)

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


Further to my le t t e r of 5 May, I have r e ce iv e d another request for details of the
d e c e a se d or bereaved. This t im e it is a request from the Manager o f C h elsea Football
Club for d e ta ils of the bereaved (a copy of his le t t e r of 5 May is enclosed), rather than
for d e ta ils o f the d e c e a se d (which of course is what my le t t e r of 5 May, referring to
the Dean of Liverpool Cathedral's request, should have referred to). I wonder if you
would be kind enough to respond to this. A copy of my ack n ow led gem en t o f today's
d ate is also en closed .           I must say th a t I would m y se lf be wary of releasing this
inform ation without the consent of the bereaved th e m se lv e s.




                                          D BRUMMELL
                                                     C*>Py
                                                                                                 H

                THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
              Queen Anne’s Chambers
              28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
              Telephones  Direct Line  01-210
                          Switchboard 01-210 3000
              Telex 917564        GTN 210
              Fax No, 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
              D X No. 2318 Victoria

Bobby Cam pbell £s
                                                                      Please quote ,
C h elsea Football Club                                                L 89/2117/D B
Stamford Bridge                                                       Your reference
London SW6                                                             BC/JEN
                                                                      Date
                                                                       9 May 1989




 Q        Av.
HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


Thank you for your le t t e r o f 5 May. As a m em ber o f the Treasury Solicitor's O ff ic e I
am th e person instructing Counsel to th e Inquiry and to this end am o f course in c lo se
liaison with the West Midlands P olice who are co lla tin g e v id e n c e on our behalf.

I regret, how ever, th at I do not have in my possession the nam es and addresses of the
v ictim s' fa m ilie s. So far as th e d e ta ils o f the d e c e a se d th e m se lv e s are concerned, th e
person who to d ate probably has the m ost c o m p le te inform ation in this con n ection is
the Coroner, Dr S L Popper. I have th e re fo r e passed your request on to him a t the
M edico-L egal C entre, Watery S tr ee t, S h effield S3 7ET.




                                             D BRUMMELL
                                     A ssistant Treasury Solicitor
FILE NOTE    8.5.89


Spoke to Mr. Whalley 01 273 2577.  He confirmed that Lord Justice
Taylor had received my letter and they were suggesting that we might
meet on Mond y either over lunch or after they r o s e , ,, in the evening.
I said that as far as I could see my day was clear on Monday       that I
was intending to probably come in and hear the Opening and that I
would make myself known to him if I did attend in Sheffield.       They
will be sitting at 10.30 a.m.




                                                     z
D irectors:                                                                                                                    President:
    K.   W. Bates (Chairman)                                                                                                     G. M. Thomson
    R.   M. Bates (Virp-Chairman)
    C    Hutchinson (Chief Executive)                                                                                          Manager:
    G.   W. C. Smith                                                                                                            Bobby Campbell
    Y.
    S.
         S Todd (Company Secretary)
         S. Tollman
                                              Football Club                                                                    Club Secretary:
                                                                                                                                 Janet W ayth

                                               Stamford Bridge London SW6
                                                  Telephone 01-385 5545
                                                  Facsimile 01-381 4831

          BC/JEN                                                                                                      5th May 1989



         Dr D Brumell
         Treasury Solicitors Office
         Queen Anne's Gate
         28 Broadway
         LONDON
         SW1H 9JS




         Dear Dr Brumell

         Following the recent tragedy at Hillsborough, I would very much like to write
         to the families of those who lost their lives, extending condolences on behalf
         of all at Chelsea Football Club.

         In this respect, I would be most grateful if you could provide me with a list
         of the names and addresses of the victims' families.

         Thanking you in anticipation.

         Yours sincerely




 ^ . Bobby Campbell
l        Manager




  Club Call:                                                                                                                                Inform ation:
0898 12 11 59                                                                                                                               01-381 6221
                                  Chelsea Football and Athletic Company Limited Registered No, 84348 England
                                           Registered Office: Stamford Bridge Grounds. Fulh am Road. London SW6 IHS
                                              5th May      89


SLP/PAD

Miss Anne Pitchar.




Dear Miss Pitcher,

Thank you for your letter of 28th April,  I note what you say regarding
the book which you want to publish.  I think before I could agree to
the publication of names and addresses and details regarding the
deceased I would have to obtain permission from the families concerned.

I a* very reluctant to write to them at this stage to ask for this
permission and I think for the time being I have to forgo agreeing
to your request.




Yours sincerely.



S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
              THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
              Queen Anne’s Chambers
              28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
              Telephones Direct Line 01-210 3109
                          Switchboard 01 -210 3000
              Telex 917564        GTN 210
              Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
              D X No. 2318 Victoria

Dr S L Popper                                                  Please
                                                                lease quote
M edico-Legal C entre                                            L89/2117/PFO W /D B
Watery S treet                                                 Your reference
S h effield S3 7ET
                                                               Date
0742-738721                                                     3 May 1989




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

I am sorry that our telephone conversation w as som ew h at curtailed yesterd ay, but I
gather th a t you w ere able to speak further to m y c o lle a g u e , P eter Whitehurst, on the
question o f the p ost-m ortem reports.

The reason for this le t t e r is the request which has been made to me by the Dean of
Liverpool Cathedral for a c o m p le te and ac c u r a te list o f all the bereaved. Copies o f his
le tte r to m e o f k May (minus enclosure) and o f my reply o f today's d ate are enclosed.

I assumed you would have no objection to my writing in th e se term s to th e Dean,
although I did try to speak to you over the telep h on e today before sending the le t t e r ,
but without su c c e ss.

If the p ost-m ortem reports (and hence nam es o f all the bereaved) are         soon to be with
us, then I will o f course be happy m y se lf to supply the inform ation         to the Dean of
Liverpool Cathedral. O therw ise, I am sure the Dean would ap p reciate           it if you c o u ld
forward th e nam es to him (if tim e permits!) in the near future,                naturally on a
confidential basis.




                                           D BRUMMELL
                                                  CyPy
                                                                                                h
                 THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                 Queen Anne’s Chambers
                 28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
                 Telephones Direct Line 01-210 3109
                             Switchboard 01-210 3000
                 Telex 917564        GTN 210
                 Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
                 D X No. 2318 Victoria

    The Very Reverend Derrick Walters                              Please quote
    Dean o f Liverpool Cathedral                                    L89/2117/PFO W /D B
    Liverpool LI 7AZ                                               Your reference

                                                                   Date
                                                                    3 May 1989




    Dear Dean

    Thank you for your le t t e r o f 4 May. I regret th at I do not y e t have in m y possession
    the nam es o f all the b ereaved . At th e tim e o f w riting, th e person who probably has
    the m ost c o m p le te inform ation in this con n ection is the Coroner, Dr S L Popper.

    As. soon as I r e c e iv e a c o m p le te list o f the bereaved , I would o f course be pleased to
    forward a copy to you.            In th e m ean tim e I thought it m ight help if I passed your
    request on to the Coroner direct as I am sure th at he to o would be pleased to a ssist. I
    have accordingly today w ritten to Dr Popper w hose address is:

                   M edico-Legal C entre
                   Watery S treet
                   Sheffield
                   S3 7ET

£                  Tel:   0742 738721

    P le a se l e t m e know if I can be o f a ssistan ce in any other way. I did try to speak to
    you over the telep h on e this morning before sending this le t t e r , but your line is
    obviously rather busy!




                                          DAVID BRUMMELL
                                     A ssistant Treasury Solicitor
LIVERPOOL CATHEDRAL, Liverpool, L I 7AZ
                                                                      £ *J -
051 709 6271


From the Dean: The Very Reverend Derrick Walters

Dr D Brummell
Treasury Solicitors Office
Queen Anne’s Gate
28 Broadway
London
SW1H 9JS

4 May 1989

Dear Mr Brummell,

I write to you on the advice of Detective Chief Inspector Lancaster of
the West Midlands Police Force.

Unfortunately there were some errors in the names on the service paper in
the Hillsborough Memorial Service, a copy of which I enclose.    Naturally
we are very concerned about this and I promised the Prime Minister that I
would make sure that all the bereaved families would have an accurate
list of the names. In fact we are going to send them a facsimile copy of
the Book of Remembrance in the Cathedral.
Obviously I will send a draft of the Remembrance Book to all the
bereaved, before we authorise its binding. In an ideal world there will
be no errors in the draft we send.

I can assure you that any list of names that you give us will not be
released to the Press until we have your permission.
I hope you can help in this our ministry to the bereaved.
Yours sincerely,




Dean
                                                        tl*n n -       L3 }   I y)




                                                                   ^   i-S'P


                                              3rd May                  89


   SLP/PAD

   Lord Justice Peter Taylor,                 PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL
   Royal Court of Justice,
   The Strand,
   LONDON, W C 2 .


   Dear Lord Justice Taylor,

   I understand that you are hoping to start taking formal evidence on
   the 15th May 1989.

   Rule 36 of the Coroner's Rules provides in a nutshell that an inquest
   should deal with the question of who the deceased was, and how, when,
   where he came by his death.   In other words the scope of the inquiry
   is limited and circumscribed.

   I am very concerned that as far as is conveniently possible our
   inquiries should dovetail together rather than overlap substantially.
   I fear we otherwise might unnecessarjrly increase distress to the
   deceased relatives' and to witnesses.

   For this reqson I think it would be very helpful if we could meet at
   a convenient time so that you could perhaps indicate to me what is in
   your mind with regard to the Judicial Inquiry and in particular to
   what extent, if at all, it would impinge or overlap the Inquest.

   I look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible.



^ ^ Y o u r s sincerely.




   S. L. POPPER
   H. M. CORONER
         28th A p r il,    1989


                                                 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
               On 15th April there was an horrendous disaster at Hillsborough.
         95 people died, many were injured.   I have been appointed by the Home
         Secretary to conduct an Inquiry into the disaster.

               May I convey my deepest sympathy to the bereaved and injured and
         the same from the Inquiry Staff.

               The terms of reference of the Inquiry are to investigate the events
         at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on 15th April and make
         recommendations in relation to crowd control and safety of sports grounds.

                I am solely responsible for the Inquiry, representation and
         re commenda ti o n s .

               I am assisted by two assessors; Brian Johnson, Chief Constable of
         Leicestershire and Professor Maunder, a professor in Mechanical
         Engineering at Newcastle University.

               This is a preliminary hearing to set out the nature of the Inquiry,
         procedures and to hear applications from parties wishing to be
         represented.

               This is not a law suit where it is a case of winning or losing, it
         is not akin to a criminal trial.  No one is on trial.

                 The Inquiry will look at:-

                 (1)      What happened
                 (2)      Why it happened
                 (3)      The le ssons to be learned and recommendations.

               If allegations are made I will consider them and if appropriate make
         a finding.

               The object is to find the facts with all speed.  I do not want this
         constructive purpose spoilt by accusation and counter-accusation .

               Regarding the scope and length of the Inquiry, because the people
         involved  as witnesses run into the 1,000's, West Midlands Police are
         carrying out the exercise of gathering evidence.  I welcome letters.  All
         relevant evidence should be available but I want the Inquiry to be quick
         and thorough .

               I want to keep oral evidence within bounds.  I will not allow oral
         evidence which does not add to that already given but written statements
         will be considered.

               The Inquiry will have three Counsels, Andrew Collins Q.C., Alan
         Goldsack and Bernard Phillips.  All witnesses who give oral evidence are
         called on my behalf.

                 T h a t w i t n e s s may a l s o be c a l l e d by t h e i r   ad v iso rs.




HB3AAB/PGT/1
                 Before any witness is called they have to have first given a written
           statement.  The witness may be cross-examined but I will limit
           cross-examinations as I think fit.

                 If an allegation is made against a body or an individual, that body
           or individual must be informed and can call evidence in answer to the
           allegation.

                 The oral hearing will commence on the 15th May at 10.30 a.m., and
           will concentrate on the events of the 15th April and why it happened.   The
           Inquiry will be public.

                 The second part of the Inquiry - relating to the future- I will give
           directions later on how this will be conducted.

                 I would like to receive written submissions on recommendations for
           crowd control and safety at sports grounds as soon as possible.

                 The press will be given proper assistance and save in exceptional
           circumstances copies of statements made by a witness will be available to
           the press shortly before that winess is called.

                 There will be no photography or filming or sound recording during
           the Inquiry.  I can and will enforce that rule.

                 I request the press not to interview any witness before they have
           completed their evidence to the Inquiry.  I believe that will only impede
           a difficult task.

                 I expect parties to be represented by lawyers.  Any person or body
           wishing to be represented must show good cause.  They must have a direct
           interest and it must be fair to be represented.

                 If there are several parties covered by the same interest they«
           should join together.

                    Any decision today on representation is not final.

                 If a party does not wish to be represented they can offer to make
           evidence available through a statement as soon as possible.

                 In relation to costs, there are no statutory provisions.  The
           Secretary of State is able to meet costs and I make recommendations to the
           Secretary of State.

                    I will consider that at the end.   Costs would be on a common fund
           basis.

                 I intend to make recommendations to pay the reasonable costs of
           anyone who ought to be represented who may not know if they can afford it.
           Certainly the families of the injured and deceased.

                 I will be sympathetic to football supporters, in particular
           Liverpool supporters.  I will be recommending that Liverpool supporters
           costs are paid.




HB3AAB/PGT/2
          REPRESENTATIONS

          Mr.    King              - consortium of solicitors within and outside
                                     Liverpool.  Already met. Hillsborough Group of
                                     Solicitors.  74 firms representing 200 families.
                                     Contact through Liverpool Law Society.

           Mr.   Coombes           - representing family of deceased and injured.     May
                                     combine with the consortium subject to
                                     satisfactory Counsel.

                  Lord Justice Taylor - will agree 1 team to   represent families.

           Mr.   Makin             - represents 7 deceased, 50 injured - not entirely
                                     happy with what took place at consortium meeting.
                                     Counsel very busy.  I represent so many interests
                                     already there may be difficulties in only one
                                     advocate.




                  Lord Justice Taylor - I don't see any difficulty.  If for good
                  reason, separate representation is needed, I will consider it, but
                  it will have to  be quite extraordinary.

           Mr.   Jackson           - instructed by Football Supporters Association.
                                     National Association - strength in Liverpool.
                                     Information about travel to Sheffield, ticket
                                     allocation, crowd control.

                  Lord Justice Taylor - satisfied will represent Liverpool Supporters
                  - work out what part want to play in first stage and what better for
                  second stage.

                  Costs - I will probably recommend are paid by the Secretary of
                  State.

           N.B. If anyone wastes the time of the Inquiry I will consider the matter
           of costs very carefully.

           Mr. Glasgow             - Insurers.   Sun Alliance, of Club and Football
                                     League.   We will provide such assistance as you
                                     need.   No application for representation by Club
                                     or respective parts.

           Mr. Purchas             - representation of stewards, turnstile men and
                                     gatemen, casual employees of club.  Lack of
                                     consultation by the Club before the match.

                  Lord Justice Taylor - grant representation to the club but not
                  stewards (rep. by club).  Dr. Purcell - drove to Sheffield
                  Wednesday - medical position on the day.  Independent contractor.      ^
                  other doctors, medical defence union for all 3.

           Calaghan (Broomheads)   - Trent Regional Health Authority Ambulance
                                     Service.

           Hallam                    - Sheffield Health Authority 2 hospitals.




HB3AAB/PGT/3
                    Lord Justice Taylor - nothing to stop watching brief.   No
                    representation.

           Michael Murphy            - Sheffield City Council Licensing Authority.
                                       Assist Inquiry in any way possible.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - responsible for perimeter fencing - grant
                    representation.

          John Dyson                 - Football Association.  Interest general and
                                       specific. F.A. Cup responsible for selecting
                                       ground, policing, took advice on decision that
                                       Liverpool should be at the Leppings Lane end.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - I am not settling civil claims at this
                    hearing. Will grant representation.

                    Interested parties will receive copies of written statements.

          Wood Q.C.                  - South Yorskhire Police - considerable interest.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - will be represented.

           Robinson                  - Fire Services - Officers at match.   Also involved
                                       Licensing Fire Certificate.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - will be represented.

           Colvin                    - National Council for Civil Liberties - no
                                       appearance.

           Swainson                  - Liverpool City Council, Sefton, Knowsley, Wirral,
                                       St. Helens, Met. District Council. Lancashire and
                                       Cheshire County Councils.

                                       Representation in a collective capacity:-

                                       (1) unlike most disasters - particularly affects
                                       Merseyside.  Local Authorities can justifiably
                                       represent the wider people.

                                       (2) Authorities believe by granting
                                       representation can demonstrate awareness of need
                                       for fairness, openness and thoroughness.

                                       Degree of sensitivity and suspicion of
                                       communities represented.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - country aware of loss/grief Liverpool.  For
                    the Inquirty representation to contribute to what happened and why.
                    Can't see what representation will add. Want views of football
                    supporters. Don't think need representations from the local
                    authorities to impress on me or the public the need for impartiality
                    and openness. I reject the application - not through a lack of
                    sensitivity but from a sensitivity of the need to get on quickly.   I
                    respect your reason but am not persuaded.

          Wright                     - St. John's Ambulance. Don't want representation,
                                       reserving our position.




HB3AA5/PGT/4
           NO MORE APPLICATIONS
                   Inquiry achieving purpose - will have to keep good time - tight ship
           -   intend to do. Confine to relevant matters. Avoid waste of time.

           King                    -    application to change venue of Inquiry to
                                       Liverpool.

                  Lord Justice Taylor - no good reasons here - ground services - not
                  minded to move part of the Inquiry to Liverpool. Will consider
                  later.

                  - first part - what and why
                  - second part - future.

           King                    - application to give statements direct to the
                                     Inquiry and not through the police.

                  Lord Justice Taylor - don't have to go through the police, but has
                  to be a comparing of information, but can present direct evidence.

          King                     -   want assurance statements will only be used for
                                       the Inquiry, not civil claims.


                  Lord Justice Taylor - point will be considered.    All witnesses
                  expenses will be paid.  10.30 Monday 15th May.




TB3AAB/PGT/5
                      f!                  €-4




^ < C W S\Vj

                       ^VjU^Uw-vcy <xV)<>dV( ^b fZUVL ^>/VvA.S *tuv M-4

   ^A/vt/v ^utA SiflW}ct\\ QV.^^O "\Vac^A>-^ «                                  *^aj W       xaK.

   ^V)yecVwv\ \ b WUI ctf>\i.i-^ ^UV a \isV                                           v\<\W j P

   VcWvs^o W                 <&aV^/v* A         c m . a.   WMUMcMKfcl. Quc^fc,

            ^V^<L&V\,VWy ^o\Al%Wii GAVj»n)\X                                       'H* koUXoAjWi-<c
       ^VSaoW*             cl\A.d      o V»Vcaa.
                                               w\j«X. ^\-ft       \JVu,\*MP                   W>Wv

   ^O C O ^O w X dN   ~ V \^ C c A t     \v <    4 V c & g 0 - e < i Cc f U ^ V b C ti|< ^      CAW>


  Q u c ^ p 'S o 'V U y X ' V^CAi CcU/\ ^ i L          W oui            ^ w | a H c \ 'V W          ^ a c ^ .,

             "*Wcv,tAvA. ^ cXs           vvv    c>.wvVvcv.|a,Vv«v'.

                                                            H   qjm^      ‘S^cgjyeUn^




    W Y v W ^ v% \ m ^ V/\vi\oV>v^ avLcl a l w i a ^                %n      ‘^><iW(jt ecu ; ^-2.<rv cW w/ife^
                 PROCURATOR FISCAL’S OFFICE
                 44 Buccleuch St. Dumfries DG1 1 BE
                 Telephone 63 034 (STD 0 3 8 7 ) Box No. 628 Rutland Exchange
IN O t ’ f M t
                 James T. MacDougall Procurator Fiscal




                                                          Your reference


                                               Aj         Our reference     JTM/LT
                                               ■-/r6.

                                                          Date   14 March 1989.


Dear Miss Pitcher

Lockerbie Air Disaster.

I have to thank you for your letter of 6 March, 1989
advising, me if your intention to publish a book about
Lockerbi|> in order to raise funds for the Lockerbie Air
Disaster AjftaealV and requesting a list of the nam,es of
                 ch would be entered on a memorial page.
                   • *-
^       cSWeared your request with all                        those       concerned
and how*en&)*0 se the list. v
                     _   ' i t -
In conclusion may I wish y o u „ eyery success with your
forthcoming book.

Youris sincere! v




                                    Lockerbie Incident Control Centre
                                                           Dryfe Road
                                                            Lockerbie




                                                                                      J
T ELEPH O N E:                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE P O L ^ ^
SH EFFIE LD (0742) 768522                    PO LIC E HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                  SN IG H IL L
FAX: (0742) 523243                               SH EFFIE LD S3 8LY


P W R IG H T CBE OSt J CBIM
C H IE F CONSTABLE


Dr S L Popper                                18 April 1989
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET



          JkA    h
                     '   / "

I refer to your recent conversation with Superintendent■
Sleath concerning the release of the deceased persons from
the Hillsborough incident to their respective next of kin,
following the adjournment of the inquest.

After consultation with Professor Usher, I have no objection
to this course of action.
                                        Sheffield City Council

                     HEALTH AMD CONSUMER
                           SERVICES                                                                 l   m    if


                                                                 D. W. Purchon, MIEH, AM InstW M
                                                                 Director o f Health and Consumer Services
 Hi/jl t& o m u £ tf       h z r m &JLTp& i z e P o / t          Town Hall Chambers
                                                                 1 Barkers Pool
                       I    h   t   i   X   jxA   a^-eje_p,C     Sheffield S I 1EN
              M
tv€_   s/Lfe-w-^JA              C>C_£U-^-£            (cKSUlJ^   Telephone (0742) 734611
                                                                 Telecom Gold 76:LM X 877 (Env. Health)
                                                                              76:LM X 878 (Consumer Serv.)
                                                                 Telex 54243 SHFLIB G


                                                                 with compliments
W est M id la n d s P o lic e
           POLICE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
           PO B O X 5 2   L L O Y D HOUSE
           COLMORE CIRCUS QUEENSWAV
           BIRM INGHAM       B46NQ
           TELEPHONE       021 2 3 6 5 0 0 0
           TELEX    337321




        4 W IT H C O M P L IM E N T S
                                                                            i
                                            t y          M             h/



                                           fu ^ -   {J ff*       f »   J V


BREAKDOWN OF DECEASED AGES




Ages have been broken down into groups: viz: under 17, 17-24, 25-34, 35-44,
45-54, 55-64, 65-70.

An analysis of the incidence of death within these groups is as follows:-

                                                             %
         U17                 14                         14.24
         17-24               45                         47.37
         25-34               22                         23.16
         35-44               10                         10.53
         45-54                2                          2.10
         55-64                1                          1 .05
         65-70                1                          1 .05



                             95                              100.00




The average age of the deceased is 24 years (viz: 24.4)

The youngest victim was 10 years.
The oldest victim was 67 years.

A separate analysis of the critical 17-24 age group reveals a tendancy
within it of deaths between the ages of 17-21. A table is produced
overleaf (Fig. 1)

N.B.   All ages calculated as of 15.4.89
17-24 Age Group       (Fig 1)


   17 yrs                 8
   18                     7
   19                     9
   20                     3
   21                     7
   22                     3
   23                     4
   24                     4

   Total              45

                              17-21 yrs = 34 (35.78%)


The combined total of 59 deaths under the age of 25 (i.e. U17 group plus
17-24 group) represents 62.10% of the total.


D17 Age Group

  16 yrs             3
  15                 5
  14                 4
  13                  1
  12
  11
  10



                    14




M R Sawers
Inspector 3451
                                                               17.4.89.


PBESS STATEMENT.


The Coroner of South Yorkshire West District, Dr. S.L.Popper would

like to associate himself with all the expressions of sorrow which

have been made to the families in the tragic loss of life which

occurred as a result of an incident at Hillsborough football ground.

Arrangements are in hand, and it is anticipated that Inquests

will be opened into the deaths of the deceased on Tuesday

the 18th of April 1989 at 2p.m. at the Coroner’s Court, Medico

Legal Centre, Sheffield and will continue as necessary on

Wednesday the 19th of April, again commencing at 2p.m.

Arrangements have been made so that the opening of these

Inquests can be undertaken without the need for the attendance

of any family members.    The purpose of the procedure being

to enable the necessary disposal orders to be issued, so

that the families may be able to make funeral arrangements to

suit their convenience.

The Coroner's Officers are being contacted by the bereaved

families who are being informed of the arrangements.

It is the Coroner'8 intention to adjourn the Inquest to a date to be

determined, and appropriate steps will be taken to keep interested

parties informed of the date and time of the resumed hearing.

The Coroner would also like to express his appreciation of the help

and support which he has received from a large number of people,

which has enabled the identification and post mortem examinations

to be undertaken quickly and efficiently.


The Coroner would also like to recognise the work which has

been done by many private individuals as well as the caring associations,

statutory or voluntary who have given much of themselves to comfort

and support the relatives.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OUR
HOUR REF                                                                     SOLICITORS NAME                                       S O L I C I T O R S AODRESJ                            T E L E P H O N E NO.                           ACKN0WLEDC
                                                                            ^^VQ-Atfehi^-lWg<^tsa wdftt#^                                     £>T*rjL.,>-S G.O N £ \jQ '&ffi,                                             T H E I R REF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DATE
                           i_/>-iV\               l(cS j ! o                                                                  d ''j*5 *k > f t-t£, ?V*e>t£i2'*«c . ,r        *
    H„ 003                                                                                                                  w '^ m r n g s B ^ v im ^ d            u
I                  — ..Eka&arM -jg»BW3*s£Si-
          oo*7

         Q o U r \ :g >
                                                                                                                                                                                       f Q5v                          Xff-M
     2
                                                                          Baileys                 law &                           17 Queen Square
                       ’   Mrs INGER SHAH                                 G illP . - n -                                                                                               01 837 5455
                           r+KkHzcfvK* .-®75i                                                                                     Lond o n ; ____ _                                                                   v    /a j s          “ 6.89 ^
                                                                         r r .Vi f T ^ W ’^ ' C                   °
                            tH,<^.::*;.^ k,•&CO0fia>jeV«tf<f " E            o M S T i ^    c.£>   o   &   7                       WC1N 3RH                                              ov s.-&n do>\
                              fe'VAag/cA-        <t5fa
                                  12-±3Kg&*ai^..-»       .-
                                                 *J7"»»* *j~fse
                                                              »-t
                                                                f in*
                                                                  (ft#<■•    b*G t-& >fi.r4 kO\>£>OrJ         cue I V'   ll+ i.
                                                                                                                                                                                        o t       3fo - ' I t <s>&
          Col o'                               ' Z > [ & j t e>) \ s ^   *1 •£icv£<zd /©/«,Atc                     I^
                                                                                                                                                                                       f c v eVlaVa ~>\ner            >ur(\\L g\^.,
     3 '■'                 Grgvc^-H                                      6-    ^V-V-                                                   <,1e        ».v-- y                             Jg.5   I       U t. ^ > \     ~VS{
                                                                                                                                  L\     \\A8l                                         F 0S\ "XO'S. <g<o^>g>
                           David G. Rimmer                                   Brighouse,                   Jones                    28 Derby Street,
                                                                            -&...C q ,                                             Ormskirk                                            0695 73202
                                                                                                                                  Lancs,                                              F6'o ^ 5
                            ~7~7>T~- =t|=i /^                                                                                     L3 9 ?RY
         00^3:
    5 /                    Colin M. Ashdroft
                                     iShcr                               William H. Lill                                          9 The Cross,
                                                                                                                                  Xi.ymm_________                                      092575 3170/5668                   CRF/JJ
                                                                                                                                  Cheshire
                                                                         afL~ihs.sin*)K/     An/ie^Kofc^
                              ^ *r> .         -is~x[-i / ‘g q       v / G©l-±n Wats&n
                                                                                                                                  13 Bold- S-treet             ^     ^     ytcfTz&i      c»o( oi»7 i«-i I
                           Ian David Whelan                                 S clIici tors                                         W a r r i n a t on          £r         JL'iPoot-      0-9-2-B— 5-7-i2j^ 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SJ’TiT— C'smfer                         25.7.89
                                                                                                                                  WAl^JLfhJ-’                A <53                    ~p~~7s~Sl


      Od(j .;jf, Fjrm suxj^
    7 v/*#" James R. Hennegay/                                            Linskills                                               Harrington House,
                                                                          Lolxci Lubi                                             ■H-ag^-iEhgt-e.^- Street,                 ' :         051 236 2224                 GT/MJ/Civil 25.7.89 «
                                                                                                                                  iniverp
                                                                                                                                  Liverpool                                            Nt,
     -0 0   C?                                                                                                                M.         9QA
                           David Hawley                                  E Rex Makin & Co                                                                                              051 709 ^^91
              >                                                                                                                 tfhitechapel
                                                                                                                              -3biverpoo3r— --------- — ---                                                          T-
 cot                                                                                                                               1     IHQ^
t v =
    t                                                                                                                                                                                                4>T-7y
    H.OO3 James Gary Aspinall
_2          __
                                                                                                                                                                    tor
                                                                                                                                               g±=3ir—| JU'jjjjsgpnv
     o G ' / '
                                                                                                                                                                                      ^ QtoV             i0 ,-\oc\
      / ,# i s  o t r t ^ f l/
                   a
       1/                                                                Gorna & Co. Solicito rs                                        Virginia House,
JJ1. V&# Dayid S. Brown                                                                                                                 Cheaps id p.,                                  061 832 3651                  ATP/JL/Brow              ♦7.89
                                                                                                                                        King S t r e e t ,
                                                                                                                                       -Manchester M? 4n r                            iLoka__
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ACKNOWLEDGE
 m iM.r                  DE C EASED NAME                                                   SOLIC I T O R S N ^ L                           S OL IC I T O R S A D D R E S S                                                   T E L E P H O N E NO,                   T H E I R REF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DATE
                     ^                 ak ifalM Ajdv ,Ag ' a > l&i/' iO he. fc'hiiCfSg-L^jt t>-1
sgv              ;                                -Ha*Jc-      CX*4L«-f.fr & .p lAjHjw y
Yf, 0 0 3                                                                             a                                                    (if^            L                  L        *L<Jl
                     U    ^    r       AJW v               ^.Tc*-rrv^0.                    fi. C(ctc/-i.Cv        '''TU.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =yx                 <J

                     H l h ac^l' ^             fc#   S/HrtS        /s/a/<?p                                                               1^6            - x d c ^

 H ,0o >                                                                                                                                   if 0         £trol»L?c^                               o r K-\
o O b i Z                              I" W r ^          l4        ig                       U                 cj«■  1          —
                                                                                                             ___        O_                          c,'(00______________ __
                                                                                                                                           L   X \J C .V j^OCP
                              f, ,-n        te j *[& *{ ''i'\o 5 /A ) o s #               ^OKti
                                                                                                                                           ■ L z o -        t f Q o .
06 b                           tT f r T .      r s f e j ^ G               £.<} ' ,
                                                                                                                                          (JJ-hhTZ- < ^ trr^ 5 > £ rU .
                                                                                                                                   1/^
       13            tn u rj                    iM A fa Z .                                     lM t L £ M A * jH U £ : % n Q # £ Kt                             f o p   U          ./ -                                   o 5 v .:-..              LS-^lY.                                   1

                                                                                                               U \}C :& H O A lL                                                                                       F C-fa\                S     O *"-\to
                                   ^-r^ >— K j 8/ ^ r
©Ola
    14                    o g j -C- QMug-C^I                                                                                             Voi4 vT^ceAA Pe.                           ;^v\) gg_fbol-                         QgVL.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TF o £ \ "Z-S^o               O ’"t-\(io
OOto                       A/m   £ n [ i                       {   ^   y     '                                                             11/13 Victoria Street,
                         Carl Rimmer                                                      Silverman-Livermore                              Liverpool____________                                                             051 227 1871                            DRF/S b |r , ^ ^ ^ 1*19 .5.89
                                                                                                                                           fe2 5QQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ffc^pV            ~Z-SS C Z-vl,
oob         l/           T - f i n          i<,j ^ J « r t \
                                                                                           Knight & Sons                                   31 I ronmarket,
                     Paul B. Murray                                                                                                                                                                                          0782 619225                             JGT/SKB                  16.5.89
                                                                                          -So.,1-i-c.it - a r - S ----------               N e w ea stX e ^widef ^ L ymeT -
                                                                                                                                           Staffordshir e,
                                                                                                                                           ST.5 .1.RIi-                                                                    ^ & -><& 2- ioi, V\\&

                     Z p L k tfp L h                                                      David Phillips,                                  268 Stanley Road,                                                                                                         [RH/LM/D4 4 7/               6.6.89
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           051 922 5525                             j)p.vnns idp.
       17            ,_______ D p . von r idfi .                                          4arr i.I &-WhaIley-                             JMew— Siu^ajicL-----                             _
                                                                                                                                          Bootle,
                                                                                                                                          -Mex-seyside ,— L2X)— 3ER-                                                       FOS\          C\'LTL~      %   T-C \ %

                                                                                           Ca.^i  <Xr\       t*r«c^L                           07      'To                                                                 0 5'\       CL^        00-77             C«2C j
 f i o o S
ocfo.                                                                                     C ob t^<2^-- __________                                                                                                                                                   *fl. C F \ !-'<?■>
CO"l 18
                                                                                                                                          L e a                   0
                                                                                          h'/Z-.SL.P. t* . m & £ < < ,                                                                                                 ^           fc“3\          S<Q Ip~V"Z-A.
                                            -few 9uton*u*\ t^akac
                                                                                                                    7^"/
 C C S
                                                                                          f d s J ~
                                                                                                      -r                       ,
                                                                                                                                         ii          t- h ( x U * C T               LOexff&b~>             $ S ( £ 7 f '     O ' l Q   6~~   ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S ^ D ~ 1 9 ‘4-        A u j K ^jcQ ><
 __ 1Q
                                                                                                                                         ^ O tis^O O s J                 {JO O rX                   iZ 12.
                                                                                                                                                                                        : 7 « u ___                        f f i r l 01 ^ 6 -       S $ 9-85
                                                                                                                                         lO-Q ^O'J THtSP-rJ’                                fo'ft‘olv~OC)'v^
 00*3
    2CL-                                                                                                                                 fe fe & e T C ,         “S S        IU .      IV 2 .W                                                     ^ tC.C

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           f o ^>pg,          x-^b
                                                                                                                                                                                                           OUR
                     *    *     t                                                                                                 1                                                                        ACKNOWLEDGE
 R REF              DECEASED NAME                                   SOLICITORS NAl^- .                 SOLICITORS ADDRESS        ^ TELEPHONE NO.                               THEIR REF
                                                                                                                                                                                                           DATE
                                                                                                                                                                       i
 O O f o           P-sr>     ■                                  ^                                      Pearl Assurance House,
                                       Whittles                                                 N                                 061 228 2061                                 DMH/TL/F399 9 ^ 5.7.89
                                                                                                       23 Princess Street,        L^O kA '..Tmo lowb
 :1         , / Vincent M. Fitzsimmo [HS^VCr’
                                            CbM V c-c                                           /

                                     1^0*0 W>-C^H                                               >.     Albert Square,             ZMrisi Otebb 5 5
                                                                                                                                                                           Ct-sCs^SFifSVV^
                                     LAM^toO-©                                                   \                                                                                                        '*r" -
                \_*?3C\.      /   I Ct^fe^>ALnr&                                                /      Manchester M2 4F.R         F Oictnc «5vov ©'U
                                                                      f?0ol-t4A^ ■*—                   \2"Z_
                                                                                                                                      0   <f                *    11[
                                                                                                                                                                           ■rMifr&j M,\<r                    is— 1s e n
  2-     O Q w

                                                                                                       f\<^<L-                    f 0 5 \ 'Wo              '^c^5
                                                                                                       131    & AA
   £>Ob              p - m - s n p / t q ^                       f*£©£. uu iOov^                       11/13 Victoria Street,
 ■3 ^               Peter A. Burkett                             S i l v e r m a n - L i v e r m o r e I.ivprphnl                     051 2 23 1871.-._                            nRF/SR/.l*AUS <3 19.5.89
                                                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                         ^AHe> S<To Vk(S o sj          fc2 5QQ
                                                                1 r                                                                   t b < 5 \          CT-\W                                            iP*'
                  ...■“.                                        \       — r*■)KK»
        oofe                                                                                           102 Whitby Road,                                                                                            %
             #HENRY C. ROGERS                                    Walker, Smith & Way F.1 1 <=Qm<=>r-(=> Pr>T"-(:                  051 355 1845                                     JFI/B                         6.6.89
                                                                                                       L65 OAG                    FO«sv 'bS'i \T.i5'V
                                                                                                                                                                                 I ^P*»oJ\t\ tfVU             ' %>•'■-
                   / A/^ -^ n M e q J/"                                                                30 Sherborne Square,                                                SDM/JS/
                   Joseph J. Clark                                  Mace & Jones                                                  051 480 7000                             H 2 5 2 8 1 .001/                 2.5.89
1
f& o ' e & r r '
                                                                                                       Hnvfnn,
                                                                                                       Merseyside,                                                         Golchrist
                                                                                                       Ti36 91JR                  'Fos^ i-eH-cv \cvS^>
                   fin                  f W u7" "
                         g e p o i & ^ ’^ f                                                                                                                                i   ? .1    // t ,       ^ .
                  /<•             , -c 'A  fit f .
                                                                                                                                  o-T/ ■2 2 ;
                                                                                        »J                                                                                                                          Ar-
 . ,.   vAfVi*.—i f l i 6 * X A      ^         ftjtjtt,             ^■J y s i       }        fchJv^.                                                                           y   4   x   ^   2A
                                                                                                                                  F 0 5 V T-'bk
                    &■   <A rtfc*--/     1"?*V-f\ 0
  !*- OOS                           C-ii                                        ^        ^              [•4cti-c- V w.Y               oi                                   1Se\cfiW-SC-.\T0:
 ;7 OOSo                                                                                                i—            J—U1 L                                               (                                     •T'"' '
            s'Uc^'C^
 _aei^t-——1------- ^5------------ -                                                                                                                                                             _


                                                                                                       L-OrtioM -                 ^ C\ % b\        0 % ' \ ' U

                                                                                                        U/C'ZA - Z u c - ~
    £30<b                       n - ’i'cxc>                         Coyne Learmonth                     135 Liverpool Road,
                         Steven Robinson                            Solicitors                          Great Crosby,             051 931. 2 841                               ACL/LMJ/HI                  25.7.8^
                                                                                                        Liverpool,
                                                                                                        L23 5TE M                 f OS''          K'bv SV^a,
                ^          ''ft?fW^vum^j L e e s , Lloyds &                                            Castle Chambers,
             Eric Hankin?<««>lv&ouefo               Wh iI-1py                                          fsc;t-]o Pf foa-|;             051 227 3541                         FJR/NRF/                       1^0.5.89
 :.r- v ^p.'                                                                                                                                                               HANKIN
                                                                                                       Liverpool,                 F 05v                 _l-vv*oO
                                                            y                                          L? QTJ
             P- a\ .                                  tf/
     ODb .                                                                                              11/13 Victoria Street,                                                     DRF/SB             1^49.5.89
            Alan    Johnston                                        Silverman-Livermore                 T iim rnnnl                    051 221 1871
1X 0
   z
       i/
      ± 4 -

                                                                                                        &2 5QQ
                                                                                                                                  f       c*5V "UiS C ^
R REF
                             t
                            DECEASED NAME                                   SOLICITORS N A ^ P
                                                                                                                                                                          <t                                                                            OUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ACKNOWLEDGE
                                                                                                                          SOLICITORS ADDRESS                                     TELEPHONE NO.                          THEIR REF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DATE
H.poS (4e*\cV^ ^^v«i^va_5                                   &o.fl<£   _-    Cu.nIe - r   !   L   i*-v   *—               f-O 6o<             XI                                 0   £ \     5^6             4T6Z~
 ■>i c o i o '
r 1 o©n_                                                                                                                 1^5                          Gp»_/c(e**-S       (Of1
                                                                                                                            rl<W*-A
                                                                  ?.p,                                                   u i
                        V - m o ^ j f    tX '   <io                        lt>vc&#i>z>                       Qoris>M)

3 2                     Ufci-rw M c ^ £ n r w                              ^vi C i T 0 & * 3                            j
                                                                                                                        ’zfLfs^   SS?<->.^<3»5, A-<                  ^      cs l -- #*? -03>2>-^                        h   *z   \   k   ' T
                                                                                                                        (IT-
                                                                                                                                                                            ^OSA         Z."2.-^S,
      O Q (   q   ,
                            James P. Delaney                                D.P. Roberts Hughes 25 Allport Lane,
33                                                                          & Denye             Rrnmhni-niigh                                                               051 334 6226                              3ER/LMC/                  11=5.7.89
                                                                                                L62 7HH                                                                  s'c f=S>                                      DELANEY
                       -lm              / to{t c      (     ----- —
ITco3r
i/,60»                                                                                                                   0/(5" Av/erTcvv                                        e>^ 1     W T - C
3A.oal­
   ec i                                                                                                                  ntr&tc^siclc-                                   |VC <aM
                                                                                                                         C2/,.
o o \ o ^               .   ^./n   Q /«/
                                                                           Joseph A. Jones &                            Barclays Bank Chambers,
                            Christine Jones                                                                             Jlpw Street-                                            0524 63371                              JK/WR                         25 .7 % 9
                                                                           Co. Solicitosr                               Lancaster LAI 1EH
  oc>5
fr.
                                                                                         rLtfite-ujS ^ ^O
3 6 <=oto                   UtA/iw          'cyr^M^                                                                      £ ^ ( G 7     Q c l a ^                                C>^(      2-3 4
Jueo~v-                                                                                                                 L ,' \/-e^r |7od C                                                                            UOlS 1X?                              tv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ------- «t-i".......
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ''
                                                                                                                        J-'Z—     ' ■a a-?'"                                f C5^                       o <rv'~\'b
  OCfo                                                                     Canter Levin & Berg  46/48 Stanley Street,                                                                                                 u £ ~ H l ~ $ e f CrLoveCCK

3Vffe: Ian T. Gldver                                                       Solicitors          Jjiverponl ,                                                                 051 236 8574                               lf   /k b ) , ^ ^ “2-6.                     89
                                                                                                LI 6AL                                                                     fcSV           ■Z-'Sb U"V\
 ©Ofa
3 8 ^ Christopher Edwards                                                  tfalker. Smith & W a y                       _102 Whitby R o a d r                               nsi                     1R/1C;            JFI/B                     J L8.5.89
                                                                                                                         Ellesmere Port,
                   f-                   "                 ------j — - —                                                 .L 6 5 OBtt ,.                                     C 05 \                       -\ ~ L ^ \
 OC*o / P - / V ) . V ^ ( l                                                                                              11/13 Victoria Street,
IS iZ Peter F. Tootle                                                      iilverman-Livermore                           L i verpool,                                      n s 1 991                187 1             D R F / S B j ,Ltc,,t J.9.5.89
                                                                                                                         L2 5QQ                                                                                                  v       1r - —    -----------
                                                                                                                                                                           f ObV           "2-SS        0 ~ 2 -V (e   nft.P \uD
                   ~~
                        70 " fT\---
                                 r
                                    i/i£r\/>-/i-------
                                                       iyw -M ew -vfv--^                                                                           C e< o
LQO ob                 ? g X a .( L     P 'lc O n io ^ i ^ k u                                                          ^l€/f            k\\5Eft?D<P^

                                                                                                                                                                            O f^V         T -S S        0 "2 -V b            \ UO


                  11
                   1
                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OUR
                     J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ACKNOWLEDGE
< REF               DECEASED NAME                                                SOLICITORS N A t ^   SOLICITORS ADDRESS                                              ^ ^TELEPHONE NO.                       THEIR REF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DATE

                                                                       ,/                             Elvv/n House,                                                    ?6S~\X. <gXV set-                                                          %
    ,0 %                 f . r r \
                                                                                Crombie Collins
                Eric Hughes                                                       Solicitors          9 Market P l a c e ,                                              0572 823643                         JRC/WP                   26.4.89
1
                                                                                                      Uppingham,
                                                                                                      Leicester-chirp. LEI'S 9QH
  ©Cfa,         ?-<*■ Si^T                             -«\©                                           135 Liverpool Road,                                                                                                                %0      ^
                                                                                Coyne Learmonth
                                                                                                      r.rpa )■ Crosby         .... 051 931 2841                                                             ^CL/LMJ/HI                   2 5 .   7 .89
                                                                                Solicitors            Liverpool,                   fbSV ^."bv
                             "a a H s y j f   — Cx'o|<<1g f----:                                      T.SM STE
 It- C?Oj                                                                                                                                 A y * f u z t ^ f t o
/.3 OO1®         (a f'                                                                                                                                                                                                                     «:. •■
                                                                                                      (2-^*r                 (C f r & J t i A L -   H - Z Z i c r r                                         0 t i / 4 . r t Z
— ~oo~*—
                    ff)                            t > u J » )tfx) ^
                                                                                                      ? - w      U       U                                             ^(DbV                   b ~ \ O c\
                                                                                Rich & Carr               P.O. Box 15,
                    Carl D. Hewitt                                                                                                                                      0533 538021                         DMR/SKB                      25.7.89
i4 o ^ r
                                                                                                          24 Rutland Street,                                           ? C C5            53iVti
                f ti\£e»~rtoG > i              G   j i x m   *.*,   3v\ci1y-\
H.oo >                                                                                           (L -C, ft«—                       0^1 a2-~7 3 5%^                                                          P'S<cyv5<v,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e |^oMfo€fa-
                 Kr»cit^(c<.s                         L<*-s                   UAiI^e-^'-A                 ca


45 O O K o                                            L'foC.CJTSTCS Of (O             (=1in                                       foSV XT-~r "Z-l+'icO
    OO't fftOfc Or •~ b 0 ' * r * & ^   'j'&
           eoo.«ke&<8*«s3£e> u>t'tw ^£s-e««.pv*^ Of\ov<b ^ ? \ U U i Po'tc,xen-                  Li v j^o? C         l            OS * ■                                                                    ?a^tc^-&QNW>e&
Zjyv vs fif, *iw £. \c» (\3EVt                vs w\\ 5 c e & u f-, <VT-/.fuAuitaaL. tv’Z.iisSu£, L i                             ^C<5"V '2-Sb ie^S's
                                2'77/§,fl ,//                                                                                                                                                                        \
   OOb x Carl Brown
                   f  m
                                                      Widdows Solicitors                         P.O. Box 1,
                                                                                                 2nd Floorf south wing)          094 2 673311                                                                AL/SB         25.7.89
4 6 i/
                                                                                                 Turnpike House,                 <r 0<\tv'£- T-'o\~\ b D
                                                                                                 Market Street, Leigh WN7 1D7,
                                                                                                u\\b Vivc,TO«u<P>  i r J P o O ^
                                                     - ^ v u x x a ^ ^
^ !a       Owir»                      t)t.CfTV-^      \ iiNiSX)
                                                              ^ ^ vUl V v : I-""                    ^        ^<£1                                                                                               t i L u ^ k
                                                                                                                 )
                                                                                                                                  f        T-^S CVV<o

H .ooj                                                                           V^soLwi ti^. (       -2.£c      ^rortlt*^
                                                                                                               cl.                         —                            o- f \      ^53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 061 Cot. G Z -i \
4 8 o o{°                                                                       .".
                                                                                  S&V.a.—
                                                                                     a-tVe_-......            -                                                                                                                          &■
                                                                                                      fyooCi<                                                                                               b
    con                                                                                               i-ivtr^<?c> V                                                                                                 v          V
                                                                                                      L                                                          fCC                             ......
  oob,                   ^     -ft     •      <anf-i]fF\               \   K                          11/13 Victoria Street,
49 > X                                                                           S ilverman-Livermore Liverpool/                                                       051 2 21S 1871                           DRF/SB               1        19.5.89
                                                                                                      L2 5QQ
                                                                                                                                                                       oSV         T - S ' S        b
                F'Ot o ^ j            Mfi-h-o
                                      ‘                  *     <oe>(
                                                                                                      io faiS^WiS'ri's vut~u-»
                                                                                  ^tmKizs                          kt-AM                                               t>j5/                                H C T f t r t   (s^tt    §                   ^
^n r n * \ n   i 1& ( Z . l I
                -                     &       E ) £ d d                                                  Q. V i                                                                     ( & $ £     u i q c ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                                       < f O Z A     k u * ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OUR
                                                                                                                                                                                               1»
    R REF       deceased                     name                                 SOLICITORS NAi^^                          SOLICITORS ADDRESS                                                        TELEPHONE NO.                               THEIR REF                   ACKNOWLEDGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DATE
                  /?. /n     *5« ^
                                                                                                                            Turret H o u s e ,
               Kevin D. Williams                                                  Goffey & Co.                                                                                                       07048 72156                                  RBF/N JT/W                  29.6.8#
                                                                                                                            3 Chapel Lane,
                                                                                                                            Formby,                                                                  fe"iCV^        " i 3 \ e\ C " Z - ~

                                                                                                                            Merseyside, L37 4DL.                                                                                                   ) u c / t f T C Z
               4>   . m    ■ < ^ y f '   ls\ie>l^e\                           UsTTjatffion   ‘va/j.'i ieo   n-^i ■   «’
                                                                                                                      er                                          Q < S     6   f Z c o Q E   R. I          Q Q < C >         R . Q        exp    *SB^SEH/
                                                                                                                            3-^-erotiby Road , ^ t                                             o                                                                                  fe
                 SIMON BELL                                                       Wall Si Co .                                                                                                        051 90-8— 6-SUU                             A61 6R/RP.1 1                d .‘i RQ
     Q o ^
                                                                                                                            Hu!, til vvaterxoo^,) 0 e S S Z r O o
                                                                                                                                                                                                     f oSA t\t^<,\ o o o 5
                          ( s . m

               STUART THOMPSON                                                                                              lc Preston New Road,                                                                                                  PW/DD/                       7.6.89
                                                                              Paul Watson & Co-                                                                                                      0 704 2 3 ? "*? 3
                                                                                                                            Ch u r c h t o w n ,
                                                                              Solicitors                                                                                                             $30                                          SHEFFIELD
                                                                                                                            Southport           PR9 8 PB

                                                                              Richard Dawson & Co                           Lauren C o u r t , Wharf.Road,
                Anthony P.. Kelly                                                                                                                                                                       061 962 8157                              RD/CB/K001                  2 6,4.89
                                                                                                                            Saie r
                                                                                                                            Cheshire,                                                                < £ O i c \ ‘\b“2- SOTO'S-
                P . f7)      < X ^ s ^ .       o > u f         1\   Q . & ^                                                 M33 2AF
                                                                              Rich & Carr                                  P.O. Box 15,
               Nicholas Hewitt                                                                                                                                                                       0533 538021                                   DMR/SKB                    2 5 %*.,89
                                                                              Solicitors                                   Assurance House,
                                                                                                                           24 Rutland Street,                                                        F o s “^> S b - n v ^
               ^ C d u /                     t x       ^   ^   h    o
                                                                                                                           Leicester LEI 9GX
W-. 0 0 3
                Qc^Jv U;l\; J                              tktW
C 6 fi©^
^   oCi&                                                                          f M "[l'L S(uQggW*W                                         Irfvb       \J i < ^ T C ' t ? t A         T                    51   3l-}      tS“f I                                |H         !»>■
                                                                                                     l5:                                                                                             fosv T^S'S ctvto

                                                                                                                           \C(.C     C3.u.i^rt^,          O r   1i M —                                                       ‘^ U                                             %r”-"
                                                                              ^    $>o(-£<s^     -L-   ^0                                                                                            &<T(
« t 7                                                                                                                      1— 1v/<,r^do                                                                                                          ^^Cvbj      ( ?   n&b        1-6    ' Z > < \

                                                                                                                           /-tj       6 n<^                                                          p- OS v -2-"'lO ~*-o*\S

                    fi/n -                         l
                                                                              Silverman-Livermore                           11/13 Victoria Street,                                                    051 227 1871                                DRF/SB                 1k   ‘20.-6,89
^    n p X a
                 Paul Clark
                                                                                                                             Liverpool,
                                                                                                                             L2 500-                                                             ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                 9 0*3'. ^ 5                  o V\t>
~     GOb>                                                                                                                 (aJ*HTk c^+a             C^          < M             C ic
$9     ^       G i O K O C r - i         H o D r i & t          y v R   .rJ £-#£>. H Q K i r J      T                                          L i u s J Z      P o & l ~   Li     t                 (X /- ^ 0 9 -                           /
                                                                            x^Ci-vvOvO V v O ^ ^ N A o ^                                                                                             pe?sv nos 8 <cr&s»
                                                                                                                                                                                                     OS\ v x ^ vs -* v.
                            ^ '. ‘A                    ^           ■           Poo                 0                       1^6                        0    ^'VA^_                                                                                                        W''
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0^1    5~V&
               C & Z f G        rz P m R J W * * 6                                                                         L , 'J-^r^oo   L                                                          :OSV   X'lO z c a S                         “ wJc-lhl fiftlL.        v<5 -         Z   ' % * \


                                                                                                                           M3       o A C -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *• I
        (
                     r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OUR
                                                                                                                                                                                      1                                                                                                   ACKNOWLEDGE
  R REF             DECEASED NAME                                           SOLICITORS N A ^                                        SOLICITORS ADDRESS                                      TELEPHONE NO.                                              THEIR REF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DATE
                                                                                                                                   ''Zvvc^      (00   (~                                                                                           totvf^v #tit\^sK
  M .>0 0 3 ,’                                                          dc<v*S^_y f                          ^ €,r^
                     ^ 11(
                         .‘ic“v'i-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 ot               i*.
       00 v                7.-vC:<S.cV
                                                                                                                                   S>ice l ^ * ^ e ~ r S J L J ~ —
                                                                                                                                                      c    c
                                                                                                                                                          ;AJ2— W(V         SA/lC           0&                                                                                             -I*'..
 nrrwa ? ^ l<4 '? «*v
                                                                                                                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                                                    1if-6            CXtc         £ 0 />i>-€—             FO^I               2-70          O - o c i f ^
          Bo-rr^ .wrlos/'CV'"                                               Qo c?( ^ - 0                .                           Lti/^rfoc, (                                                                                                                                           lS * -ft*\
C®2. Vorf
                                                                                                                                    ci 5
                                                                            /?                 ,                                             c ~ ?                                         o r - t         2 2 - 7       Z * " ? L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   f ^ A - f :'   J £*H,#>.J,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          * #
(^>3 ftOlrD         Af e-4%/                         ■                  ■        t    I                     .'   &   y       fp.                                                          F OS'- -l/Sb 2-VV\                                        y   %




                ^          P„/r>      < s > - i h [ ,:G   ‘ill i f '
                                                                                                                                   11/13 Victoria Street,
                "Sarah L . Hicks                                       3ilverman-Livermore                                                                                                  051 221 1871                                            DDRF/SB                           il.r 19 .5.8?
                                                                                                                                   Liverpool,
                                                                                                                                   L2 5QQ                                                 fc>5 \ a ^ 5 o ^ ' fi

       oofo
                    William R. Pemberto n                                            as above                                                   as above                                           as above                                             as above ^                            19.5.89
f»5      i/
                                                                                                                                                                                          PCS'.             -L-<=,<^          0 2 _\W

             (3/n          1/                                          a+(eiSfDtS>ff(c€ 'THOKrtt5 V-C0
  ,6
(jr    Onlrt -fWOHtf5- § - P © *                                       Af 6 > f ) t i K        <3 S                                — >7                                                    O ' C       1      feo--?            M-qq»
                                                                       c^f^ewg i z v i o s t s       ^

                                                                       P><(Hc£AJU-FTf>Q ' 0 0 < R . £ & K
                                                                                                                                                                                          f-©S                bb<o
                                                                             I~~i4l       Ca       -J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !5,'S"'f         A    h   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -'C r u g y * * * * ' ?
(^7 OOfo            /^S4T|/*.-'>"'J d j ^ v t r t - g f  -?«.> ' ' T -"
                                                        /.
                                                         ^1           ^7^ ^ i> ^                                         M .* , "                              L   I   J   d   ‘- 3          < a ~ ± £ j £ j t e , x 't j                    £ $                                                ^kgp1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '"'
                        J ..       ..... ^ _ .
                                                                                                                                                                                          f CSV T.'VO "2-1 <4-^\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /
                         * i    4                                                                                                  ii   //U          ^'jf /*■<•*                                                                                                                      m   m     .

La Offib             iv^//^  £ &/*C A h                                /t    ( o T A r r ^     6   > < J e / ^       0   r                                                                    ^i           d~^-      /        ) ~~i '?   1                                            » T.,.-.

                       r .tt\   CiO,^X ^K\c\n                                                                                                /I                                           ^ C?Sv            "Z-bS             O 6-\(o
 H 00 5 W r X                   Ge^TrJL                                                                                            AS          c*< ue-'t ^ao<K^e.
Uq 0 0 b.                                                                                                                          ?<t»££r««k                                                                     S\oVbr
   C0"1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
   oor rd,(rit-i<^                 Peve/v
                                                                                                                                   ^KV        ’SO't                                       v: O M x                   S ^ o 5                       (-M4. V-.ufc-^u\-r.'*v>\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 J
  H-- ooi                                                                                                                                                                                   0 ^(                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i -“y    62—
                    IVL^        !Tt=-6 r(on^
       yu "v’
            "
                                                                                                                                   U^rlc^M
        9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OUR
                      *                                                                                                                                                                            4                                                                                  ACKNOWLEDGE
R REF              DECEASED NAME                                                   SOLICITORS N A ^ ^                                        SOLICITORS ADDRESS                                             TELEPHONE NO.                              THEIR REF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DATE
                      P. m* & n [ i J 6 ^ ^                                                                                                  11/13 Victoria Street,
 7 1    O O p ,   ^Stephen P. Copoc                                             3i1ve rman-L ivermore                                        Liverpool,                                                     051 227 1871                                  DRF/SB                      19.5.89
                                                                                                                                           _L2 5QQ                                                                          7 * 5 '£       c W   t
                                                                                S( J ~ [ / E K . f ^ . i atf\j     L i   V e y ? M C K i

C C 9

 72                                                                                                                                         w          -' ' _             u u ^ d tJ L tf° u fc ~                       ""73 3 " 8 3 * } i f
                    p z j) V sj     /)        P                     S*.         C ~ t.   i,ffr g M r t r   .   |,H 'P "7 If     l"~ f' '
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ■iK.)c   f


                                                         ..        D fy a v ^ ^ l u . U v ^ ' b j                               ^          ftU |-F ?           /V           ^   '_   Z telS                                                                     | “ilfVivvit-fi.^
                                  W l d t a . ^
                                                           " u
                                                         C avi,l^_
                                                                                                                                                                                                       °oV\                s»^             IS E & r
                  \C U * S ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ^!5TL«?                                      tS't
                                                                                                                                                >              '                     MeoiCT^o<S        P 'fcS N          C\ ' Z - ' Z-


                  p.m.                     -                                     P/»c/‘C F f <               ^&&HZ(?Ot£ RC ‘£~T                                                                                                     c> £ )^ b 'i
       OOb                                                                      sfll-i-tZ'J U’\JO^QlOOO-C> . &r. ftU*,AN6 I4 & lf‘b Q-bi' SiCT                                                         oT 'z.y                                        err. i-tH . 6aU . ..... i_ ... ..
                  k@znac & a & iz a e e r o z
                                                                                €<s*wic.tY©*S     .... ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                       fc n tn                    k>>%\C
CC4^/                                                                       &        a t v j f                   Vi^"                      Buttercross House,
                  Derrick G. Godwin                                             Leiqhton Davis                                             14 Lanadale G a t e r                                       09 9 3 779977                                   .CAKD/.LPT                ..       12.5.89
                                                                                Solicitors                                                 Witney,                                                     FO'UXla ' l o t o ^
                                                                                                                                             Oxon     0X8 6EY
   OOb                    s>?/V^7 X
                          P ^ n
                                                                                                                                           30 Sherborne Square,                                                                                       3DM/JS/                     Ute-
                                                                                Mace & Jones
 76 X             John A. Anderson                                                                                                         Huy'r nn (           ._                                .. 051 480 7000                                                                                2.5.89
                                                                                                                                           Merseyside,                                             1<)CfPk^                                           \nderson
                                                                                                                                           T,36 9TJR        ^  ' c
                  1                 &{SsttoP'i tot?
 7 7 OOb V ^ w r i ^ K&Oioerir i
                               io 3 ® r                                                                                                     tSTcoePbR.t' -Si^ > SI M:^ A- •                            Pfcfc 2? -' U6 7 3 o                           f t t H z r n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M            *




   bob                                                                           c o p f iZoeszrcx-^                                                   O   A    & r u ^   ST
 7ft X            p£f>^           g £    0&   £ r j T h O ( H / £ t & ~          N 0K.TV   t < i R. >C                                       (-iCisrk . P o o i ^ -             h t O                  0  t -2^7 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                           <.         )                               Ocf^Tc^-rHO                        4*#.'



                                                                                                                                                                                                       F o<5v      ^SSi|-                                1 1
                                                                                                                                                                i<
 H •0 0 3                                                                                                                                   a^v                                                        0 2.C^^                  ■>1 0 3 ^ 4           CrC-•                                           *&
                    Grr^Wc,^. '"5’^L,                    { ^ X > c . rl[s                                                (?ok>jL<4$          Ci-ieSfC&v                                                                                               ^-[-SCxv\ibo                  .._______ ____
                                                                                                                                             C (A ,
                                                                                  SZ(k*QUtv&^A-)-*L 0 6 l ^ t s s v

   00*0 Dav icT^J*/ ^5e n s o n ^                                                                                                                                                                                 - <&sn - (#7/
                                                                                   6trTln~~Wgj^s.on                                         <T3- B o l d ^ & r e e t                                            -0QV5 5712-12 '                       JM / G F ^ d f t   <J-S>   ■'<^ 2 5 .7.89
 pf
 Qvlt —
                                                                                                                                             WA1 I D J .
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ^ ©*\7J5
     4


                   r                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OUR
                       ■»                                                                                                                           «                                                                           ACKNOWLEDGE
                   DECEASED NAME                                                  SOLICITORS N ^ S              SOLICITORS ADDRESS                        TELEPHONE NO.                              THEIR REF
UR REF                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DATE
                                                                                 3 m 4s £H<4tvJ                                                          :          ''••1 '-                     i
                                                                                                                                                         f cSV ~
                                                                                                                                                               *-6 £ O t\ b
                 p . m .      c5 > - i h / < & Q , .^                                              11/13 Victoria Street,
   » OOfe’ ,2**ion*f 4 o &A-0 , 7
                                                       P- 1 J  ^QT-in-in      r i                 Liverpool                                              051 227 1871                                  DRF/SB            19.5.89
  81          THOMAS HOWARD                       / P°                           x r n

                                                                 <_■ p H it i ^ — i  sr-7rjZ/e>s       & T A ^ i ^ - * r /e&                  & r        0 <5\ cn,“V                                 Xrt.W ) yH<?w.(Ws >
                 ae^-Jr      t5)z>/<to —
                                                       ^ i e a - T & p s Z .
                                                                           7^                    ©OOTI—CF, /"I( 5 ~ R & l S ' 1 t > " c > U r            f ts'^ ‘\T-T- ■§z>'\.<5
              ^           < T-V’*•> O                   Coyne Learmonth                           135 Liverpool Road,
                Philip Steele                                                                                                                            051 931 2841                                ACL/LMJ/HI                25 .7.89
                                                         Snl     ini     fnTR                     Rrp.at-     rrnsby                           •.
      G W m -                                                                                                                                            /
                                                                                                  Liverpool,
                 f             o a •,">>cvO ^                                                     T.?3 VPF.                                              fCS'      c\"b\               StXT.
                                                        ^ikUiiie^Arsy jltykfcrio£tf
                 A   m
                                                                                                                                                         o^r\                  V<5"tv                                          --
  3 3 ^ / ^ flrv-/ P f t A t     £Lt U 4 0      L £    £ (ga>c
                                                            c

                                                                                                                                                         p 0^3 V         -1£<5    o z-v*o
                                                                     '?///< t o
                  — ftyrr^r'&f    —                                    1*                                       <g(     Q c ct-e_ sr/e^r-                O'Tl        2-36
 & . o « * ;

            fl«A Qr V icL
  o Li noo p.                                                                                                   L Ii/>,rl/O O \                                                                                                           ' i _ --- -
             /H a U , r-j\ iT»j :>[ »                   o           ‘^                                                                                   Fogv        'l-'bfo ^VX\
                                                                                                                ^-2- '2.1+2-
                  1?-^ V b - ^ v «                 ■                  ;■                                                                                                                   VV -
& ? & r j
                   ^Tt-^v                           I—                 ^
                                                                                                                                                                     5   W   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ?f.
                                                                                                                L [ tr ^7oc ^                            C= lE><3\                   Ci T-Ce\4'                                       'S' E.-S"' .
                                                                                                                                                                                                         '     i
            -.:                                                                                                 Ll-Z, O^iL-

                  PY™    Kll                                        [ I J   4 0 f*loC•£-tf*» J Qc/- >6,.X -<-    &u.e<i-^ Gw'ijl!
H .ot?3                     r«<L,p                                                                                                                       6^1     'VbL                <0%'7   \
  oft oob                                                                        CfctVv'iCxC                     “K PfcLd^ S                                                                         ^ O •M . O
      ooi         P       G^v-C - S ^         h    Ih   c
                                                                                                                  L. rtr|7jo L_                         ^"O'SI                        S\C*\

H -o b ' y         ‘yfc.fly.on.   PVs-i^c.S
 87< ®0    <?         O 1 llO^((                                                £ P\fV-                                                                  0 f7 V 'VO'N                                * •-c<= .'SO
-°     po^               Cstta’.-! lb\S i‘VO                                                                                                             < o5v 'log                     S b ‘5-^
                                                                                                                Pta,jr&v^
                                                                                 P.(S\^cvx)f       vSW^^V...    X ^ L ^ y v r A -- &3-1-— ------- ----
         o0<o                                                                    •Siu\)fegHPiK) kOC&rtc’e-vc    ■Ga-s+le Clidiubers                                          )<sn                    3f2.P1ooj        \vHV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mt>-

                   Balft                                                          e^iii ym i-tTTfe              P nni— oirnr,4. Ill I?} \Uc5t)(R.iA ‘S 051 227 25-&2                                 m   )g - m o -                   5.T.89
  OC5                             f   N   i    m    S           S     "     *

                                                                                                                          pool UV'J&.^P^OL. .L-S-      f oyi
                                                                                                                t o O j a * * 4-*- .,

                               Q - ) |7 / ^ ^
                     f ^ r n .
                                                                                                                  11/13 Victoria Street,                                                                 DRF/SB        I r 19.5.89
                  Victoria J . Hicks                                             Silverman-Livermore                                                      051 227 1871
 ,ijy..   v
                                                                                                                 Liverpool,'
                  s?.n   J o L i cL n d       0 0       \                                                        L2 5QQ     ■ .■                         ^ D5v 7.6‘S oMto                                                    ...._.   .          &     *
                                                                                  Layton & Co.                   Oriel Chambers,                                                                                      .\                         9*r

                  ;David L. Thomas                                                                                                                       051 236 9475                                    CS/DRW                  25 .7 .89
   nn* V
   40  w:
                                                                                  Solicitors                     14 Water Street,
                                                                                                                 Liverpool,
                                                                                                                 L2 8 TD                                 ^o.^v                         SU-t-O



                  ...
                                                                                                                                    i
                 1«
                DECEASES) 'NAME                                  SOLICITORS NAtl^           SOLICITORS ADDRESS
                                                                                                                                   ii TELEPHONE           NO.       THEIR REF
                                                                                                                                                                                                    OUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ACKNOWLEDGE
R REF                                                                                                                                                                                               DATE
            1
                  -S')/? /g^ y f r1./>)d i f * /Cyy«?J < h e a . ^ O ^ ‘
                         &,/h     ■




                                                                                                                                                                                                #r
  x ©0 W                                                                 11/13 Victoria Street,




                                                                                                                                                                                                - <J\
       ^Stephen F. Harrison Silverman-Livermore Liverpool




                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LO
                                                                                                                                        051 227 1871                 DRF/SB
------
 91 /
                                                                         L2 5QQ
                                                                                                                                        P &6V \t.$5   O'z-v ^
            Arthur Horrocks                                                                                                                                             Y<U v'a
                                                                 Fanshaw,      Porter (3    11 & 61 Hamilton Square                                                 NLJ/DT                      25.7.89
                                                                                            Ri rIcp.nhp^rl                              051 647 4051
 92i €
                                                                 Hazlehurst                 Merseyside,                             f o^J ' b't'C I
                                                                                            T.4 1 6 ax
   cob                          £ > n \ n j k t \                                          /4&- 0. h . o o C M f t h , & i s £ s
 937 /          CtltUP    ( J ' & H H O i- J P                                             3O r A O R T V ' S b n i \ i g f         ac/ - ^ - 7 - 5 ^ 9 y           Q P f A l z ^ l h Q i ^ i   *      %•
                                                                                                                                                                           I   t

                                                                                                                                    ^CS'.              5o n
 u ,COb         saj^gcj                             xj   y

 J'A                                                                                        11/13 Victoria Street,                      051 227 1871                    DRS/SB                       19.5.89
        "Adam Spearrett                                          Silverman-Livermore
                                                             L                             Ij2 5QQ                                  £ OS1              O tv »o
 \          r-\tofliMAi *b Of              >u


                L tv      MloLA                                                             !>tf.   d        /       fV)cir         .   ,d>£\t        b *   ?   ^
                                                                  W J v <- C                                                                                                                 Pv(o Ar<
q s SSS.                                                                                     W& (fer(oo
                                                                                                                                                                                      tOi.ctf
  C X T {
                                                                                           .L % z = l , ......... .............     t ' & Z K             COO?




                                                                                                        i»




                                                                                                                                                      -
                         \tV\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ©ts-R—
                                                                   SOLICITORS NAME                                SOLICITORS ADDRESS                                                                              IjEPHONE NO.                                                 -fteKHeWLEDGE
 i'R    REF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                THEIR REF
               CXC^wQ^ Vof^                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mrrF
               aaicff*
                        ^.vCOig?.                                 Qft»\fc£>             Cbo^gfe               q & R t C £ W £ b k ?koC^                         I   o n     £&bS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t-s^'
                Poi-ta2 O C P < c c . f l $       o f
                                                                                                              PUtS&iScj Mo °&i£
 5 x / 3          ifOfc^-fgD R P                r ^ K                                                         Q        Qisfoj?            tST- Vv^ixisS K^?i o3-t4 ^                                          0<T:\a ^-S'cnfoS'           N   H   ‘" y H     l t > / - C £ g z ifv o ' e ? H


                 PO(-/C.('            C & N & T f * f o o t e r

 S oy-?        \kf\t-te-u>(sfO $0/~;OfligO^                       10   P/oe-floiuKy   $Rde>fbko 6 o t Z u f z .      n ' ^ ^ i o ^ o      v Q S'T0<3^ ^ >~l^>o S                                               0 3 1 U> 73 ?              fiz H       ) iffy     g
               o£ftce.<te> oc- Aso^RcvTtD                                                                    6|0t2e*2o                 } j o o e < i     Q      u       t   z    m    c       S       T

 5 ^ 3                                         C           Cfc?        m AUK.12R__________                   /^i£:isg> &                  l—*s>/       cC? M                ________                                                                         .j-\ l l ~ k j ^ Ac’/)oQ          H
                                                                                                              C ^ O T H        U G k L       Q O O     fCT,         VWPlKn^M
se*Ja          3 > ' D U C * ^ i f a           KkO                tic p ^ o & jw * C m c w ic K               Sr i~geos                                             c3T6                                                                  l Icgc/          3J o i c ; / P u c k :




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W j


               feoT&flU-                                                                                    fedpOlTV «* kAtvJ H o u s e
                                                                                                            H-~7 C ftS T V g                   ST
                £>(-31log Tern                                                                                                                         -^,-                       q o &
                                       h jo if ajehc^j l                                                     WATLf/Vc,                    H ou^e
               Fft.                                           a   H-0^Bew.T           smith                 3 S C ^ V W C W S T . (_0<V) D O f\i
                                                                  R©l/r\)£>uC£ i^OiareA.      C h i c H e S T e K (+0 0 ^ ^
0^/3           ^tSTuoook                                          r Hft/nfiaQLjQ! ^/______ l/ 2.~?S)+I C.H l-fOMgOtgiV , u c i
                                                                  Mes.sKs c & u r e ^         OAiruooo i-/oo^e
                                                                                                            £>37          to u M & H O T                M                       USR
                                                                  D 166       1-<J<0TCW «t                  ft)oN T41 r\j ^K.e'ci kic T
               'T Z - U lp iO T>og /7 J                           & K.covn..^.e?aQ______                    6 A i m G K 6K M          6rf-JC>
                                                                                                    1 7
                                               foutvic- U                                                    SrfT  OTVHfe'S ^.
                                                                                                                S----------   0 00 ,
                                                                                                                             -------------------
5 ^ /                                 T " i
                                                                                                             W1
                                                                                                              f»tfiv
                                                                                                                 iAo^ro
                                                                                                                      ' -v'a
                                                                                                                           ^.-r
                                                                                                                              * U  oO €>l^
                                                                                                                                r,v-/11*j5 -ST
                                                                                                                                            vj'
                                                                                                            f c o T o w P v l ■€ > <          U o v o O o fO                    R .c ,? > P               ^   ^ 01/ -PH~t
3 o k /3       5 a )PT QlafcMUflJO-P                              6Qgkou) Ajnfc s Gd~6 0 K'i                                                                                                                                              R\aifiAO t^ Q Rk,

                                                                               vSbgxmik £Mm
                                                                                                              Kf && (r^           t~
               S u p f ■ H/q<ga^AU                                Uf^c-iavTf               **■ <$•£?         fSf4t£^icg<_o                         1 ^ io                             £                       D 1 u-<5i ' *5      tfo»-
                                                                                                             ■fsr ■     Pi^o/JiiW e> HOU&G.
               S~>                                                                c»- C c u 5 5                   H l / o . \ . ' t b £                                                   ^
               au.                                                                                            —              r^JSg-Q -s                k%> / ^                                                                                                               !fi_
                                                                                                                     0 Q
                R    ^    l   a   t    1 v/t^S                                                                <iQokL                                        U       u   i   ^     f   O   o       ^




 "".0   '&-A
  -mrm*   I
