    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions


Owning Organisation:        South Yorkshire Coroner

Title Memo:                 Pre Inquest Review Audio Cassette No. 3

Description:


This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the digitised version
of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement by BR Consult to reduce noise
and improve audibility of the incoming radio transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
    Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                      101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                   Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
        Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
0 0 :00:11


CORONER:              — I do not have the capacity to set up a video duplicating organisation so
                      this would have to be understood by everybody. Does that raise terrible
                      problems as far as you’re concerned?

MR KING:              Sir, from my point of view I’m content (several inaudible words). Sir, for
                      the moment that’s all I can.

CORONER:              Yes, thank you. Now, if I work my way down the line like this. Yes.

MR CATCHPOLE:         Sir, I only rise really to echo Mr King on one point and that’s in relation to
                      the Taylor report which, certainly from Sheffield Wednesday’s point of
                      view, we feel could be beneficial both in saving time and in dealing with
                      some matters that aren’t disputed. If you were intending, Sir, to issue a
                      general invitation for the parties to attempt to agree certain paragraphs,
                      it may in the end form a useful basis to be put to the jury. We would be
                      very willing to take part in that.

CORONER:              I’ve got no objection to that at all. I had assumed that that was going to
                      present the parties with some considerable difficulty but if in fact I’m
                      mistaken on that then of course if we can save time and if we can have
                      something which is agreed, then I’ve no objection whatsoever.

MR CATCHPOLE:         I’m very grateful. Thank you, sir.

CORONER:              Yes.

MR RUSSELL:           My learned friend rose -

CORONER:              Could you just say your name because the shorthand writers won’t
                      recognise your faces either I presume.

MR RUSSELL:           Sir, Christopher Russell.

CORONER:              Yes, I beg your pardon.

MR RUSSELL:           You kindly outlined the categories of witness that you’ll be calling.
                      Although you have said that you won’t be providing a list of those
                      witnesses, are we able to assume that you’ll be calling witnesses from
                      those categories in the order that you have outlined them? Is that your
                      present intention?

CORONER:              When you say the order do you mean that I’ll start with supporters and
                      then move to -

MR RUSSELL:           To residents and then shopkeepers.
00:02:09
CORONER:              No, not necessarily. That was purely a grouping. What I would intend to
                      do is, as I said, to work from the outside in. So, if, for example, I was
                      dealing with the surroundings of Leppings Lane we would call some
                      residents, we’d call other groups, we’d call any supporters that had
                      something specific to say on that and then we would move our way
                      through the event, so to speak.


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                 2
0 0 :02:45
                      Now, I do recognise that in many cases it isn’t actually possible to
                      categorise. You cannot say we will only listen to this little bit and not to
                      the rest. If we called a supporter he is going to want to tell us a story
                      from A to Z, and quite rightly. There’s no way that we could get him to
                      come backward and forward across the Pennines just to suit the
                      convenience of a scheme which I have designed. There are some
                      witnesses who will only give very restricted evidence because they don’t
                      know anything else.

                      So, we will try and deal with those as we go but the order in which I gave
                      them was non-specific; it was just the way I happened to write it down. I
                      will look at it. In fact, it is quite likely that because of logistical we might
                      well start with local people in the morning and have people come from a
                      distance later on in the day than the other way round. In other words I’ll
                      be guided not by their category but by the convenience, timings, where
                      they live and so on. Does it help you at all?

MR RUSSELL:           Sir, thank you for that clarification. The other matters are perhaps
                      matters I could raise at any subsequent meeting if there was to be a
                      further lawyers meeting at which matters of law are going to be
                      canvassed. They deal with two matters my learned friend Mr King has
                      raised. One of them relating to the matters arising from what he has
                      termed the mini inquests, additional matters that he wishes to have put.

                      What concerns me, and my first reaction is, whether and to what extent
                      those matters are going to be circulated to the other legal
                      representatives because it seems to me appropriate if he’s going to
                      supply you with specific questions for you to ask the witnesses, which is
                      what I understand he wishes to do, whether those questions should be
                      made public to other representatives so that we might have an
                      opportunity to comment upon whether those questions were or were not
                      proper.

CORONER:              With great respect we’re getting into legal argument but I can tell you
                      now that the decision of whether the question is proper is actually mine,
                      but I know what you’re saying. Let me see what he has to say and as
                      far as I’m able I will try to hold the knees and hands between everybody
                      who has an interest in the matter. I understand the point that you’ve
                      made but I think it’s a concern which maybe you don’t have to be too
                      worried about.

MR RUSSELL:           Sir, thank you. Insofar as my learned friends might seek to dissuade
                      you from the course that you’ve intended with relation to Lord Justice
                      Taylor’s report, I don’t know whether you’re going to invite each of us to
                      add ourtwo-penneth to that view on one side or other of the debate. Sir,
                      from my part may I suggest that putting selective parts of the report
                      before the jury is perhaps a greater evil than putting the whole when one
                      is perhaps going to have a dispute as to which parts should be the parts
                      selected, and bearing in mind the inquiry was prepared and the report
                      written at a time before all the facts were known —
00:06:17
CORONER:              Mr Russell, what I tried to indicate was that if there was an agreed
                      statement as to what we would put then I would be prepared to consider
                      it. If we can’t agree then I’ll stick by what I’ve said with regard to the use
                      of the report.

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                   3
00:06:34
MR RUSSELL:           Sir, thank you. Finally, sir, you recently mentioned the compilation
                      video. Although you have said that you won’t be in a position to provide
                      copies, will you be in a position to afford facilities for legal
                      representatives to view it before the inquest starts? So, either they
                      come to you or that they all gather in a particular place and at a
                      particular time which has been set aside for showing the video to the
                      legal representatives.

CORONER:              I will certainly —yes, Mr (inaudible)?

MR CATCHPOLE:         Perhaps I could help? Obviously Sheffield Wednesday for their part
                      have copies of the compilation video and I am instructed that we’d be
                      happy, as far as we’re able, to assist any other person who doesn’t have
                      a copy in providing our own copies of our copy.

CORONER:              Well, that would be very helpful and Mr Russell I am sure you will accept
                      that very generous offer of help.

MR RUSSELL:           I do. I thank my learned friend for that.

CORONER:              That will assist me as well. Thank you very much indeed Mr Catchpole.
                      Yes, Mr Hale(?).

MR HALE:              My friend from the Football Association (inaudible) supporters (several
                      inaudible words) very properly made the request whether undertakings
                      might be given one way which might save a lot of time, save a lot of
                      money and also save a lot of grief. For my client I’ll be very happy to
                      give such an undertaking and I accept that I may be inhibited by the
                      actions that other people may take. I wondered if it would be possible
                      either by us milling together here today or by your office, perhaps,
                      sending to each person who’s on your list as a representative a
                      complete list of all the representatives so that we may get in touch with
                      each other and see whether we can in fact agree on any specific matters
                      which, without impinging on your jurisdiction, might help to avoid areas
                      of contention. If that could be done, and I know that my client would be
                      very happy but he doesn’t to cause any further distress to any of the
                      relatives.

CORONER:              Thank you. Can anybody see any objection to me circulating a list to all
                      of you of your respective names and addresses and references? I don’t
                      suppose any of you would object to that, so we can do that. I’ve heard
                      what you say. I think the question of the undertakings; they are risky
                      business in this inquest and it is not for me to say what undertakings
                      anybody should give but obviously I will conduct the inquest and take
                      whatever evidence I think is appropriate, whichever way it turns out, so
                      to speak. My job is to make an inquiry into the deaths of these
                      unfortunate people. Yes, Mr Isaacs?

MR ISAACS:            Sir, may I ask you to clarify two points? The first relating to the Taylor
                      report. If I understood what you said at the outset, the Taylor report was
                      not to be used at all, save insofar as my learned friends, myself and
                      colleagues might actually agree certain facts that may or may not prove
                      to be something that can be done. Assuming that that cannot be done,
                      how far then do you believe that you will allow the use of the Taylor
                      report at all.

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                             4
0 0 :09:55
                      As I say, as I understood it at the outset it was not going to be used, but
                      then I noticed when my learned friend, Mr King, was addressing you
                      briefly, the impression that I certainly got was that you were going to
                      allow the transcripts to be used for cross-examination purposes, which
                      was certainly not something that I understood at the outset and is
                      something which might lead us to another time, I would make
                      submissions against.
0 0 : 10:20
                      That is the first point, Sir. The second is this: and it is a relatively minor
                      matter related to the video evidence. Yes, the video will undoubtedly
                      show and if circumstances are right, as I understand your present
                      position, would you clarify this: as I understand it you would not intend
                      that the video be shown during the course of the inquest whilst
                      witnesses were giving evidence for the purposes of cross-examination?

CORONER:              With regard to the second point, in principle the answer to that is yes we
                      would look at the video and that would be it. I have to be a little bit
                      careful with regard to this response because I can conceive of a
                      situation where a point is raised and where it will be infinitely quicker and
                      easier to resolve it by looking at the video. So, I wouldn’t give an
                      undertaking that we would not look at the video at other times. I will
                      seek to avoid it. The purpose of the video is to give the jury an
                      overview, if that’s a correct word, of what happened and in order for
                      them to be able to understand better what the witnesses are saying. So,
                      it is an aide rather than anything else, but it is not inconceivable that one
                      might want to look at the odd snatch of video. Indeed, I can tell you now
                      that in one or two statements which I’ve read and where I’m considering,
                      the video is referred to, or parts of the video are referred to, and it may
                      well be necessary to look at it because you wouldn’t be able to
                      understand the statement otherwise.

MR ISAACS:            Sir, I’m very grateful.

CORONER:              The last thing I want is to spend hours and hours rerunning videos and
                      assessing minutiae on it. We want to hear the people viva voce as is
                      conventional. Now, the other point which you raised in regards Lord
                      Justice Taylor’s report and in particular the transcript; now I must
                      confess I do find this quite a difficult problem as to precisely how to use
                      it. What I was trying to say was this: it’s foolish of me to assume that
                      you don’t have the transcripts and that none of you are going to look at
                      them because you are, I’m sure, all going to do that, particularly if you
                      know that we were to call, as you will no doubt guess, some of the
                      witnesses. Some of the witnesses are inevitable, we have got to call
                      them because they are key players, shall we say, in this matter.

                      So, in that sense it is unavoidable, as I see it, that people will use the
                      transcripts to prepare their cross-examination. What I’m not very keen
                      on doing is, (a), I certainly won’t allow the transcript to be used to put
                      things to people so that one puts them in the position where they say, “I
                      will not answer that question.” If I put it to them that it’s an incriminating
                      question and they’ve exercised their privilege not to answer then I will
                      not allow whoever it is to pursue them on that point by quoting to them
                      from the transcript because I would consider that to be oppressive.
00:13:58
                      It may well be that in certain other cases matters which are not really

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                  5
                      controversial or even if they are controversial but which have been dealt
                      with sensibly and properly where it might be easier to put to the witness
                      something that he said which he could then agree with or otherwise as
                      the case may be. So I want to be flexible in this and I may have to
                      modify my stance as we go along because it’s only right for me to tell
                      you that I’ve never ever conducted an inquest of this size or complexity
                      and I have to learn like most of us probably have to, as to how to do it
                      correctly. In that sense I have to reserve the right that I too may have to
                      modify what I do.
00:14:53
                      Have I helped in any way?

MR ISAACS:            You certainly have, sir. One can understand, if I can put it this way, the
                      use of the transcript to perhaps remind somebody of something that they
                      said which they perhaps had forgotten about. As I understand it, that
                      was the sort of example that you were giving just a moment ago.

CORONER:              Yes.

MR ISAACS:            What I think developed from what Mr King was saying was this: that if
                      Witness X says X, Y and Z and Mr King has a copy of the transcript
                      where he actually says A, B and C, then Mr King should be permitted to
                      say to that witness, “Wait a moment, you’re saying X, Y and Z but
                      18 months ago you said A, B and C. Now, what’s the position here?”
                      something that we’re all used to in the normal civil process but not, in my
                      respectful submission, something which is necessarily a tone in an
                      inquest such as is being conducted.

CORONER:              Well, my feeling on that point is simply this: that what we’re trying to
                      establish is the truth as far as we are able. It will depend entirely upon
                      what the A, B and C and the X, Y and Z are. Can we leave this point? I
                      think we’re moving onto the legal submission point. It’s obvious to me,
                      subject to what you may say, that we will have to have a session where
                      we deal with legal submissions and we can then try and deal with these
                      matters and I’ll try and give you rulings, as far as I’m able, at the time. Is
                      that acceptable to you Mr Isaacs?

MR ISAACS:            Yes, it certainly is, sir. In fact, it’s a very good idea if I may say so. Sir,
                      there’s one further matter that I’ve been asked to raise and that is the
                      question of the recall of witnesses. Certainly one can understand why it
                      would be impressive for a witness from over the Pennines or indeed
                      from down south to be coming up on a number of regular occasions.
                      Sir, that same point must also apply because the giving of that evidence,
                      in any way, even by a semi-professional, witness is going to be
                      traumatic. That same point must apply, in my submission, to all
                      witnesses and it would be wrong, in my submission, for, for example, a
                      particular police officer to be asked to come back and deal with half an
                      hour of what took place on that day and then three days’ later to come
                      back and deal with another half an hour and so on.

CORONER:              Yes, I understand.

MR ISAACS:            In my submission that would be very impressive indeed.
00:17:14
CORONER:              I take your point. I think that is a very fair point. I’m not saying that no
                      witness will ever be recalled because if you remember, those of you who

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                  6
                      were here at the interim inquest, we did recall witnesses even in that
                      instance because things occasionally come up which we’ve forgotten or
                      a point is made which, on reflection , we would have explored. So, it
                      may be that I will have to recall witnesses from time to time, but I accept
                      your point. I think that’s a very valid one and, in principle, I agree with
                      you.
00:17:44
                      I entirely accept that this inquest is going to be pretty hard on everybody,
                      not least the witnesses.

MR ISAACS:            The only point I sought to make is one can understand why a witness
                      should be recalled to elucidate some point that hadn’t been raised at the
                      time when he or she gave their evidence. That is quite different from
                      asking a witness to stop at some stage and then come back.

CORONER:              That wasn’t my intention.

MR ISAACS:            I’m very grateful. Thank you very much.

CORONER:              What I was trying to say was that if, for example, we have a local
                      resident who can only give evidence as to what happened outside the
                      ground and didn’t go in, then obviously we will stop at that point with him
                      because there’s nothing more he can say. If we have a supporter who
                      was there and then went in through the gates and so on, we will listen to
                      all of it and ditto with officers as far as they ... Yes. Can I tu rn -y e s ?

MISS ADDLEMAN:        (several inaudible words). Just the one point (several inaudible words)
                      was sent to you or brought to your attention a number of items of
                      documentation which in due course I would like to inform the jury. I
                      (inaudible) ask for permission that that be the case. That was appointed
                      on the basis that we’re genuinely expected to take them away and read
                      them cover to cover, but they should be used (several inaudible words)
                      as and when is required.

CORONER:              Yes, that is right. In fact you sent me, I think, Volume 3. Mr Jones, you
                      can remind me because I forgot to check this, in the core bundle were
                      are Volumes 1 and 2 of the South Yorkshire submission included in that
                      or were there separate ...?

                      I can’t remember your Volumes 1 and 2 at the moment so it’s difficult for
                      me to answer this but it seems to me if we could agree, if you like, a
                      bundle of papers or three bundles - 1don’t care how many - which are
                      the ones which we’re likely to want to dip in - and that’s really a good
                      word because that’s what I want. I don’t want the jury to have to peruse
                      thousands of pages - or hundreds even - of documents. If we have a
                      convenient way of having before us documents which I agreed in the
                      sense that they are relevant, not necessarily agreed with regard to the
                      contents, then it may be possible for the jury or for you or whoever that
                      is asking questions to draw particular attention to page 27, paragraph 5
                      or whatever it might be. Is that what you’re asking?

MISS ADDLEMAN:        Sir, does that mean that we’ve actually at this stage got permission to do
                      that?
00:20:39
CORONER:              No, it doesn’t quite but you’re pushing me towards that. So, I want to
                      think about this a little bit further because my original intention was

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                 7
                      actually to go the other way and to make you produce each document,
                      or each page, as and when you wanted to use it. What you’re really
                      asking me is to allow to produce it in advance and then to dip. It may
                      be, I’m inclined to think at the moment, that that might be a better way
                      but I want to think about it a little bit further.
00:21:13
                      Has anybody got any thoughts on that? Do sit down for one moment.

MR KING:              Well, it would be nice to know, Sir, what documents my learned friend
                      was referring to and then (several inaudible words).

CORONER:              I understand actually that they’ve all had copies because that’s what you
                      said in your letter.

MISS ADDLEMAN:        Sir, I’ll be happy to explain. Volumes 1 and 2 of the three volumes that
                      were sent to you were in fact the South Yorkshire Police inquiry
                      Volumes 1 and 2 submitted by a public inquiry. The South Yorkshire
                      Police (several inaudible words) something called background material
                      and then Volumes 1 and 2 which are just documents. They were
                      standing orders, briefing notes, et cetera. Volume 3 that we sent to the
                      Coroner is a mini core bundle, if I can call it that, documents which the
                      Chief Constable considers irrelevant which all parties have access to
                      and on the public inquiry of (inaudible) recent civil contribution
                      proceedings.

CORONER:              So, what you’re saying is there’s nothing new in those documents and
                      the lawyers ought to know about them if nobody else does.

MR KING:              Sir, I think what would be helpful is we may know more about them if we
                      knew what she was talking about. Sir, as a very gentle suggestion again
                      which was certainly adopted at the public inquiry. It started off with
                      everybody having their own separate bundles and then halfway through
                      the core bundles were produced.

CORONER:              We don’t want to do that. Either we start with nothing, single sheets or
                      agreed —

MR KING:              Sir, that was my opening suggestion to you. If, by the time we meet
                      again - it may not be agreeable, it’s not perfect - but a core bundle, one
                      or two bundles perhaps, were brought together, we could each comment
                      on it, make suggestions for what might be introduced or arguments
                      about what should be taken out and we could just have those core
                      bundles.

CORONER:              Yes. Yes (several inaudible words)?

MISS ADDLEMAN:        I would just make the point that there has been no attempt at not letting
                      the parties know -

CORONER:              Oh, I know that.

MISS ADDLEMAN:        It was decided that in the first instance those documents would be put to
                      you for you to look at. If you, after this meeting, said, “No documents
                      whatsoever,” then circulating the bundles to every other party -

CORONER:              Would be pointless.

www.merrillcorp.com
00:23:25
MISS ADDLEMAN:        — would not be appropriate. So, that was the reason why we were
                      particular about that.
00:23:29
CORONER:              Yes. Can we leave this question of documents for the time being? I
                      have got to take a definitive decision and for certain things we have now
                      deferred one or two of these decisions till after this meeting because I
                      wanted to hear what you think as well as you to hear what I think. The
                      only thing I would say with regard to documents is that we are going to
                      need obviously any documents which have got to be enough for the
                      main representatives, got to be at least four copies for the jury and I
                      think it’s only fair that I should have a copy as well so that I know what
                      we’re talking about.

                      So, don’t proliferate documents because I think we worked it out we
                      need 20 copies if we were going to cover adequately the needs of this
                      inquest. Yes, anything else? Yes?

MR JACKSON            Peter Jackson, Sir. Just to come back on the undertakings point,
                      perhaps my use of the word undertakings was unfortunate. What I had
                      in mind was precisely what (several inaudible words) do and agree
                      certain statements within the Taylor report from my client’s point of view
                      insofar as they relate to the criticisms of Liverpool supporters. W e’re
                      certainly happy to liaise with whomever on that.

CORONER:              Yes.

MR JACKSON:           Then my second and third points come from the (inaudible) -

CORONER:              May I just say that the difficultly about that is that if I’m going to call
                      100 witnesses it’s very difficult for solicitors, or indeed anybody, to give
                      undertakings as to what they will say. This is a problem. I wouldn’t be
                      very happy about shutting witnesses up in the middle of a sentence if
                      what they’re saying is actually relevant to my inquiry. That, I think, is a
                      problem when I was looking at you about giving undertakings. It is a
                      very major problem for you as the solicitor for the supporters’ club. It’s
                      easier for the other parties but it is a very major difficulty which you’ve
                      got and I’m not quite sure how we can dissolve it at the moment. Carry
                      on please; I didn’t mean to interrupt.

MR JACKSON:           (several inaudible words)

CORONER:              Yeah, I understand.

MR JACKSON:           Secondly, Sir, as you pointed (several inaudible words) you may be
                      looking at these inquests from afar and coming in. Am I right in thinking
                      that there will be a list available, perhaps three days in advance, of
                      witnesses who will be called?

CORONER:              That’s what I’m hoping for and, of course, if I am persuaded by the
                      arguments by your colleagues you may get an even fuller list. Certainly I
                      would want to try and at least give a three-day provisionally warned list
                      so to speak so that you would have some idea of who was coming. Not
                      their statements but their names and, if you like, category - supporter,
                      friend, whatever it might be.
00:26:16

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                9
MR JACKSON:           My final point is a question, whether a daily transcript will be kept.
00:26:22
CORONER:              I’m coming to the transcripts in a moment. We’re taking rather longer
                      than I had anticipated —yes, Mrs McBrien, just one minute. We’re
                      taking a bit longer than I had anticipated, I am sorry about that but I think
                      we might as well press on and deal with major items today. Are you
                      happy with that? Is everybody happy?

                      Mrs McBrien, yes? You must shout because otherwise I can’t hear you.

MRS McBRIEN:          Right (several inaudible words) concerns (several inaudible words)
                      cut-off point.

CORONER:              The what?

MRS McBRIEN:          The cut-off point, where do you say (several inaudible words) -

CORONER:              The cut-off point?

MRS McBRIEN:          — new evidence (several inaudible words) 3:15. I think the most
                      important thing that day is —

CORONER:              No, Mrs McBrien, I’ve got to stop you because I’ve made it — I know it
                      sounds unfair because I haven’t more or less stopped the others but
                      you’re moving into what I call the question of evidence. In fact, what
                      you’re saying is you want me to reconsider the cut-off point.

MRS McBRIEN:          (several inaudible words)

CORONER:              Yes, okay. Now, when we next meet for legal submissions then you can
                      argue at that point on the point of law, which, forgive me, I realise this is
                      difficult for you, Mrs McBrien, because you are not the lawyer, but on the
                      other hand if you represent yourself you have to be treated as if you
                      were one. So, I have to apply exactly the same, if you like, rule to you,
                      even though it is harder for you. I know that; I know that. At the next
                      meeting when we’re arguing points of law then by all means, if there is a
                      legal point on which one can argue that I’m wrong about the cut-off
                      point, then let it be argued. If I, having listened to the argument am
                      persuaded then, of course, I will hopefully say so. If I’m not persuaded I
                      will also say so and everyone will have to accept it because that is how it
                      is. Is that clear? Have I made that clear?

MRS McBRIEN:          Yes.

CORONER:              Was there something else Mrs McBrien?

MRS McBRIEN:          No, (several inaudible words).

CORONER:              No. I’m not trying to be unfair to you because I know it’s very, very
                      difficult in the context of this meeting anyway with legal points but I’ve
                      got to try and be fair to the others as well.

                      Now, what I was going to say was - 1notice notes are passing backward
                      and forward - are there any other points on the procedural aspect which
                      any of you need to raise? I/m not talking about legal points. I want to
                      stick to procedure as far as I’m able.

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                               10
0 0 :28:58
                      Right, I hope I’ve succeeded. Actually we are making quite good
                      progress. Transcripts: somebody raised it; I’ve forgotten who it was.
                      Yeah, you; that’s right. It is my intention to have, I think you call them
                      next day transcripts, is that right Sir Davidson?
00:29:20
                      So, each day’s proceedings should be available first thing —
00:29:27




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                               11
