                                                                                           M I R . 15




 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised     jo          <=to             Num ber
                                                                                                                  ^ = r
T<22«r, •
 Title                                        .031                                       Cdu_v                CLoO-t^O.
  Inc^dje source and any document number I f relevant)              C s^& >   5L                 ^
, Receiver's instructions — urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                      Indexer
 D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
 Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                      Indexer
  Indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                             SIO
  Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                       Indexer
  Further action No(s)


  When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



         INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                 STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                     GARY COLLINS




                       Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B .M E D .S c i , BM, B S , MRCGP

              (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                          At

             The Medico-Legal Centre,
                  Watery Street,
                    Sheffield.

                          On

                 20th April,    1990.




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




      From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
       55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                            Page N o .


                        Opening Remarks                         1.
                    B
                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called
                           By THE CORONER                       2.


                        POL. SGT. JOHN KILLOCK Called
                           By THE CORONER                       3.


                        DET. INSP . MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                           By THE CORONER                       4.


                    D   Closing Remarks




                    E




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
20th April, 1990

             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF GARY COLLINS

        THE CORONER:    Please sit down.   Yes, Mr. Fraser.

      MR. FRASER: Sir, just for the record I understand
that this afternoon's timetable may be slightly revised
because the parents of Peter McDonnell have apparently
taken the wrong turning on the motorway somewhere and last
recorded they were in Pontefract, wherever uhat is, so
if it assists you, sir, I am here as a member Oi the
Steering Committee to help you in the Inquest relating to
Gary Collins.
      No members of his family are here, sir, but Mr. Jones
the Social Worker from Sefton Social Services who has been
with the family since this disaster is present on their
behalf and will assist in any way he can.

      THE CORONER:   Well it seems sensible if we have got
a case which we can slip in that we should allow the poor
family more time to get here so I am quite happy if you
are happy, Mr. Fraser.

        MR. FRASER:    Oh certainly sir, yes.

      THE CORONER: Mr. Jones, you probably weren't here
at the opening so I will just outline for you the procedure
because it is easier for you to follow what we are doing,
or were you here?
        MR. JONES:     I was here on the first day sir.

        THE CORONER:     Well in that case I don't need to    do
that.
      This, then, is a resumed Inquest which was opened
on the 19th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony
Parkin, the Acting Coroner's Officer said:

        "The body which is the subject of this Inquest
        has been identified to D.S. 1649 Hardy of the
        South Yorkshire Police as that of Gary Collins
        by John Collins, his father. He was 22 years
        of age having been born on the 7th August 19 66
        at Liverpool.   He was a single man and he lived
        at |
           ------------ ------------- ^ — I Liverpool". He
        was a Quality Controller by occupation.       He died
        at Hillsborough Football Ground following an
        incident there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.
        P.C. 184 2 Brookes caused the body to be removed
        to the Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified
        it to Detective Constable Simon Weigold who
        subsequently identified the same body to Dr. Slater.
        It is the family wish that the body should be
        cremated."
                                        DR. D.N. SLATER



      I have just remembered what the other thing was I was
trying to remember on the previous case.  I will deal with
it later.
      Now we had the details checked and they were signed
by John Collins and in fact everything that I have read out
as far as names and place of birth appears to be correct.

        MR. JONES:     Yes sir.
        THE CORONER:     And you agree with that as far as you
know?

        MR. JONES:     Yes sir.
      THE CORONER: We also had the blood alcohol figures
dealt with on the opening day and in the case of Gary Collins
the level was 29 mgs./lOO mis.
        Can we hear the Pathologist please, Dr. Slater.


                     DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called
                            By THE CORONER:

Dr. Slater, you have taken the oath already so there is
obviously no need to repeat it and if you could just,
it is David Slater, isn’t it, and this is to do with Gary
Collins who had identification number 48 and as before
you are quite satisfied that you are telling me about
this young man, that you have satisfied yourself that this
was the body you examined? - A. Absolutely satisfied sir,
yes.
I notice on this one that you have actually referred to
Weigold? - A. I have sir, yes, this is the Monday.

 It was a very difficult few hours on that morning for
 all of us.
       Now then, Dr. Slater, can you please take me through
 your post-mortem? — A. Yes sir. My examination O j. ^
 Mr. Collins showed very few signs externally of injury.
 There were two small scratches on the face but there was
 tremendous blueness of the face.
       Internally there v/as suffusion of many of the organs
 with areas of haemorrhage within the lungs. The haemorrhage
 in the lungs was accompanied by a fracture to the second
 rib and there v/as no doubt in my mind that the immediate
 cause of death here was asphyxia due to compression of
 the lower part of the face, chest and upper abdomen.

       In addition my autopsy showed evidence of a small
 haemorrhage at the back of the head on the brain.  This
                                                                 DR. D.N. SLATER



                          is something called a subdural haemorrhage and I formed an
                          opinion that this was an additional contributory factor
                          towards his death.  This would have resulted from blunt
                          impact with presumably the ground or another firm object.

                                  My autopsy showed that Mr. Collins was a normally
                           developed young male who I felt would have had a normal
                           life expectancy and I submitted my final cause of death
                    B      as la. traumatic asphyxia and under 2. traumatic subdural
                           haemorrhage.

                        Q. There was no fracture where   the subdural was, was there?
                           - A. There was no skull fracture sir, no.

                        Q. Presumably there must have been a blow of some sort? -
                           A. Yes sir, there was a blunt blow to the back of the head
                           with some firm blunt object.

                                 THE CORONER:   Any questions?

                                 MR. FRASER:    Gary's family have no questions sir,
                           thank you.

                D                          POL. SGT. JOHN KILLOCK Called
                                                    By THE CORONER:

                        Q. Yes, if you would give us your name as we usually do please?
                           - A. Sergeant John Killock of the West Midlands Police.
                           I have previously taken the oath sir.
                    E   Q. Indeed, thank you. - A. At about 0800 hours on Saturday,
                           15th April 1989 Mr. John Collins states that his son,
                           Gary Collins, left the family home with the intention of
                           travelling wih friends to Sheffield.  He was to attend
                           the Semi-Final football match at the Hillsborough Stadium.

                                  Mr. Henry John Clarke travelled by car with friends
                           ircluding Mr. Martin Christopher Malone and Gary. They
                           arrived in Sheffield at about lunchtime.   They took
                           refreshments and eventually arrived at the Stadium at about
                           143 0 hours. They joined the crowd and entered via Leppings
                           Lane turnstiles.   They went together to Enclosure 3.
                           Due to crowd pressure the three men became separated.

                                 Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                           terracing Mr. Clarke climbed over the perimeter fence and
                    G      onto the pitch.  He eventually found Gary lying on the
                           pitch near to the goals at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.
                           He was being treated by two Policewomen.

                                  Police Constable Frances Anne Baker and Police Constable
                           Caroline Marion Marsh found a man now known to be Gary lying
                           on thfe pitch.  They attempted resuscitation for some time
                H          but were unsuccessful.   They were joined at this stage by
                           Henry John Clarke who remained with Gary whilst the Officers
                           assisted other persons.

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                    - 3 -
                                                            D R . D .N. SLATER


                              Mr. Clarke saw a Police Officer and a number of
                        spectators carry Gary to the gymnasium which was being used
                        as a temporary mortuary.  Those persons have not been
                        identified.  In the gymnasium Special Constable Steven Baker
                        saw Mr. Clarke with Gary and the Officer attempted resuscitation,
                        again without success.
                              Police Constable Andrew John Brookes then assumed
                    B   responsibility for Gary in the gymnasium and Mr. Clarke
                        identified him to the Officer.
                              At 1604 hours Dr. Colin David Welsh examined Gary in
                        the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                              Police Constable Brookes later escorted the body of
                        Gary to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification
                        to Detective Constable Weigold.
                               At 1640 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989 Mr. John Collins
                        confirmed the identification of hisson to Detective Constable
                        Hardy.
                              On Monday, 17th April 1989 following the identification
                        by Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried out
                D       an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                              Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                        blood sample from Gary where the presence of ethanol was
                        detected. The witnesses proving continuity of the blood
                        sample are Detective Constable Green, Detective Sergeant Turner
                        and Detective Sergeant Fletcher. Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest
                        carried out the analysis.
                    E
                              Found in the personal effects of Gary was a part match
                        ticket which tends to confirm that he entered through a
                        turnstile. Martin Malone states in fact that he did enter
                        the stadium with Gary through a turnstile at 144 5 hours.

                              That concludes my evidence, sir,     There is visual
                        evidence.
                              THE CORONER:   Any questions, Mr. Fraser?

                               MR. FRASER:   There are no questions for the Officer
                         sir, thank you.


                                       PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                    G
                                                 By THE CORONER:

                               THE WITNESS:  Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                         West Midlands Police.
                               Sir, an examination has been made of visual evidence
                         in respect of Gary. He has been identified on a BBC video
                H
                                                   - 4 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 D.I. M. LAYTON


                             tape actually outside the ground and this is shown on a
                             BBC tape reference Map 9, 00:09:47:13.  I think I have
                             previously stated, sir, that that is not in fact the actual
                             time. The data base on that camera was not accurate, but
                             we believe that it was timed at some time between 1437 and
                             1450 on the date.
                                   In respect of that particular identification, sir,
                    B        I have in fact prepared a plan which has been now referred
                             to as MWJL/137, which is an additional plan sir.

                        Q.         the CORONER: C3 6. You will show us the location in
                             a moment? - A. Yes sir. Sir, Mr. Clarke has signed a plan
                             of Enclosure number 3 where he last saw Gary and a plan O jT
                             the pitch area where he found him with two Police Officers.
                             Those plans are referenced KJC/1 and HJC/2.
                    C
                        Q. And those we will give numbers 37 and 38. - A. Sir, in this
                           instance Mr. Clarke initially identified Gary on two photo­
                           graphs but this is one of those occasions where subsequent
                           re—examination of the material showed us that a genuine
                           mistake had occurred.
                                   P.C. Brian Gee viewed photographs of Gary and recognised
                D            him as a man who he had attempted to resuscitate on the pitch.
                             The Officer left this man on the pitch to go and assist
                             others but it cannot be established what time this took
                             place. This Officer has signed a plan of the pitch indicating
                             the position at which he treated Gary and that is referenced
                             BG/2.
                        Q. It is very similar to Mr. Clarke's positioning? - A. In
                    E      respect of Mr. Clarke sir, yes.

                        Q. Let's have that one as well. Make it number 39, C39.
                           BG/2, isn't it? - A. That is right, sir, the plan prepared
                           by P.C. Gee.  Sir, Mr. John Collins, that is Gary's father,
                           has seen the visual identification made outside the ground
                           and has confirmed that it is his son.
                    F   Q. Could you take it and show us over there? - A. Yes sir.

                                    (The Officer moves to a visual display board)

                             Sir, if I could first of all refer you to the plan MWJL/137,
                             it is this particular plan now that we are looking at,
                             the location on the video that I have referred to, Map 9,
                             is somewhere in this area herer the Leppings Lane side of
                    G        the outer perimeter gates.

                                    Sir, in respect of the plan referenced HJC/1, which
                              is the plan of the terraces, the location at which Mr. Clarke
                              has indicated Gary is in this position here which is in
                              Enclosure number 3.

                H                                     - 5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                         D .I . M. LAYTON


      in respect of the plan HJC/2, looking at this plan the
position that he has identified Gary is in that position
there.
      Then referring to BG/2 the Officer has identified
Gary in that position there so there is a slight variation
but roughly the same area.
Mr. Clarke's is a recollection, isn't it, it is a plan and
that small difference might be a matter of mis-remembermg
a matter of yards? - A. Absolutely sir, yes.

      THE CORONER:  It is remarkable that one can remember
it at all. Thank you.
      This is an unusual case because Gary's friend j-ound
him so to speak almost immediately and was with him through­
out and Mr. Jones, the family know Mr. Clarke, I assume.
Is that right?
      MR. JONES:     Yes, they do sir.
      THE CORONER:  So obviously I am sure they have spoken
to Gary's friend I have no doubt on many occasions though
I don't know of course.
      THE CORONER:     Did you have any questions?          I forgot
to ask.
      MR. FRASER:     No thank you sir.

      THE CORONER: Well that is in fact the evidence we
are going to take in this case.
      Would you please convey to the family our         condolences
and sorrow that they have lost this lad in this         tragic
incident and thank you very much for taking the         trouble
to come and to be able to tell them so to speak         ^irst-hand
what happened.  Thank you.

       We will rise then for a few moments.

                 (The Inquest into the death of
                          GARY COLLINS
              was adjourned to a date to be fixed)
