 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and tim e raised            <=\0           Number

~& 2fsr           •


 T itle   *                 f*        C_^~X.                                                            H O ty °tO
 A/nc/ude source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)                                                  ( £ .2 0 0 1 ^ 0

*^
 *> •         i
              I
 Receiver'sinstructions — urgent action — Y es/N o     ____
                                                                                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                      Indexer
 D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                              Statement Reader
 Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                      Indexer
 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised

 Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                       0 /M          SIO




                                                                                                                      Indexer
 F urther action No(s)


 When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Number Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER
          ON THE 15th OP APRIL 1989


           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

              JAMES GARY ASPINALL




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

              The Memorial Hall,
                  City Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

          Thursday, 19th April, 1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                    A




                                                       INDEX
                    B
                        )R. SOMASUNDRUM SIVALOGANATHAN - Called

                         By THE CORONER   ........................


                        POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK - Called

                         By THE CORONER   ....................


                        3ETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                         By THE CORONER   .............................

                    D

                                                    — oo— oo —




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        19th Apr i1 1990

                                 INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF JAMES GARY ASPINALL

                                THE CORONER;     Mr- Fraser.

                               MR. FRASER:   Yes, sir.  I appear to represent Mr. and
                          Mrs. Aspinall who are present in Court, as in fact i& their
                          own solicitor, Mr. Harris, who is here to support them this
                          morning.
                    B
                                THE CORONER:   Yes, they are
                                                          ?e sitting
                                                             s i t t i n g there.
                                                                           mere.  Can you
                           just tell me, were Mr. and Mrs  Aspinall in Court yesterday?

                                MR. FRASER:   No, sir, but they have been in Court this
                           morning and they have heard previous Inquests.

                                THE CORONER:     Did you hear what I said to Mr. and
                           Mrs. Edwards'?   (indicating a g r e e m e n t ) E>o you want- me to
                           repeat that for you or have you grasped what is going on
                           because the presentation is similar, of course, in nearly
                           all the cases?     Is that okay?      You are quite happy and you
                           understand.    It is Mr. and Mrs. Aspinall we are dealing
                           with, yes.

                    D           This is a resumed Inquest which was opened on 1Qth
                           April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting
                           Coroner's Officer said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                identified to PC 233 Grant of the South Yorkshire
                                Police as that of Jarnes Gary Aspinall by James
                                Aspinall, his father-       He was 18 years of age having
                    E           been born on 13th March 1971 at Liverpool-               He was a
                                single man and he lived at.
                                Liverpool-   He was a clerk by o c c u p a t i o n . H e died at
                                Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
                                there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.               PC 233 Grant
                                caused the body to be removed to the Medico-Legal
                                Centre and there he identified it to Detective
                                C onstable Simon Weigold who subsequently identified the
                                same body to Dr. S i v a l o g a n a t h a n ...“

                           who we usually refer to as Dr- Siva and he doesn't mind          I
                           think.

                                “ It is the family wish that the body should be
                                c r e m a t e d ."

                                I didn't say this in the earlier cases but there are
                           one or two instances - in fact there are more than one,
                           there are several instances - where there are mistakes in
                           these opening Inquests and this is one of them because, in
                           fact, Simon Weigold did not carry out the identification to



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                             DR. S. SIVALOGANATHAN

                            Dr. Siva and we will be dealing with that during the
                            evidence.  I read it out as it was recorded so that you know
                            what was said on that day but we obviously need to make any
                            necessary corrections at this stage.

                                  The blood alcohol evidence was taken yesterday
                            afternoon and Dr. Forrest came along and told us what he had
                            done.   The result in the case of James Gary Aspinall was
                    B       that it was negative.

                                  We also wrote fairly early on to the families to ask
                            them to confirm names, dates and occupations and we have a
                            signed statement from Peter Darcy which was dated 26th April
                            in which he confirms the name of James Gary Aspinall, date
                            of birth, clerk, and place of birth as Liverpool.   I take it
                            that is all correct, isn't it?   Your clients are happy with
                            that ?

                                 MR. FRASER:   It           :ir , yes

                                 THE CORONER:   We will now listen to Dr. Siva.  Dr.
                            Siva, I think you were in Court earlier so that you know the
                            wording is slightly different.  If my Officer could just
                    D       swear you in.

                             DR. SOMASUNDRUM SIVALOGANATHAN was called and took the
                             following o a t h :

                                 "I swear by Almighty God that the evidence I shall give
                                 shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
                                 truth in respect of each of the bodies on which I
                    E            performed a post mortem examination as a result of an
                                 incident which occurred at the Hillsborough Football
                                 Stadium on 15th April 1989.“

                                                    Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                        Q   Dr. Siva, I think on this particular occasion I am going to
                            ask you to give your full names, qualifications, and where
                            you work and then if it is permissible, can we call you
                            Dr. Siva, is that all right? - A. Yes.  I am Somasundrum
                            Sivaloganathan.  I hold a Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelc  of
                            Surgery degrees, and a Diploma in Medical Jurisprudence,   I
                            am a Lecturer in Forensic Medicine at the University of
                            Leeds and a Home Office pathologist for West Yorkshire and
                            North Yorkshire.

                        Q. Dr. Siva, you very kindly carne down after this tragedy to
                           help us with the post rnortems, that is right, isn't it? -
                        A. That is right.

                        Q. You actually came on 16th April which             I think   is the Sunday?


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                DR. S. SIVALOGANATHAN

                        A. That   is right.

                        Q. You came some time in the afternoon,     didn't you? - A. That
                           is r ig h t .

                        Q.   Can you describe how you satisfied yourself that the body we
                             are talking about, body No. 9, James Gary Aspinall, is in
                             fact the one you did the post mortem on? - A. Yes- Actually
                    B        in respect of each of the bodies the process of
                             identification was the same, sir, in that the body was
                             presented to me by Detective Inspector Timms as the
                             particular body that I was told and I checked with the name
                             on the body itself and had it photographed as such.

                        Q    The bodies had their names    and numbers written on the leg I
                             think? - A. That, is right,   yes.

                        Q. You are quite satisfied that this is the young lad we are
                           talking about? - A. That is right.

                        Q- Dr. Siva, could you then please give me your cause of death?
                        A. Yes, that was due to traumatic asphyxia, sir.

                    D   Q. Could you tell me briefly on what you are basing that? -
                        A . Yes, sir.  Based on the fact that there was intense
                            congestion of the upper part, of the body, sir, with numerous
                            microscopical haemorrhages, which we call petechial
                            haemorrhages, in the skin and in the membranes lining the
                            eyes and the membranes lining various internal organs.

                        Q. Those are usually associated with? - A. With a crush
                    E      situation where the person is unable to breathe.

                        Q. We heard yesterday from Prof. Usher, but as the family
                           weren't here I will just put it to you, that if a person
                           gets into an asphyxial situation where they cannot breathe
                           for whatever reason? - A. Yes.

                        Q.   If their chest is held, they would lose consciousness pretty
                             quickly? - A. Yes, I would think they would lose
                             c onsciousness within some seconds.

                        Q. The fatal outcome would be a matter of minutes? - A. Yes, it
                           is variable, sir, but certainly you are talking in terms of
                           a few minutes at most.

                        Q. From the point of view of once the asphyxial process begins
                           loss of co n sciousness would be within seconds? ~ A. It is
                           very rapid, yes.




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            D.S. J. KILLOCK

                        Q.   I think I am right in saying there were numerous superficial
                             abrasions but nothing of any major importance? - A- That is
                             quite right, yes-

                                  THE CORONER:      Mr-   Fraser,    are there any questions for
                             Dr. Siva?

                                  MR. FRASER:      The family have no questions from the
                    B
                             doctor, thank you.

                                      THE CORONER:      Any questions from anybody else?      (no
                             r e s p o n s e ) I did mention the blood alcohol, didn't- I »•’

                                  MR.   FRASER     You did.   sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   Is it satisfactory, and have you
                             understood?  (indicating a g r e e m e n t ) Dr. Siva, I am most-
                             grateful to you.  Thank you very much indeed.          Now we are
                             going to have the presenting Officer.          This is a West
                             Midlands Police Officer who is going to tell us the facts.
                             He has already taken the oath.        Do you want him resworn at
                             all or are you content?

                    D             MR. FRASER        I am sure the family are content,             sir,
                             thank you-

                                        DETECTIVE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK - Called:

                                                      Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Do tell us who you are please? - A.           Sergeant     Jbhn Killock,
                    E      sir  of the West Midlands Police.

                        Q. You have taken the oath? - A.          I have,    sir,   yes

                        Q    In respect of this and the other cases? - A. That               is
                             correct.

                        Q- You have in front of you a copy of the summary                 I believe?
                        A . I do, sir, yes-

                        Q- At your own pace and in your own time read it to me please?
                        A - At approximately 0945 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989,
                            James Gary Aspinall together with Graham Wright (Graham is a
                            friend of James and Graham also died at Hillsborough)
                            travelled by coach from Liverpool to Sheffield with the
                            intention of watching the Semi Final football match at the
                            Hillsborough Football Ground.  George Francis Wright, the
                            father of Graham Wright, confirms these facts.

                                      James and Graham were seen in Enclosure 3 at
                             approximately 1330 hours by Carl Andrew Sterritt, who is
                             J a m e s ’ cousin. They were both seen together at

                H                                             4



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    D.S. J- KILLOCK

                            approximately 1430 to 1445 hours    in the same enclosure again
                            by Carl S t e r r i t t .

                                 Some time after the crushing had occurred in the West
                            Stand terracing James was removed from the enclosure, placed
                            on to the pitch and taken to the gymnasium.  It has not been
                            possible to identify the persons involved in these actions-
                    B
                                 Police Constable Robert Keith Lindop was present in the
                            gymnasium which had been set up as a temporary mortuary when
                            Dr. Matthew James Bull examined James.  He pronounced life
                            extinct at 1554 hours to Police Constable Lindop-

                                 At. 1630 hours Police Constable Paul Anthony Grant, at
                            the request, of a Police Inspector, attended at the gymnasium
                            and assumed responsibility for James-   Police Constable
                            Lindop was at this time engaged with another deceased
                            person -

                                 At 0330 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr- James
                            Aspinall, James' father, identified the body of his son to
                            Police Constable Grant in the temporary mortuary at the
                            gymnasium.
                    D
                                 Police Constable Grant later escorted the body of James
                            to the Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the identification
                            to Detective Constable Simon Weigold.

                                 On 16th April 1989 Dr. Siva carried out an autopsy and
                            submitted a report giving the cause of death -
                    E               Found in the personal effects of James was a ticket
                            stub for the Semi Final match but in the circumstances it
                            cannot be established how or when he exactly entered the
                            stadium.        That concludes my evidence, sir. There is visual
                            ev id e n c e .

                        Q. Can I just take   you back to one or two points-  Paragraph 4
                           of the summary,   the time of death we have now given as 1554.
                           Actually it was   transcribed as 1545A? - A- It was, sir-  The
                           correct time is   1554.

                        Q   That comes from the form which    is known as the JM18? -
                        A   Yes .

                        Q   Which is prepared in most of these cases,     isn't   it, on the
                            time? - A- Yes, sir-

                        Q   The other thing I wanted to deal with was this
                            identification of Simon Weigold.  I think initially he gave
                            a statement in which he identified this body to Dr- Siva? -
                        A - He did, yes.


                H                                         5



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                               D.I- M - LAYTON

                        q . This, as you understand it, was because he was under the
                            impression that all the pathologists were present at 9.30 on
                            Sunday when he was doing the identifications? - A. He did,
                            sir, yes.

                        Q- He has now given us a correcting statement? - A- He has now
                           made a third statement, sir, which clarifies that point.
                    B
                        Q- He now confirms that was an error? - A. That was an error.

                                   THE CORONER:      Any questions?

                                  MR. FRASER:   No, sir-  The family are grateful for
                            c larification of those times but there are no questions.

                                   THE CORONER       I am obliged to you-           Thank you very
                            much   indeed.

                                    DETECTIVE    INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - C a l l e d :

                                                      Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                        Q   Yes? - A- Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector, West
                    D       Midlands Police.  Sir, in respect of James I have made an
                            examination of the video and photographic evidence available
                            and James has been identified as being in the enclosure
                            which we have previously referred to as No. 3.  He has also
                            been identified subsequently on the pitch.

                                  Peter Darcy, J a m e s ’ uncle, has viewed visual evidence
                    E       and is able to identify James alive in Enclosure No. 3 on a
                            BBC video.   He has also identified James subsequently lying
                            on the pitch being attended by an unknown supporter, and
                            again on video, again BBC video, James is shown lying on the
                            pit ch.

                                 Just to deal with the reference numbers in relation to
                            those matters, the time for the enclosure where James is
                            seen alive is at 1438:43:03 and that is on a video reference
                            Map 1 and the photograph referred to is referenced DB16/29.

                                 There is a further photograph which has been given a
                            reference number MW1/2 and again in relation to where James
                            is shown on the pitch that is referenced Map 7, 1527:54:23.

                                 Carl Sterritt has viewed visual evidence and has also
                            identified James on a photograph.  He initially did identify
                            James on other photographs but those have subsequently been
                            clarified by Mr. and Mrs- Darcy and discounted at this
                            stage.  The photograph reference referring to that
                            identification by Carl Sterritt is DB16/29.

                                 Mrs. Aspinall, James' mother, has viewed visual
                            evidence and she does agree on the identification made by
                H                                       6



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          D .I . M- LAYTON

                             Mr. Darcy on video, Map 1 reference, timed at           1433 it does.
                             in fact  show James alive in Enclosure No. 3.

                                   I have, in fact, sir, also prepared a further plan
                             which has been given the reference number MWJL13 and these
                             relate to locations in Enclosure No. 3 where James is shown
                             alive.   In addition I have prepared a plan which has been
                    B        given the reference number WWJL14 and this plan refers to
                             the photograph MW1/2 which relates to where James is shown
                             actually on the pitch.

                        Q. Did we have a tirne for that or not? I can't remember what
                           you said? - A. That particular photograph, sir. is not
                           t irned.

                        Q.   But the video Map 7 gives a time of 1527? - A. That             is
                             correct, sir, which would tend to suggest that the
                             photograph was taken before that time.

                        Q- There is no doubt whatever he was in Pen 3 from visual
                           evidence quite apart from what Mr. Sterritt says in his
                           statements? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.
                    D        Would you be kind enough to show us on the big plan and we
                        Q
                             will give the plans our usual C numbers.                MWJL13 is C12 and
                             M W J L 14 is C13? - A. Sir, if I can refer you to the large
                             scale plan of the terraces, this p ar t icular enclosure here
                             is Enclosure No- 3 ( indicat in g ) - There are three
                             p ar ticular locations to point out.             The first relates to a
                             video, Map 1, BBC tape, and that apparently shows Jarnes in
                    E        this location here (indicat. i ng ) ■ On a photograph referenced
                             DB16/29, which is timed at 1445 hours, James is apparently
                             shown in this location here.              Subsequently on a further
                             photograph which was identified by Mrs. Darcy, which is
                             r eferenced at PR1/14A, James is shown in this location here
                             < i n d i c a t i n g ? . In fact , that is si ight 1y high - Just,
                             a pproximately there ( indicat. i n g ) .

                                  Sir, if I could then go to the other map, in relation
                             to the photograph M W 1/2 and in fact also the video Map 7,
                             1527:54 James is shown in approximately this position here
                             on the pitch.

                        Q    Just on the pitch      and just in front of the goal more        or
                             less, isn't it? -         A. Yes, sir-

                                      THE CORONER:        Could you see?  It is a bit difficult,
                             isn't it?          Are you sure you have seen? (indi cat ing
                             a g r e e m e n t ) Any questions you want asking?

                                  MR. FRASER:    James'     family have no questions of the
                             Officer, thank you.

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             THE CORONER:   I am obliged to you.    Mr. and
                        Mrs- Aspinall, thank you for coming.   I am very sorry as I
                        said to the other family-    You heard me earlier and it
                        applies to you as much it   applies to them, that you have had
                        this terrible disaster in your family.    I can't really think
                        of suitable words in a situation like this but I do want you
                        to know that although we are dealing with all these, a lot
                        of it seems like technicalities and so on and to a certain
                        extent it is, I try to remember and I am sure the Jury and
                    B   everybody else does as well that we are talking about your
                        lad.  Thank you very much indeed.

                           (The   Inquest, into the death of JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                                    was adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )



                    c



                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H                                     8


J. L. Harpham Ltd
