  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOE SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)




        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                      At

                The Town Hail,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

              22nd February, 1991




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




    From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Lt d .,
         Official Shorthand Writers,
     55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON Recalled

     Cross-Examined   by MR. TOULSON
     Cross-Examined   by MRS. MCBRIEN
     Cross-Examined   by MR. RUSSELL
     Further by THE   CORONER

WILFRED EASTWOOD

     By THE CORONER
           FIFTY SIXTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS
             FRIDAY, 22nd FEBRUARY 1991

        CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON Recalled

           Cross-Examined by MR. TOULSON
Dr. Nicholson, you indicated to the Coroner and the
Jury yesterday that you, were asked after the tragedy
to carry out a technical investigation, because you are
an engineer and had the resources of the HSE Laboratory
available to you, and not because you had any expertise
or experience in relation to sports grounds? - A". Yes,
that is correct.

May I just enquire, are you in fact a football fan? -
A. Not specifically; I go to the occasional match.

Have you ever stood on the terraces? - A. Oh, yes.

I want to keep my questions, if I may, to the main
points. You said in answer yesterday to Mr. King, who
sits next but one to me, appearing for the bereaved,
that the problem on the day with which we are concerned
did not arise from the overall number of people
admitted to the Leppings Lane end, but from their
distribution? - A. Yes.

Therefore I am not going to ask you any questions about
overall capacity but confine myself to the relevant
matters. When we talk about distribution we must of
course include in that, must we not, rate of inflow? -
A. Yes, I would think that is relevant.

Because if you have got the Green Guide to hand - I am
sure you have - can we just look at one important
matter? On page 20 the opening words in bold type:

     "Spectators should be admitted at a rate which is
     compatible with the dispersal arrangements for
     them inside the ground.

That is obviously a matter of fundamental importance,
is it not? - A. Yes.

And perhaps a matter of obvious commonsense rather than
engineering skills, but whatever the capacity, if you
bypass the entry system by admitting large numbers in
an uncontrolled flow you have a potential safety
problem? - A. Yes, a potential problem.

And that is an aspect I want to come back to in a
moment. Let me just start, as you started when your
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON

investigation began, with an examination of the
barriers. You began investigations, did you not, with
a team on the day after the tragedy? - A. No. I
attended myself on the day after the tragedy, about
mid-day, and then built up a team in subsequent days
from the Laboratory.

So be it. That team included, I think, a Mr. Hibbs? -
A. Mr. Hibbs, yes.

Who was a specialist inspector in matters of mechanical
engineering? - A. Yes.

It is right, is it not, that your inspection showed
that besides the barrier which failed, there were two
barriers which had deformed but not failed? - A. Which
barriers are you referring to here?

I am referring, in fact, to numbers 128 and 137. - A.
Can I just check that?

Of course. Perhaps it might help to have up acetate
C276. Do you have any recollection of this, Dr.
Nicholson, or would it assist if I were to take you to
the passages in the reports to you, which may jog your
memory? - A. If you could. I can't remember the actual
numbers that you referred to. Do you know which
barriers they are on the ...?

I do indeed. Number128 is in pen 4, therownearest
the front, the right hand barrier which has three
spans. - A. Yes.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     I think C502 perhaps will   assist.
     MR. TOULSON:     Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER:     Yes, because they are numbered.

     THE WITNESS:     Yes, I see.   502 has got 128 ....

     MR. TOULSON:   And 137 is in the middle of the
middle row. - A. Yes.

I can take you to the reference point if required, but
do you remember that there were two barriers there
which had bent visibly but not failed? - A. I can't
recall the amount of bending but I am prepared to
accept that.

Certainly you looked, and obviously your team looked,
to find evidence on the terrace of any barriers. It
was an obviously important thing to look for, any
barriers which had bent? - A. Yes.
                                         C. E. NICHOLSON


And these were the only two, other than the one which
had failed? - A. I have not got the record so I can't
confirm that.

Do you have the Smith and Games report to you, that is
a report by Prof. Smith of the Department of Mechanical
Engineering? - A. Yes, I have that.

And by Mr. Games, and I think you seconded to them, did
you not, the task of investigating the load
calculations, in other words, what load would have been
necessary which caused the barrier which failed to
fail? - A. Yes, I have that report.

Essentially the evidence you have been giving on that
subject is derived from their investigations and their
opinions? - A. That is correct, yes.
Would you be kind enough to turn   to page 4 of their
report? - A. Yes, I have that.
Do you see the second paragraph on the page, starting,
"Test performed by Dr. Eastwood"? - A. Yes.

If it is of assistance to you to look further, you will
find, I think, a report to you by Mr. Hibbs of 9th May,
1989, in which he goes into the matter in much fuller
detail? - A. Yes.

In that report he says -I am looking at the
introduction - "Mr. Eastwood and his son ..." - it
should be, "Dr. Eastwood and his son, Mr. Eastwood,
were present on site on 17th April and conducted a
number of tests of the crush barriers which were
witnessed." - A. Yes. I have not got Mr. Hibbs' report
directly to hand. I am just searching for it now.

I have a summary sheet from Mr. Hibbs to you and then
annexed to it a much more detailed report dated 9th
May, 1989. - A. I have got Mr. Hibbs' report to me of
9th May.

That starts with a summary sheet and the summary reads,
"Barrier test by Mr. Eastwood and his team were
witnessed, which revealed that the barriers tested met
the load requirements for type A installations as shown
in the relevant code of practice". That is the summary
sheet. - A. Yes.

Then there is a much more detailed report of 9th May
going into those individual barriers which were tested?
- A. Yes.
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON


Just to indicate the relevance to the Jury, the object
was this, wasn't it, that if there were two barriers
which had bent but not failed, it would be possible by
testing those barriers to find what load they had been
subjected to? - A. Yes.
Because they must have been subjected to a load enough
to cause them to bend? - A. Right.

And you could measure that, not by theoretical
calculations but by an actual measurement, by applying
load to them? - A. Yes.
All things being equal, if you knew that that amount of
load had been applied to a particular barrier, and if
the densities in the two pens were, as you believe,
roughly the same, it was likely that similar loads
would have been applied to a similar barrier? That was
the objective? - A. That is the objective, yes.

The result of that testing was, was it not, as Prof.
Smith reported to you, that barrier 128 must have been
subjected to a load of 9 kilonewtons - page 4 of the
Smith and Games report. - A. That is the figure in the
report, yes.

Absolutely, so it was a known fact that that barrier
had been subjected to that loading? - A. Right.

Absolutely, and that loading is, of course, almost
double the design load and 1% times the test load? - A.
Yes.

Absolutely, and if we look at 128, which is in the
front row, it is in a position roughly comparable to
124A in the sense that they are both in the same row? -
A. Yes.

And therefore your evidence has been that you believe
that the densities would have been the same in both
pens, as it were row by row? - A. Yes, that is correct.
Therefore simple logic would suggest, wouldn't it, that
if it was a known fact that 128 was subjected to a load
of 9, the probability is that 124A was subjected to a
comparable load? - A. That presupposes that the loading
of 9 was produced by the crowd and that the deformation
in 128A was purely a result of deformation by the
crowd.



   /Q. Absolutely, on the assumption ....
                                                       C. E. NICHOLSON


    Q. Absolutely. On the assumption that the reason why the
       barrier 128 was found to be bent in the way that it was
       after the Semi Final was because of what had happened
       during the Semi Final and not because somebody the
       previous day had come along in a quite unconnected
       incident and bent it? - A. Yes.

    Q. On the assumption it had happened during the match, on
       that assumption, logic would suggest that the same load
       would have been applied to that? - A. That is possible,
       yes.
    Q. It is not only possible but likely, is it not? - A. All
       the barriers are slightly different.

    Q. Of course. - A. In terms of corrosion and in terms of
       bracing and so I do not think you can make a straight
       comparison between the two.

    Q. We are not talking about that Dr. Nicholson. We are
D      talking about the loading imposed on them. - A. Yes.

    Q. If the densities are roughly equivalent then it is
       likely the loading imposed by that density would have
       been not less? - A. Yes. Loadings produced by
       densities are comparable, yes.

    Q. Absolutely.  It is a fair comparison to compare the
       loading imposed by density on 128 with the loading
       imposed by density on 124A? - A. Yes.

    Q.    We know that the loading imposed by density on 128 was
         in the order of 9 kilonewtons? - A. Yes.

    Q.    Thank you. So that was that testing. Next can we just
         consider briefly the likely mode of failure of 124A?
         Would you agree that the likely mode of failure, the
         likely way in which it failed was this; that the rail
         bent horizontally, came out at end 4 and spun round,
         twisting the support at 3 — you are nodding your head
         — breaking and then 2 to 3 would also have gone? - A.
         When you say breaking which part are you referring to
         then?

    Q. Breaking at point 3? - A. Yes, it could break under the
       clip at that time.

    Q. Exactly. - A. That horizontal was still attached to the
       vertical in the final collapsed position, yes.

    Q. That is the likely method of failure? - A. Yes, it is.




H
                                                         C. E. NICHOLSON


    Q. If that is so, if that is the likely method of failure
       which you agree, then at the time when rail 3/4 was
n      bending, which preceded what we have just agreed upon,
       of course, it would have been supported at end 3? - A.
       Yes.

              THE CORONER: May I just stop you for one minute
         so that we know which end 3 we are talking about.  I
         think it is presumably Dr. Eastwood's 3 that you are
         talking about.

              MR. TOULSON:     Yes, I am talking about Dr.
         Nicholson's 3.

                THE WITNESS:   Yes, our figures.

              THE CORONER: Let us put that schematic one up and
         make sure that we know what it is. (drawing put on
         screen)

    Q.          MR. TOULSON:   What I think, Dr. Nicholson, you
         have   agreed is a likely method of failure was that the
         span   that we can see nearest to us would have bent,
         come   out at the end which is nearest to us and then
         spun   round causing the next support to bend and the
         span   fracturing at the second from us, your .3? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. Then 2 to 3 would also then have gone? - A. Yes.

    Q. You are also agreeing with me if that is the likely
       explanation at the time when the nearest span of rail
       was undergoing its initial bending it would have been
       free standing at one end, 4, and supported at the other
       end, 3? - A. Supported to some degree, yes.

    Q. That is exactly the calculation or the basis upon which
       Professor and Mr. Games operated when they made their
       report to you, is it not? - A. That is right.

    Q. On that basis they calculated, did they not, that the
       load on 3/4, the nearest span, necessary to have caused
       it to collapse was over 8 kilonewtons? - A. Yes, that
       was an assessment made including for the degree of
       corrosion.

    Q. I am grateful. They also calculated that the load
       necessary to cause the next one, 2/3, to fail would
       have been higher, 9? - A. Yes, that was assuming span
       2/3 was simply supported at both ends.




H
                                                       C. E. NICHOLSON


     Q. Yes, and so    - A . I am sorry, can I just correct
         that? I said it wrong. They were built in at both
jj      ends.

     Q. Yes, and they themselves, Professor Smith and Mr.
        Games, made the point, did they not, at page 4 of their
        report that therefore their independent examination was
        consistent with the results of the testing of the
        barrier 128 done by Eastwood but witnessed by the
        HSE? - A. Is that actually in the report?

     Q. Yes, I think it is.   On page 4:

            "Tests performed by Dr. Eastwood on a similar
            but not identified barrier showed that with
            over 9 kilonewtons it was sufficient to cause
            very large permanent deformation. The
            calculated collapse does, therefore, appear to
            be realistic values."

D      A. Yes, thank you, yes.

     Q. So their conclusion from these two sources of evidence,
         both the examination of the one which bent but did not
         fail and the test on the one that did, produced
         comparable results? - A. Fairly comparable results,
         yes.

     Q. The conclusion from both was that the load necessary to
        have caused this to collapse was substantially greater
        than the test load? - A. The conclusion is with that
        form of assessment of the loads —

     Q. That is right, which is how they assessed it? - A. It
        could go at something in the region of 8 kilonewtons
        per metre.

     Q. But the fact you knew that a comparable barrier, the
        barrier may have been different? - A. Yes.

     Q. But the loading on it was comparable, had in fact been
        subjected to 9? - A. Yes, a similar. Not a vast
        difference but we cannot really compare one barrier
        directly with another.

     Q. But we can compare as we have been through this broadly
        the loading on both assuming conditions were similar? -
        A. Yes, in broad terms.

     Q. The picture which emerged   was a consistent picture
        suggesting that a loading   had been imposed on this
        barrier in the order of 9   kilonewtons? - A. I am sorry,
        which barrier are you now   talking of?



H
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON



I am now talking about all those barriers along the
front row. A loading imposed? - A. In the region of 8.

In the region of 9 kilonewtons? - A. All right, 8 to 9.

Compared with a test load of 6? - A. Of 6, yes.

We can I think deal very shortly, because you have
really essentially already dealt with it, with the
corrosion point. As you have said, the Smith and Games
calculations allowed for such corrosion as was found
under the clips at your points 2 and 3? - A. They did,
yes.
Exactly. That would have been invisible corrosion.
You make a point about the corrosion at the other end?
- A . It is difficult to say that it would have been
completely invisible.

All right, it is under the clip? - A. It is under the
clip.

Would you just be kind enough to look again at the
Smith and Games report, paragraph 7 at page 4? - A. The
one headed 'Collapsed Mode'?

Yes, and just be kind enough to read to yourself the
first two sentences? - A. Yes.

The question I just want to ask you is this and I hope
we will not have to go into the scientific reasons for
it; it is right, is it not, that the corrosion which
you think would probably have been visible at the end
of 144 played no part in the cause of the collapse? -
A. Sorry, the end of 124?

124A. - A. Played no part in the collapse?

In the cause of the collapse. You talked about what
you think would have been visible corrosion at this end
of the barrier? - A. At our support end 4?

Exactly. - A. Yes.

It is clear, is it not, that whatever there was there
played no part in the cause of the failure? - A. When
you say the cause of the failure, what precisely do you
mean?
                                                         9


                                  C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. Smith and Games make the point, do they not, that to have
   sheared at that point would have required a load of
   48 kilonewtons? - A. That is acting in pure shear.

Q. We have agreed that the mechanism, the likely mode of
   this failure was totally different. The likely mode of
   this failure was that the barrier bent and came out at
   that end? - A. Yes.
Q. And therefore the question of a degree of corrosion
   at that end is irrelevant to the mode of failure? - A.
   No, I would not say it is "irrelevant".  If you have
   a corroded end, as you can see from the pictures in the
   report the degree of corrosion will influence the actual
   point at which it pulls out of the strap, so it will
   influence it to some degree the point of release.

Q. That is not something which has or could readily be
   calculated? - A. I think it would be very difficult
   to calculate.
Q. But the broad point stands that Smith and Games have
   calculated the load on the whole rail necessary to have
   caused its collapse? “ A. Its collapse, yes sir, based
   on the amount of bending and then coming out of the
   supports.
Q. And therefore full allowance has   been made for corrosion
   factors in the calculation which   they have arrived at
   because they have measured it? -   A. Full allowance?
   I think we have allowed for what   is reasonably possible.

Q. Right thank you, that is sufficient. Well now then
   having agreed that the likelihood is that this barrier
   was subjected to a load of I have suggested 9 kilonewtons,
   you say somewhere between 8 and 9, you have then considered
   what it was which caused the barrier to collapse and that
   is where you come to your leaning crowd model? - A. Yes.

Q. I hope I can deal with this shortly. You have indicated
   yourself that the leaning crowd model is an entirely
   theoretical exercise? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. And would it be right to say that the author of it,
   I take Professor Smith to be the author of it? - A.
   Actually the initial proposer of it was Mr. Games and
   Professor Smith and Mr. Games worked together on that.

Q. I see, but they as the people who devised this had some
   cautionary words to say about it in the final paragraph
   of their appendix dealing with the subject, did they
   not? - A. Yes, in the appendix, yes.
                               C.E. NICHOLSON



Did they say this, because that is the document, I don't
think   we need look at it again but it is the one that
had all the various trigonometry figures on them? - A. Ye

And on the back page of that did they say this:

      "It should be noted that no previous work
      can be found in the literature concerning
      this type of calculation. Existing
      design rules for barriers appear to rely
      on empiricism together with limited
      experimental testing. Caution should
      be exercised in the use of this new model
      which requires experimental substantiation."

A. Yes, that is correct.

Would it be right, and I don't mean this by way of
criticism, but it has not, so far as you know, ever
received any such experimental substantiation? - A. No,
that is true. It has not yet been tested out.

I just want to touch very briefly on theory and then
practicality conscious of the Coroner's warning that
we don't want to get locked into abstruse matters.

      So far as the theory of it is concerned it is
based, you have said yourself that it makes no allowance
for dynamic force for a crowd swaying. It is assuming
a static crowd just in a position of lean? - A. Yes, it
is a summation really of each layer but it is a static
solution.
Where of course a crowd is swaying then that is going
to impose substantially greater loads? - A. Yes.

Now the assumption is, for the purposes of the model,
do you have the entire crowd standing up on tip toes
with each person's body at an angle of 10 degreesfrom
the vertical? - A. That is correct.

Now I don't want to seem to be going into as I say too
much theory, but in fact if you do stand upright on
your toes you have to lean forward a number of degrees,
do you not, in order to bring the centre of gravity
over your toes? - A. True, yes.

So that if the body is at an angle of 10 degrees off
vertical the centre of gravity will not be 10 degrees
forward from the toes? - A. No, it would be a projection
down 10 degrees.

We could do a calculation if it really matters, but a
substantial part of the 10 degrees would actually
be taken up in bringing your centre ofgravity over  the
                                                           11

                                  C.E. NICHOLSON


   toes? - A. Well some of it would but the body is still
   deemed to be at 10 degrees.
Q. But the drawing, the calculation, takes the angle by
   which the centre of gravity is forward of the pivot
   point as angle theta? - A. Yes.

Q. And if they are on their toes leaning at 10 degrees
   angle theta will not be 10 degrees, angle theta will
   be 10 degrees less whatever number of degrees bring
   the centre of gravity over your toes? - A. Certainly
   the effect of the length of somebody's foot will
   influence the overall model. This was purely put
   forward as a possible means of indicating how much
   load can be transferred by people's weight, their own
   weight rather than any external force.

Q. But if you took off only 2 or 3 degrees from your 10
   degrees forward to allow for what is necessary to get
   the centre of gravity above the pivot point, that
   is going to throw out the resulting calculation? - A.
   Yes, of course. The actual angle that is chosen, we
   have chosen 10 degrees as a possible angle that people
   could achieve.  If that angle is changed it obviously
   influences the amount of force produced by the model.
   Greater than 10 degrees will produce greater force and
   lesser ....
Q. But the point is this: if the body is of an angle of
   lean of 10 degrees, angle theta is not actually to be
   10 degrees it is going to be less than 10 degrees?
   - A. Well angle theta as defined on our simplistic
   model will stay at 10 degrees. The point is it becomes
   a much more difficult and complex mathematical problem
   to include waists, to include feet, it is a simplistic
   model based on a simple line.
Q. Absolutely, it is in fact, as you have agreed with me,
   an entirely conjectural exercise? - A. Conjectural?

Q. Theoretical? - A. It is a drawing.   It is a theoretical
   assessment.
Q. All right, let's leave the theory and just come to the
   practice and consider it for one moment as an explanation
   of barrier failure.
          I think you will be aware won't you, Dr. Nicholson,
    that collapse of barriers at football grounds has been
    mercifully an exceedingly rare occurrence? - A. I under­
    stand so, yes.
 Q. I believe, I may be wrong, I believe it may have occurred
    at Bolton Wanderers in 1947. I am not sure about that,
                                                          12


                                  C.E. NICHOLSON



  but apart from that are you aware of any recorded incident
  in English football history when there has been a barrier
  collapse? - A. No, we have been informed of the Bolton
  Wanderers one but I don't think there are any others
  that we have been informed about.

Q. If we just take the Sheffield Wednesday ground for one
   moment, you were kind enough to look at a drawing and
   know, that before the Green Guide was introduced they
   had far fewer barriers on the Leppings Lane end? -     A.Yes,
   this was the drawing you gave me last night?

Q. Yes? - A. Yes.

Q. There is no reason why you should or should not be aware
   of this, are you aware throughout the 1970s there was
   a limit agreed between the Police and the Club for the
   number of spectators at the Leppings Lane end   of 11,600?
   - A. I was not aware of that figure.

Q. The documents can be produced if necessary, but that would
   have resulted, would it not, in certainly an average
   density in excess of 5.4? - A. This is 11,000 for the
   complete end?

Q. For the terraces, the North West corner, the equivalent
   of the 10,100 was 11,600? - A. Yes, if the areas are
   the same yes, it would be a natural thing to assume that
   that would be greater therefore than 5.4.




                        Q. There were
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


There were, of course, in those days no radial fences
back in the seventies? - A. Yes, as on your drawing, yes.

The probability, as we all know, is that people would
have massed towards the centre rather than at the
outsides? - A. Well, one would presume so, yes.
Therefore the likelihood is that there would have been
density figures very substantially greater than 5.4 in
those days, if there were capacity crowds? - A. Well, I
can't really comment on that but it is a possibility.
Are you aware - there is no reason why you should be -
but are you aware that every season from 1971 to 1977
there was a semi-final match at Hillsborough with a
capacity crowd of 55,000? - A. I know it was regularly
used for semi-finals, yes.
So every year there would have been a crowd of 11,600 on
those terraces, with far fewer barriers? -A. Presumably
so.
With distances behind some of those barriers of nearly 10
metres? - A. Yes.
Therefore, if the leaning crowd model were an accurate
predictor of barrier failure, one would certainly have
supposed that with those crowds, 10 metres deep behind
barriers all of those years, the model would have
predicated failure of barrier? - A. Not necessarily.   It
depends on the density that is achieved and the depth
that is achieved behind each barrier.
I know, but if we have got an average density of over
five and a half and you have got the likely massing
towards the centre, you were going to get densities
there... - A. You are likely to get more than 5.4, yes.

Substantially.
     THE CORONER:   May I just ask a question because it
would help me to understand this point:

As I understood your leaning crowd model, with all its
qualifications, it made an assumption which I think we
haven't mentioned this morning, and that is that
everybody - the metre across and however many metres deep
- was leaning at that angle? - A. Yes.   It is rather
like a domino effect, one person leans and then everybody
else gets stacked behind.   It is not too far fetched but
obviously it requires a considerable number of things to
happen at the same time.   That is what happens in most
accidents actually, things coming together at the wrong
time.
                                                            14

                                               C. E. NICHOLSON


Q.        MR. TOULSON:    Can I just mention one other matter
     by way of illustration?    Dr. Eastwood will be able to
     tell the Inquest that he was engaged before the Green
     Guide was introduced, to test barriers at the Nottingham
     Forest Ground.    On the terraces there barriers were very
     sparse.   They had capacity grounds and when he tested
     the barriers he found they failed at a load of only
     150 lbs. which would be just over 2 kilonewtons.    I am
     not asking you to believe or disbelieve Dr. Eastwood. I
     merely tell you that he is able to give that evidence.

     If those facts are right, and you will have to take it
     from me that the barriers were sparse and the terraces
     were fully occupied, application of a leaning crowd model
     as a predictor of collapse would have suggested
     likelihood of collapse, wouldn't it, if you have got
     barriers which are going to fail at 150? “ A. Possibly.
     People can stand at that sort of density without any
     forward movement and not put any forward stress on a
     barrier.   It all hinges on everybody moving at the same
     time, or being moved by some external force.

Q. I think that is helpful, Dr. Nicholson, because can we
   just move forward from that?   You are accepting, and I
   think we are all agreed, that the failure on this
   occasion was something very exceptional in football
   history terms? - A. Yes, of course.
Q. Although in the past you would know this, many First
   Division Clubs had football grounds with much larger
   crowds than they are allowed to have today and with far
   fewer barriers? - A. Yes.
Q. This failure on this occasion was not only something very
   exceptional in football history terms, but it was also
   immediately preceded by a very exceptional event, that is
   to say, the opening of the gate and the admission of
   2,000 fans? - A. Well, I don't know whether that is
   exceptional.
Q. Would you suppose it to be normal? - A. I don't know.      I
   have no experience of that.
Q. Very well.   Are you aware that spectators have described
   being so crushed on this occasion that they were unable
   to move an arm, some of them, some not even able to put
   feet to the ground? - A. Yes, I remember some of that
   within the Inquiry.
Q. The normal characteristic of a football sway when people
   go forward to see an incident, is that they go forward
   and then come back? - A. Yes, I have observed that on the
   videos.
                                                            15

                                               C. E. NICHOLSON

Q. Doesn't this answer suggest itself as the overwhelming
   explanation of what happened on this occasion that has
   not happened in the past, that the conditions which
   caused this barrier to go, were that people were so
   jammed packed that physically there was no possibility of
   taking the load off the barrier?   Do you follow? - A.
   Yes, I follow you.

Q. So you didn't have the transient load of a swaying crowd
   - the wholly exceptional situation of the crowd so packed
   that when they go forward, as you say, nobody is able to
   move a different way? - A. Yes, that certainly appeared
   to be the case.

Q. That would suggest itself as the distinctly exceptional
   feature on this tragic occasion? - A. Yes.

Q. That may well account for why in the past barriers,
   nothing like up to today's standards, didn't fail under
   very large crowds because the crowd swayed forward and
   came back and took the load off? - A. That seems
   reasonable.

Q. And that what caused those conditions to arise when
   people became so jammed packed that they were unable to
   move an arm and take the load off the barrier, that the
   event which caused those conditions to arise was the
   admission, the inflow, of those 2,000...

          THE CORONER:   No.   Mr. Payne, you don't have to
     get up.   I think that is a conclusion and not one which
     Dr. Nicholson would have expertise on.

Q.        MR. TOULSON: May I pass to other matters?    You
     were asked a number of questions, not scientific, but
     where the form of question began with the words, "As an
     engineer..."   It is no criticism of you, Dr. Nicholson,
     I just want to see whether they are matters on which you
     feel qualified to express an expert opinion.   If so, I
     would like to pursue them briefly. If not, I shan't.

Q. Firstly, the question of the desirability of sub­
   divisions of a terrace being given a separate capacity
   figure in the Safety Certificate by the Licensing
   Authority - that topic.   Is that a subject on which you
   consider that you have knowledge or experience which
   enables you to express an expert opinion? - A. Not an
   expert opinion, no, just a general opinion.
Q. If it is not an expert opinion then I will leave it.
   Secondly, the question of visual monitoring.   That is to
   say, the ability of the Police, or whoever may happen to
   be in charge, to be able to see if one area is clearly
   full and an adjoining area far less full, when deciding
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


to bypass the admission system and let in 2,000 people,
where they should go.   Is that a subject on which you
consider you have knowledge or experience which enables
you to express an expert opinion? - A. Not an expert
opinion, no.

Gangways.   Do you have any knowledge or experience which
enables you to express an expert opinion whether it was
desirable to have had a gangway on this terrace and if
so, where it should have gone? - A. No.   It is just a
reading of the Green Guide as a commonsense engineering
approach.

I am not sure whether you are indicating you do feel as
an engineer you have a contribution to make there or not?
- A. I don't have an expert contribution to make on
gangways.




         Q. No, and nor have you considered
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON


Nor have you considered, I take it, where if there had
been a gangway it ought to have gone, and what would
have been the pros and cons? - A. No.

So far as testing of the barriers are concerned, just
two points: you have been kind enough to indicate that
you regard Dr. Eastwood's interpretation of the code as
a tenable interpretation. For the purpose of the
Taylor Inquiry you, I think caused, or somebody in your
team caused inquiries to be made of the practice of
other engineers in the country? - A. Yes. We looked at
other people's systems.

We know from the transcript there that Counsel to the
Tribunal, Mr. Collins, told the Tribunal - and I assume
it came from you and therefore I want to check this is
right - that there appeared to be different practices.
Some engineers read it as Dr. Eastwood did, some read
it differently, is that correct? - A. I can't remember
the detail of that. I don't think we did all the
searching for the Inquiry on that matter.

If you can't remember I can't ask you about it. One
other matter relating to the testing of barriers: you
have looked at Dr. Eastwood's test, or his firm's test
results? - A. The one that we have the view graph of,
yes.

It is right, isn't it, that wherever you get a full
recovery for any barrier on one particular test, and
when it was then reloaded, that nought is always
followed by a nought in the next column? If it got a
nought on the first then you invariably got a nought on
2 and 3. If it got something above nought on the
first, but a nought on number 2, you always get a
nought on number 3? - A. I would expect that, yes.
You would expect that? - A. It it is taken to the same
load, yes.

You would expect that and by the same logic, if one had
adopted the other interpretation of saying that
particular barrier had required a re-test, since on its
last loading recorded it recorded a nought, you would
have expected on the re-test to have got nought,
nought, nought, as you have just indicated? - A. Yes,
if the barrier is in good condition.

Just on the Green Guide, I don't want to take you
through details on it but just two general matters, if
I might. I just want to discuss two aspects of it with
you, the flexibility and contradictory nature. You had
a report made to you, did you not, on the Green Guide
by Mr. James? - A. Mr. James, yes, he gave us an
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON


initial response to his visit to the Leppings Lane
ground.

He, I think, prepared a report to you in which he
attached an appendix which collected a large number of
entries from the Guide, emphasising that the Guide's
recommendations were intended as a guide, not a
statutory code? - A. Yes.

And were to be interpreted flexibly? - A. Right.

You recall, I think, an appendix probably where he goes
through that in some detail? - A. Yes, I remember.

It is right, is it not, also that he approached the
author of the Guide, who I think was by this time
working in the Home Office Prison Department, Mr.
Stickley? - A. I think he did refer to Mr. Stickley,
yes.

To try to ascertain the intentions, and discovered that
that was indeed absolutely deliberate, the intentions
were that licensing authorities and engineers should
not be constrained by individual recommendations but
should seek to apply the underlying philosophy, that
had been the purpose underlying the code? - A. Yes, it
was recommendations - sorry, guidance, isn't it, yes.
Right up to and including 1987 is it right that the
Home Office was continuing to put out circulars
emphasising to licensing authorities their need to
approach these matters flexibly? - A. I am not aware of
any Home Office circulars. I don't think I have seen
those at all.

We can have it copied if necessary, but can I just ask
you to look at an annex to a Home Officer circular of
1987? Just look at the passage which has been
highlighted.

     THE CORONER:   I think what we will do, once Dr.
Nicholson has looked at it, is to give its reference
and just read it out.

     MR. TOULSON:  I am afraid I don't have the full
document. It is a Home Office document and no doubt
can be obtained.

Dr. Nicholson, can you identify what it is, at the top
of the page? - A. Yes. It is Annex A to Home Office
Circular No. 71/1987.
                                                              19

                                               C. E. NICHOLSON


    Q. Can you then just read out the relevant words there? -
       A. This is part of paragraph 3 of the introduction, and
       it says:
B          "Local authorities are reminded of the advice
           contained in paragraph 4 of Annex B to Home Office
           Circular 7/1986, highlighting the need to maintain
           flexibility in order to take account of the
           different circumstances at individual grounds."
    Q. Thank you very much. The other aspect I wanted briefly
       your help about is this. One point again which Mr.
       James highlighted in his appendix to you, did he not,
       was that the objectives of the Guide involve not merely
       a competition between differing considerations but
       striking a balance between actually opposing
       considerations, the opposing considerations being on
       the one hand the objective of restraining fans, and on
       the other hand the objective of encouraging freedom of
       movement? - A. I can't recollect that actual feeling
       from his report.
D   Q. It is my paraphrase but just go, if you would - have
       you got his appendix? - A. Yes, I have. Is this the
       one that was sent on 6th June?

    Q. Yes. - A. And an Appendix A attached to it?

    Q. Absolutely. Could you turn to the second page of the
       appendix? - A. Right.
    Q. Where he quotes from paragraph 16 of the Guide, which
       is all about controlling crowd pressures, and he
       underlines some passages. Towards the foot of the
       paragraph he says:
            "... so careful attention must be paid ..."

        - this is quoting from the Guide -

            "... to restraining surges and similar pressures
            on the terraces and to ensuring free movement
            throughout the exit systems."
       - A. Yes, I see.

    Q. And his comment on that is that to some extent there is
       a conflict of interest in restraining surges but
       ensuring free movement? - A. Yes, I have that.

    Q. And it is an entirely acute and accurate point, isn't
       it, that what you are endeavouring to do is actually to
       achieve two contradictory things? The whole idea of
       radial fences and so on is actually to stop people, is




H
                                                              20

                                               C. E. NICHOLSON

       to inhibit people's movement, and at the same time you
       want
          it in appropriate circumstances freedom of movement?
       - A.
          .. Yes.
B   Q. Therefore in seeking to get the right balance in
       relation to any particular ground, any responsible
       licensing authority, club or engineer would want to
       have regard, would they not, to the individual
       characteristics of the ground? - A. Yes, that would
       have to be taken into account.

    Q. To the experience of how things worked there? - A. Yes.

    Q. And obviously to the views of those responsible for the
       operational control of the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q. All those would be factors which it would be right and
       proper to take into account? - A. Right.

    Q. Equally, of course, in any design there will always be
       certain fundamental assumptions on which a designer
       will work, will there not? - A. Yes.
D
    Q. And a fundamental assumption on which the licensing
       authority and the engineer would work, where you have a
       ground controlled by turnstiles and entry through
       turnstiles is that the spectators will be admitted
       through those turnstiles? - A. That seems reasonable.

    Q. Because of course as soon as you bypass that system by
       opening the gate you would then create a radically
       different situation from the assumption which would
       underline a design, wouldn't you? - A. Anything that
       would influence the rate of inflow ....

    Q. Which would influence the rate of inflow. - A. Would
       have to be taken into account, yes.

    Q. And you have taken into account, you have observed,
       that the rate of inflow through the gate exceeded by
       many times that which could have been achieved through
       the turnstiles? - A. Yes, that is correct.

    Q. You have agreed that we are not, in fact, concerned
       here with questions of overall capacity, but in fact
       once you open the gate it would not make any difference
       what your overall capacity is because you have bypassed
       the method of control, haven't you? - A. Yes, opening
       the gate did bypass the control.

    Q. Equally, I have not gone into desirability of separate
       turnstiles for separate sub-divisions, because you have
       indicated you are not an expert on that, but once you
       open the gate it is not going to make any difference




H
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON


whether you have had individual turnstiles for
individual sections of the ground, or not, are you? If
you are not using the turnstiles, if you are opening
the gate, then you have got a different situation? - A.
Yes, a different situation occurs.

Thank you, Dr. Nicholson.

     THE CORONER:   I think what we will do is stop now
for ten minutes or so, and then hopefully we will be
able to finish in one go.

                (Short Adjournment)
                                                C. E. NICHOLSON


             Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Dr. Nicholson, you are an expert in safety matters and
you were aware that Hillsborough Football Stadium
possessed a Safety Certificate, weren’t you? - A. I am
sorry?
You were aware that Hillsborough Football Stadium
possessed a Safety Certificate? - A. Yes, I have been
told that.
     THE CORONER: Excuse me, Mrs. McBrien.   It is your
first question.  I think what Dr. Nicholson said was
that he was an expert in safety matters relating to
engineering, not football stadia. He did not know
anything about the Safety Certificate until well after
the event.
Is that right? You know it now but you did not know it
then? - A. Yes, and I was shown it I think two days ago
for the first time.
     MRS. McBRIEN:    You are aware of it now? - A. Yes.

A safe capacity had been worked out by D r . Eastwood and
these details were included in the Safety Certificate.
Did you discover that when you did read through it? -
A. No, I have not read through it. I was just shown
the Certificate by — I am sorry but I forget who it
was.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. Payne.

     THE WITNESS:     I have not read through it in any
detail.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Would you mind looking at the
Safety Certificate again please at page 3?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     C.381, sir.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Under No. 3 it says:

    "The number of spectators admitted to the
    STadium and to the several areas of spectator
    accommodation within the Stadium shall not
    exceed the figures specified in Part 1 of
    Schedule 3."

A. Yes, I see that.

If you would turn to page 10 please, Part 1? - A.
Right.
                                               C. E. NICHOLSON



You will see a figure of 7,200 for the West Terrace and
2,900 for the North West Terrace? - A. Yes.

Making a total of 10,100? - A. Right.

If that was the capacity set for the terrace in 1989
there had to be a means of achieving that figure,
didn't there? - A. There had to be a means of achieving
it?
Yes, of achieving that figure which was written down in
the Safety Certificate? - A. Yes.

Would you agree that that could only be done at the
turnstiles as the Club had a monitoring system, a
computerised system, to make sure that that capacity
was not exceeded? They had a special system? - A. For
ensuring that that was controlled within that figure?

Yes. - A. Yes.

So if no proper means of counting was in operation on
15th April 1989, would you agree that no proper records
could be kept of the numbers either?

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, is that an engineering
question?

     MRS. McBRIEN: Sir, I was thinking that we went
over a lot of figures yesterday and the day before and
I thought the figures were important and I would like
to explore those matters a little please, if I may.

     THE CORONER: Yes, but it will not help you to
explore those figures by asking him whether or not he
knows anything about keeping records.  I do not mind
you exploring the figures, his figures particularly.
Forgive me, I keep referring to the witness as he and
she. I mean Dr. Nicholson's figures but there is
absolutely no point in exploring with him whether or
not records were kept of the figures. Ask him whether
or not records were kept of the figures of the people
who came through the turnstiles. That is I think a
proper question.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    I have got other questions coming
on from this one.

     MR. PAYNE: Sir, I wonder if some latitude could
be allowed in questioning Dr. Nicholson about this
because he is the nearest that the Jury are going to
have to an expert on safety matters.  I agree he has
                                              C. E. NICHOLSON


qualified his skill and expertise at various stages in
answer to questions but he is the nearest that theJury
are going to have to an expert on safety.

     THE CORONER: Yes and no. My problem is that Dr.
Nicholson has, in my view, a lot of expertise in the
field on which he has been addressing us but if we are
going to let him answer questions on other matters then
we dilute, in my view, the quality of his opinion
because we do not know any more whether his opinion is
an expert opinion or merely an informed opinion.   I do
not want to stop you.  I do not want to hinder your
questioning.  I want to steer you away from things
which Dr. Nicholson cannot help you on and what is more
important, cannot help the development of your
argument. So I do not think the question of whether or
not a record should have been kept and whether that is
a breach of the Safety Certificate or not is a matter
for Dr. Nicholson.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Are you saying, sir, that I cannot
ask Dr. Nicholson if he felt it was important it should
be known how many people went into the stadium that
day?

     THE CORONER:  I think that is a fair question.    I
think you can ask that.

Would you think it was important to know how many
people had actually entered? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   That is all right. I do not mind
that.

     MRS. McBRIEN: So would you agree that to let
people in by various means, that is the number of gates
and turnstiles, and later to try and count them in some
form or another from photographs etc. is no
satisfactory way of knowing the true figure? They are
only assessments, aren't they? With all the figures we
have been given they cannot be the accurate figure, can
they? - A. Are you referring to the figures that I have
given of our counting techniques?

I am not criticising you at all, Dr. Nicholson, because
you had to do this after the tragedy but I mean it
would not be a method used normally, would it, to let
people in and then try to find out how many were in
afterwards? - A. No, if people entered by some
unmonitored route, whatever unmonitored route, then
this is not a very satisfactory system.
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


So guessing numbers outside, if it looked about right,
there was no way that anybody would know that it could
be the correct number, would they? - A. When you say
guessing numbers outside, do you mean outside the
Leppings Lane?

Yes, by just seeing a crowd outside and just letting
them in, although it may appear that perhaps the right
number was there, there would be no way whatsoever,
unless there was a proper counting mechanism for doing
so, would there? - A. I think it would be difficult to
estimate to any accurate figure the size of a crowd
outside but I am no expert in estimating dynamic
crowds. This might be the skills of other people.

Do you think that the same would apply for the counting
of the people in the pens on the terrace? It would be
very, very difficult for anybody to assess the correct
number in a certain part on the terrace? - A. It would
be difficult but from our experience of looking at
photographs of crowds it is difficult to assess actual
numbers.  I think it would need perhaps known crowds to
be observed and note taken of that density or some
crowd structure. Then that could be given to people
who are called to assess crowd numbers.

You would agree that the only correct way of knowing
would be by way of the engineers working out the
capacities, wouldn't it? The only way we could know
the capacity for the terrace would be through the
engineer's figures? - A. Yes, working on the
recommendations made in the Green Guide.

So the Certificate clearly requires a specified number.
It does not ask for a hit or miss total, does it? - A.
It appears to call it crowd capacity and gives quite
accurate figures — well, it gives a crowd capacity to
a fine accuracy, 50,174. So it is not crude
approximations.

That counting, there is only one place for the
counting, both for the entry into the stadium and for
the terrace itself. The only place that that could be
done would be at the turnstiles, wouldn't it? - A. Yes,
that is my understanding of the layout at the ground.

I was wondering have you any figures for the number of
people who entered through Gates A and B please? - A.
No, we were not able to see Gates and B from the videos
that we were shown. We could only work on Gate C and
turnstiles A to G.
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


You would agree that everybody attending that match
should be accounted for really. Every individual
person? - A. I would have thought so, yes.

Also we know that a number of fans entered via
turnstiles 1 to 16 and ended up on the Leppings Lane
terrace but there would be no way for you to estimate
that number, would there? - A. No, I have not seen any
data saying they actually did come from 1 to 16 and
then go into the terraces.  I was not aware of that.

You showed us on the graph how the turnstiles were
capable of admitting over 1,000 people per minute per
turnstile, that is correct, is it not? - A. At one
point during the time between two and three o'clock the
rate did rise to just over a thousand and that is an
average figure.

That was at one stage. That was when there was no
congestion outside the turnstiles? - A. That was our
conclusion. The most possible reason was that the
pressure had been relieved which allowed the crowd to
come through at a faster rate.

So the turnstiles obviously could have been capable of
coping in that way if there would not have been
congestion there at all, wouldn't it? - A. The
turnstiles?

They could have operated at that same rate if the same
sort of pressure would have been kept outside the
turnstiles from the beginning? - A. It is certainly
possible for the turnstiles to operate at a faster
rate.

So obviously it was not the mechanism of the turnstiles
that was ineffective, was it? It proved after 2.52
that they could still operate? - A. The mechanisms were
still operating. Yes, the turnstiles were still
operating and were operating when we tested them after
the event.

Before that time, even when there was serious
congestion outside the turnstiles, the turnstiles
seemed to cope relatively steadily, didn't they? On
the graph it showed a steady flow of people in over
quite a long period? - A. A long period. Yes, there
was an average rate of about, I think over three-
quarters of an hour, of this 650, 660 people per hour.
                                               C. E. NICHOLSON


That was   despite all that was happening outside? - A.
It might   have been because of what was happening
outside.    That was, whatever the conditions were, the
rate. I    cannot say that they were coping all right.
That was   the figure that we measured.




                                       /Q. You said 75.
                                                   28


                                  C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. You said 75 to 76 people entered per second through
   Gate C? - A. Was that the figure we arrived at during
   the ....
Q. There were this many in a row I think you described?
   - A. I don't think it was as high as that. I was
   trying to show what sort of flow was coming through
   Gate C. I think we were working it out during
   discussion perhaps with Dr. Popper.

         THE CORONER:   Yes, that is right.

         THE WITNESS: We measured the number of people
   coming in through Gate C and determined the total
   number that came in, estimated the total that came
   in and then tried to work that out as an average flow
   over the time the gate was opened.  I was trying to
   show what that rate really meant.  I think it was a row
   of people shoulder to shoulder coming through per
   second through the gate.
Q. Yes, that is what I remembered. - A. I can|t remember
   the exact figure now, but if the gate is five people
   wide then it would be five people per second, something
   like that.
Q. That is how I understood it. So the rate of flow
   by that method of entry was substantially faster than
   by turnstile method, wasn't it? ~ A. Yes.

Q. I think the maximum figure that you gave for people
   who entered via Gate C during the three openings was
   2.480. Is that right? - A. Can I just check the
   figures again? Yes, that was the maximum estimate
   2.480.
Q. Do you know how many people went into the stadium by
   means of Turnstiles A-G plus the gates from 2.52 to
   3.03 please? - A. It would be possible to work out
   but I have not got the figure, it would take some
   time to extract that from the data.

Q. You have not got it? - A. I have not, no.   It is not
   a figure that we prepared I don't think.

 Q. But you could do? ~ A. It would be possible, yes.

 Q. The reason I have asked for that was you said the
    rate at the turnstiles at that particular time also
    increased dramatically? - A. Yes, from 2.52?

 Q. Yes? - A. Yes.
k>                                                        29


                                              C.E. NICHOLSON



         Q. In my mind I have a picture of people coming through a
            gate much faster than the turnstile entry and I have
            got a picture of them coming through the turnstiles
            at a very efficient rate indeed as well, so we have
     B      got two flows through at that time? - A. Yes.

         Q. And would you agree that the vast majority who entered
            at that time went down the tunnel? - A. I can't comment
            on that at all I am afraid. The only evidence we have
            is taken from the video and the video is a fixed camera
            which looks directly at 1-7. Although you can see
            people disappearing off to the right-hand side of the
            screen there is no indication, you can't tell from
            the video where they are going.

         Q. But you did calculate that there were, I hope I have
            got the figure right, 1,576 or was it 3 people in
            Pen 3? - A. That was our estimate.

         Q. is it 1,576? - A. Yes, that was the figure, yes.

         Q. And that was at 15.03 wasn't it? - A. Yes.
     D
         Q. But you did say that that was a minimum figure, wasn't
            it? - A. Yes.

         Q. It could have been far more. I have also got two
            figures. I don't think you gave these yesterday, I
            am quite sure of that, Dr. Nicholson, but I have two
            figures here, 643 and 678 represented the numbers in
            Pens 3 and 4 respectively and these figures were
            before Gate C was opened but I don't know the time
            that those figures were taken, what time the photographs
            were taken. I wonder, could you help with that matter
            please? - A. 600 and something?

         Q. Yes, 643 and 678? - A. I wonder, was that data that
            I gave out yesterday?

         Q.    No, I don't think you have given this information    here
              but I was wondering if you had it available?

                    THE CORONER:    He has not said this, has he?

                    MRS. McBRIENJ    No, no he hasn't.

                    THE CORONER: What you are saying is from some­
              where you have got information that at, what time did
              you say?
                    MRS. McBRIEN: No, this is my problem.   I don't
              know when but I know it was before Gate C was opened,
              obviously, but I don't know how soon before.




     H
&                                                              30


                                            C.E. NICHOLSON



                   THE CORONER j Let me ask the question because
             I fear Dr. Nicholson will not be able to help you
             on this.
    B   Q. Dr. Nicholson, what Mrs. McBrien is asking you is
           whether or not you have any information at all about
           the number of people who might have been in Pens 3 and 4
           at the time, lets start two or three stages, a time
           before 15.03 which is the time you used for the photo­
           graph? - A. Yes, we did attempt to calculate the crowd
           capacity before Gate C was opened and we examined a
           lot of photographs but unfortunately the angle of the
           photographs that were available at about that time were
           too low for us to get an accurate figure. Although we
           have produced a figure in our report we have no confidence
           in it because of the distance it was away and the angle
           that it was at.
        Q. Can you remember the figure, I can't recollect the
           figure? - A. Yes, there was a photograph which was
           taken from MP1A 14 and from that we counted the
           occupants in Pen 3 and Pen 4 using the same system
    D      that I described earlier and the head count in Pen 3
           was 678 and the head count in Pen 4 was 821, but as
           I said before we have little confidence in the two
           figures because of the techniques and because of the
           angle of the photograph.

        Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: What time was that please? - A.
             That was at 14.52, 2.52.

        Q. That is very helpful.     So Pen 4 is the bigger of the
           two pens, isn't it?

                   THE CORONER:   What was the question?

                   MRS. McBRIEN: Well I am looking at the figures
             678 and 821, so I am assuming that Pen 3 is quite a
             bit smaller than Pen 4.
                   THE CORONER: But you can't make assumptions
             and Dr. Nicholson says he is very unhappy with the
             figures. He has given you the figures.

        Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:  I am wondering if you know the
             area? - A. Yes, we have calculated the areas of both
             Pens 3 and Pen 4 from the drawings we got from the
             surveyor and I am just trying to remember which is
             the larger of the two.

        Q. Have you got those figures please, the areas? - A. Yes,
           I think I can find them. Yes, there is sery little
           difference. Pen 3 was 188 sq.m. whereas Pen 4 was
           192 sq.m., therefore Pen 4 would be expected to have
           a slightly greater capacity.



    H
                                                       31


                                     C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. Now I was wondering, have you heard the figures 1,200
   and 1,000 mentioned for the centre pens? - A. Yes.

Q. Am I right in thinking that 1,000 would be for Pen 3
   and 1,200 for Pen 4? - A. I think that they were the
   other way round on the original drawings provided
   by Eastwood. My recollection is that the Eastwood
   figures were 1,200 for Pen 3 and 1,000 for Pen 4 I think.
   Could I check back on that? I am sorry, I can't
   locate the figures. Has there been an acetate with
   those figures on?

Q.        THE CORONER: Are we talking about the alleged
     capacities which were a plan which you were shown?
     - A. From a plan by Eastwoods, yes.

           THE CORONER: It is one of your plans, Mr. Payne.
     You will be able to help us with the numbers.

          MR. PAYNE:   474 is one.   388 and 390.

           THE WITNESS: I don't think 474. Does that
     actually show the numbers? 390 is it? Yes, 390
     shows Pen 3 to have 1,200 and Pen 4 to have 1,000
     whereas our measurements suggest that Pen 4 is the
     larger of the two and we would therefore expect that
     to have the larger capacity.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: Thank you. Now from the density
     figures you gave us it was very clear that the density
     in Pen 3 was far greater than the maximum accepted
     one of 5.4 persons per sq.m. as stated in the Green
     Guide, wasn't it? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. You said you had carried out tests at the laboratory
   using people to fill a room and a density of 10 persons
   per square metre was used. Even with that density no
   one felt unsafe? - A. No one felt unsafe but it was
   under laboratoiy conditions and for a limited time.

           Just as a general observation it was perhaps
     something like a crush on a Tube Station, a London
     Tube in the rush hour, something like that.




                          Q. Now this room
                                                            32

                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


Q. Now this room that was used, it did have a flat surface?
   - A. Yes, it did.

Q. That was the only room you used for the experiment, was
   it? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. Therefore, as you didn't use a room with a slope, having
   a gradient similar to the Leppings Lane terrace, then it
   couldn't be compared with the terrace, could it, at
   Hillsborough? - A. I think it can be compared. I think
   it is an illustration of what that sort of density feels
   like.   I think it is reasonable to compare it.   The
   slop isn't that great.

Q. But it is different? - A. It is different.   Weonly   did
   the test within a flat room, yes.
Q. Perhaps though the density you achieved using that
   particular room could be compared with the flat area
   outside the turnstiles, for instance? - A. Yes, it could
   be compared with any areas really.

Q. Because there they were standing on a flat surface? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Now the people who took part in the experiment, would you
   agree the people who took part in that test knew there
   would be no real danger for them?   They would only have
   to say the word and the experiment would have immediately
   stopped? - A. That's true, but I must say some were
   apprehensive before they took part in the experiment.
Q. Do you find that often happens, Dr. Nicholson?   When
   people are taking part in an experiment, even though you
   tried to reassure them they still have this apprehension?
   - A. Well, we don't have a great deal of experience in
   doing tests of this nature.   It was really a one-off, so
   I have no experience of people's feelings before such a
   test.

Q. However, they would feel there would be no real problem
   for them? - A. Yes.   We had taken medical advice and I
   spoke to everybody before the start of the test saying
   what was going to happen, how it was going to happen, and
   pointed out that we had the proper medical care and
   attention ready should anything untoward occur.

Q. Were these people who took part calm and quiet as they
   participated in it?   They weren't a loud, shouting
   crowd? - A. Certainly not, no.

Q. Also they would have been told beforehand that they were
   only taking part in an experiment?
                                                               33

                                                C. E. NICHOLSON


          THE CORONER:    Yes, Mrs. McBrien, I think we have
     established that.

Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   And that they would be closely
     packed together.   Now I want to compare that situation
     with the situation in the centre pens at Hillsborough.
     The people there found themselves in a very tight,
     extremely unusual situation, suddenly.   They had no
     previous warning and would you agree they would soon feel
     there was very serious danger of their losing their lives
     there? - A. I can't really comment on that.   I don't
     think I have any experience of what it is like to be in a
     crowd of the densities that were measured in
     Hillsborough.
Q. But it would be a different situation? - A. It certainly
   would be different from the situation we created in the
   laboratory, yes.
Q. Also, a simple plea for help could go unanswered in the
   situation at Hillsborough...
          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry.   However
     much latitude I would like to give you, I really can't
     let you ask that question of an expert in engineering, in
     metallurgy, mathematics and physics and similar things.

          MRS. MCBRIEN:   I was going to bring psychology in
     there.

          THE CORONER:   It is actually a very interesting
     matter, the psychology, but not, unfortunately, with this
     witness.
          MRS. MCBRIEN:   I have got quite a lot written down
     here but I don't think any of it could be usad.   If I
     could just say one thing:

Q. Would you agree that the people in the centre pens at
   Hillsborough - from what you have heard - were mainly
   young, healthy, active people who were fighting
   desperately to survive that day? - A. I am sorry, I have
   no knowledge of the people within the pen at all, of the
   actual people who were involved with the incident.

Q. Therefore, the physical and mental states of those people
   you could not give any... - A. No, I really can't comment
   on that.

Q. You are not an expert on that.   Two photographs were
   exhibited on Wednesday, and these were PR.1/7A, and the
   number for that is C.360.   Could we have that up,
   please?   We also had another one, PR.1/8A.   I would
   prefer that one please.
                                            C. E. NICHOLSON


      MRS. PERKINS:    That is C.495.
     MRS. MCBRIEN:    On that photograph my son John is
seen alive and it is timed at 15.03. He is also seen
alive later on other photographs, much clearer than this
particular one.    I think 10.A is about the best
photograph.   Although the density at that time was far
greater than the accepted density in the Green Guide, he
is still alive, as shown on the photograph, but there are
lots of other factors that have to be taken into
consideration at that time.    The anxiety, plus, a little
later, the breaking of the barrier.    All these things
made that pen much more dangerous.    The state of the
people, the fact they were panicking...
     THE CORONER:   Well, what is the question,
Mrs. McBrien, which Dr. Nicholson can answer?
     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Would you agree, Dr. Nicholson, that
it took more than the density, actually, to create the
real problems in that pen? - A. It is really not
something within my expertise to comment on, but as a
general observation I can imagine that people's physical
state or psychological state would influence the outcome
of the event, but it is not something I could comment on
technically at all.
     MRS. MCBRIEN:    Sir, I was wondering if it would be
convenient at this point to deal with the matter relating
to plans 275 and 276?   We have seen those plans a number
of times...

      THE CORONER:    Yes, by all means, 275.
     MRS. MCBRIEN:   On plan 275 the position of John is
marked with the number 68.    It is in front of the
barrier that broke. - A. Yes, I see.
In the transcript of the Inquest on the 23rd of April,
1990, on page 4, letter C, it says:
      "John McBrien was pushed to the right of the
      barrier..."
On plan 276, if we could have that one, it shows very
clearly that John is way over to the left and he is
clearly identified on a lot of photographs...
      THE CORONER:    What has Dr. Nicholson going to tell
us?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    I thought I could just bring this in
so we could get...
                                                                 35
                                                   C. E. NICHOLSON


          THE CORONER:   I don't think so with Dr. Nicholson,
     unless you can ask him a specific question on the
     barriers.

          MRS. MCBRIEN:      Would I be able to deal with that at
     some other point?

          THE CORONER:   Possibly.   I will have a look at
     that, but not with Dr. Nicholson.
          MRS. MCBRIEN:      All right, I just thought I could
     slot it in today.
          THE CORONER:    You are learning fast!

Q.         MRS. MCBRIEN:   Although pen 3 was full at 2.52, it
     was not a serious situation at that time, by the numbers?
     You would say looking at the densities at that time... -
     A. No, I can t say that at 2.52.    The only measurements
     we took of the density that we have confidence in were at
     3.03.    I am sorry, we weren't able to get an accurate
     figure of the density before that time.
Q. Would you say when you did take the density figures, that
   that showed gross overcrowding? - A. Yes.
Q. Unacceptable? - A. Severe overcrowding, yes.

Q. The figures you gave me earlier and the figures that were
   given later, would you say the numbers in pen 3 had
   doubled in a few minutes really? - A. No, I can't say had
   doubled in a few minutes, unless I have a figure for
   before that time.   I can only comment on the actual time
   at which we made the measurements.

Q. Therefore, when we have got the very high densities, the
   situation turned into a fatal one, would you say? - A.
   Well, yes, it would appear so.

Q. Especially as the tunnel from the terrace had become
   blocked with a solid wall of people? - A. Again...

          THE CORONER:   I am sorry, I couldn't hear the
     question, but I suspect...   Go on, what is it?




             MRS. MCBRIEN:      I don't think it is
                                                         36

                                             C. E. NICHOLSON

        MRS. McBRIEN:   I don't think it is something Dr.
   Nicholson has said, but judging by the number of people
   who had come in at that time, and what we have been
   told, it created a solid wall of people at the terrace
   end of the tunnel.

        THE CORONER:   Dr. Nicholson has told us several
   times that he can't comment as towhat it was actually
   like because he was not there andhe does not know, so
   it is a hopeless task if you are trying to get him to
   say something on that score.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Well, that is all.    Thank you very
   much, Dr. Nicholson.

              Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL
Q. Dr. Nicholson, you calculated the density of fans in
   pen 3 shortly after 3 o'clock, in calculations founded
   on two photographs? - A. Yes.

Q. What we now know as C360 and C495 which were shown on
   the screen a moment or two ago? -A. Yes, I think they
   are the same as the ones we used, PR ....

Q. Yes, PR17A and 8? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. The time on those photographs is shown as 15.03.   We
   know that, in fact, is 15.02, the corrected time. Did
   you know that? - A. I understand there hasbeen some
   adjustment but it has not been part of our
   investigation.

Q. Those photographs, I think you told us, were taken from
   a point high up on the South Stand? - A. Yes.
Q. A point from which it was easier to assess the numbers
   in the pen, the densities in the pen, because of the
   elevated position? - A. Yes.

Q. Indeed, I think you told us that you were unable to
   produce very reliable calculations later on because of
   the low angle of the photographs, in attempting to
   assess densities at an earlier time? - A. That is
   right.

Q. You did not have any photograph of the right-hand front
   corner of the pen - by that I mean where pen 3 meets
   pen 4, behind the goal? - A. That is right.

Q. And indeed you had to calculate the numbers along the
   perimeter fence itself, not by counting heads which you
   felt unable to do because of the compaction of the
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON

people in the crowd, but by creating a static model? -
A. Yes, that is correct.

And it was a model that you created whereby everyone
was described as very tight? - A. Yes, that is a
reasonable description.

I am taking the phrase "very tight" from the evidence
you gave yesterday. - A. Fine.

You estimated similar densities at the same time for
pen 4 using contemporary photographs? - A. Yes.

And using your expertise you calculated the numbers
that you believed to be in pens 3 and 4 at that time? -
A. Actually initially we just said that the densities
were similar; it was, I think, during the proceedings
of the Court that we calculated an approximate figure
for pen 4.

I see. I would like, if I might, to show you one or
two other photographs and I would invite you to compare
the densities shown in those to the ones that you used
in calculating the density in pen 3. First of all,
might I invite Sergeant Griffiths to put up C3477? Dr.
Nicholson that is a photograph, as I am sure you will
appreciate, showing the majority of pen 3 and indeed
the front corner of pen 4? - A. Yes.

I would like to direct your attention particularly to
the front of each of those pens and perhaps for
convenience sake take the area below the horizontal
bar, running along the top of the perimeter fence. Do
you follow? - A. Yes, I have got it.

It is right, isn't it, that in that photograph the
density of people in the front of that pen is wholly
different from the densities that you observed not only
in the photographs that you calculated the density in
pen 3 at 3-minutes-past-3, but also the other
photographs you saw of the state of the crushing at the
front of those pens? - A. Yes.  It is difficult from
the definition of this photograph, but it does appear
to be less crowded than the figures that we used for
our density calculations.

Perhaps you would like to have a look at this
photograph where the definition may be rather better.
Take first of all the situation in pen 4 at the front,
in that corner, as you can see, my question is the
situation is wholly different from the densities that
you were assuming and saw from the photographs taken
shortly after 3 o'clock.
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON

Pen 4 in this photograph is to the left hand side,
isn't it? - A. It is to the right hand side. You can
see a "4" on the gate? - A. Yes, but I think pen 4 is
to the left. The gate is gate 4. Could we just
establish which of the pens ....

     MR. PAYNE:   You can see the radial fence just to
the left of gate 4.

     THE CORONER:   If you look at the radial fence and
gate 4, to the left of the gate is the radial fence. -
A. I am just trying to establish which radial fence it
is.

That is the one between 3 and 4.

     MR. RUSSELL:   That is the radial fence between
pens 3 and 4, Dr. Nicholson. - A. Right, I accept what
you say.

     THE CORONER:   Sergeant Griffiths, can you put
C275 up, because it demonstrates .... - A. Yes, I see.
I had not seen this photograph before.

     MR. RUSSELL:   No, I did not expect you to have
done so but now that you can be reassured that what is
seen in the bottom right hand corner of that photograph
is the front of pen 4 you would agree with me that the
density shown in that photograph from the assumptions
and the calculations you were working on to produce
your densities for pen 3 shortly after 3 o'clock? - A.
Yes, entirely different.

And equally if you run your eye along to the left, the
density at the front of pen 3, underneath the higher
horizontal bar of the perimeter fence, is equally
wholly different? - A. Yes, it is.

Please turn, if we can just continue this, to two more
photographs taken at the same time, C478, as far as you
are concerned, Dr. Nicholson, it is the next photograph
in that bundle? - A. Thank you, yes, I have that.
The question is the same, Dr. Nicholson. The
photograph is at the same time, taken a little further
to the right, that is the front of pen 4, and again
concentrating at the front of the photograph, close to
the camera, the densities there are wholly different
from what they were shortly after 3 o'clock? - A. Yes.
Finally, C344, the same question, the density in that
photograph at the same time, in other words 14-
minutesto-3, the corrected time, is wholly different
from that which you observed and used as a basis for
                                                                 39

                                                C. E. NICHOLSON

       your calculations, shortly after 3 o'clock? - A. That
       is right, yes.

    Q. Dr. Nicholson, those photographs show the position at
B      14-minutes-to-3 and you have told us that you did some
       calculations at 8-minutes-to-3, 14.52? - A. Yes.
    Q. You were seeking to calculate at that stage the
       capacity of pens 3 and 4, which you now know have a
       maximum permitted capacity, or a maximum guide for its
       capacity, of all together 2,200? - A. That was the
       figure, yes.

    Q. 1,000 in one and 1,200 in the other, 2,200 all
       together? - A. That was the figure put forward by the
       Club, yes.

    Q. You produced two figures at 14.52, 678 in pen 3 and 821
       in pen 4? - A. Yes.

    Q. Which make a total of 1,499? - A. Yes.

    Q. Say 1,500 to all intents and purposes.    That is a
       figure which as I understand it you do   not have a lot
       of confidence in? - A. No.

    Q. In scientific terms then I expect you would say that
       you would want to incorporate into that figure a large
       margin of error? - A. Yes.

    Q. And I expect you would not be bound as to which way the
       margin of error went, it could be as margin of error
       either way? - A. No, I think from our analysis we have
       used enlarged photographs and examined them with
       magnifying glasses, so we would only identify
       positively discernible heads, so I think the figures
       that we produced could only be regarded as minima.

    Q. All right, but let's assume for the purposes that it is
       approximate or roughly right. If you have 1,500 people
       at 14.52 in pens 3 and 4 you have, do you not, just
       over two-thirds of the capacity of 2,200? The
       percentage would be 68%? - A. I am not saying that it
       is even an approximate figure. We just can't put any
       sort of accuracy on the measurement we took at that
       time.

    Q. But you would agree as a matter of arithmetic that if
       that figure was anywhere near right it would produce a
       figure of just over two-thirds, 68%? - A. Yes, if the
       figure is assumed to be right then that is correct.

    Q. Can I now move on to your estimates of the capacities
       in the pens and very briefly the flow rates, and I




H
A                                                             40

                                               C. E. NICHOLSON

       think I can deal with this very shortly. Your best
       estimate of the numbers in pens 3 and 4 at 3-minutes-
       past-3 are 3,183? - A. Yes, that is the joint figure.
B   Q. Your best estimate of the numbers who came through
       turnstiles A-G and gate C is 9,734? - A. Yes, I will
       take your word that is my figure.

    Q. If one takes away everyone in pens 3 and 4 from that
       figure of 9,734 we are left with a figure of 6,551 who
       were not in pens 3 and 4 and who were seen to come
       through either gate C or turnstiles A-G? - A. Yes, that
       is the difference in the ....

    Q. It is a matter of simple subtraction? - A. Yes.

    Q. So are we not left with this simple proposition, that
       more than two-thirds of the people who came in through
       gate C and turnstiles A-G went elsewhere than down the
       central tunnel? - A. Well, I can't comment on whether
       they -- I don't know what they did, once they have
       gone down the tunnel. They could still disperse
       sideways I think.

    Q. All right. More than two-thirds who went in through
       gate C or through turnstiles A-G did not end up in pen
       3 at 3-minutes-past-3? - A. I can't say that. I can't
       say where the people who entered through gate C went,
       whether it is two-thirds of them or one-third of them.
       There is no data that I can refer to that gives any
       indication ....

    Q. Forgive me, Dr. Nicholson, I think we are at cross
       purposes. I have aggregated the total that went
       through gate C and A-G. - A. All entrances, right.

    Q. You have identified the best estimate of that figure as
       9,734? - A. Right.

    Q. You have identified a best estimate of 3,183 in pens 3
       and 4 at 3-minutes-past-3? - A. Right.




                   /Q. That leaves a surplus
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


That leaves a surplus of that 9,734 of 6,551? - A.
Right.

Or a little more than two thirds of the figure entering
through Gate C and turnstiles A to G? - A. As a total,
yes.

Again I thought I could deal with it simply. The point
I am seeking to make is simply this; more than two
thirds of the people entering through gate C and
turnstiles A to G ended up somewhere other than Pens 3
and 4 at three minutes past three? - A. Yes.

Finally, Dr. Nicholson, you are not as I understand it
an expert on crowd behaviour? - A. No.

In particular you do not hold yourself out as an expert
on how a crowd might behave in an emergency? - A. No, I
am not an expert in that matter.

But you have been asked about it and forgive me if I
pursue it a little. You have been shown photographs of
the gates at the entrance to the tunnel, on the
concourse end of the tunnel, that lead to Pens 3 and 4?
- A. Yes.

We have heard evidence at this Inquest from a man with
an enormous amount of experience in footballing crowds,
a former Police Superintendent, who was in charge of
the policing of this ground for three years, between
1982 and 1985, and who, subsequent to his leaving,
became and has been since 1985 the man who is the
Security Officer at Hillsborough Football Ground, a man
perhaps who has rather more experience of crowd
behaviour than yourself? - A. Considerably more, yes.

He was asked about the wisdom of shutting those gates
when Pens 3 and 4 were full of people.  I am going to
read to you what his observation on that was and ask
you whether you would disagree with it. He was asked:

   "Q. What is your comment about that? - A. I
   would have thought that was a most dangerous
   practise because as you are aware the gates
   open inwards.  If there was an emergency, if
   there had been an explosion or anything which
   caused the crowd to run up that tunnel, the
   opportunity to open those gates in the face of
   the oncoming crowd would have been disastrous.
   They would have pushed the gates to and the
   weight of the people would have pushed them
   against the doors, so to do anything like that
   would be extremely stupid."
                                                                       42

                                                           C. E. NICHOLSON



         Would you seek to disagree with a man expressing that
B        view with the experience I have outlined? - A. No.

                             Further bv THE CORONER

    Q. You will be relieved to hear you have nearly finished.
       I have got two or three questions from the Jury? - A.
       Yes.

              THE CORONER: Before I do that, Mrs. McBrien, I
         did find this number for you. You will remember you
         said how many were coming through per second and what
         you said actually, Dr. Nicholson, is, "Yes, I think we
         worked out that it averaged out across the width of the
         gate, a row of people going through shoulder to
         shoulder.  It took them about a second to pass the
         gate. So each second there was a row of some five or
         six, whatever it was going through but that the rate
         stayed steady for the whole gate opening period."

             THE WITNESS:     For the gate opening, yes.

              THE CORONER:  I think I am right in saying if you
         had got around 2,000 odd in about five minutes, that is
         about 400, is it not?   You said yes in a very sort of
         rough and ready way.

              MRS. McBRIEN: I must have written it down
         incorrectly.  I thought I had heard 75 or 76.

              THE CORONER:     It is difficult because you are a
         long way off.

              MRS. McBRIEN: Just five were going through the
         gate in a row like that.

              THE CORONER:     That was the assumption.

              THE WITNESS: That is purely a simulation of the
         rate that we measured really.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   The crucial point is that the
         throughput through that gate was (a) steady on your
         graph apart from the initial blip? - A. Yes.

    Q. And (b) you have worked out how many came through, and
       we know how long it took? - A. Yes.

    Q. So it is a simple matter of arithmetic to work out how
       many people came through and how many it took per
       second? - A. To get in, yes.
                                               C. E. NICHOLSON


I do not think I need   trouble you to do the sum. The
Jury have asked me to   ask you a couple of questions
which I will do. One    of them I do not know whether you
will be able to deal with but the first one is this
and these are to do with the Green Guide — were any
calculations done for the whole of the terrace, Pens 1
to 7 for the 5.4 persons per square metre? In other
words did you work out the floor area so to speak or
the whole of the Leppings Lane terrace and multiplied
it out? That is the first part of the question. The
second part is, was the figure of 7,200 a correct
figure for the terrace so far as you know? - A. I do
not think we did a calculation for the whole of the
terrace.

So you do not actually know? - A. We were concentrating
almost exclusively on 3 and 4.

The second question, again you may not be able to help
on this, what was the capacity for the North West
Terrace — and the North West Terrace is the bit at the
top — which has 2,700, is it, in the Safety
Certificate?

     MR. PAYNE:  It is 2,900 in the Safety Certificate,
subsequently corrected to 1,500.

     THE CORONER:   The question really is, what was
the capacity for the North West Terrace at 5.4 persons
per square metre and was the figure of 2,900 correct?
Can you help on that? - A. I have only a vague
recollection of this and I do not have the figures with
me. I think that we did check that area from the break
drawings and I remember that the figure was less than
Eastwood's but I have not got the actual figure with me
I am afraid. That could be obtained.

The next question I have for you is Mrs. McBrien’s
question put another way.  I will read it out but I do
not think you will be able to answer it. I will read
it as the Jury have asked it. Would elements such as
excitement and panic have made a big difference to
pressures compared to people in a controlled
experiment? If you cannot answer the question say you
cannot answer it? - A. I cannot answer.

I do want to ask you a supplemental question which you
can answer — at least I hope you can — going back to
your experiment in your anteroom, how did you load the
room, if that is the right word? Did you just work out
the capacity of the pen and then rush them or did you
layer them? What did you actually do? How did you get
them in? Do you know what I mean? - A. Yes. We
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


calculated what the specific densities would be for
each separate person going in and then counted them all
in one by one going through a door. So we knew what
5.4 looked like. We opened the door again, fed in some
up to 8 and then up to 10. So it was a very gradual
controlled process.

It was a gentle filling? - A. A gentle filling, yes.

I just want to ask you a question which I am afraid
will be displaying my ignorance and please forgive me.
I want you to make an assumption. Supposing you had a
barrier, and I am picking a different figure, let us
take 20 kilonewtons to it and it broke? - A. Yes.

Start again. Supposing you had two barriers which were
identical and that you had tested one to destruction
and found that it broke at 20 kilonewtons by applying
your force? - A. Yes.

Over say the test period of five minutes as the Green
Guide suggests. What I want to ask you is this;
supposing you then took the second one which was
identical and you applied 20 kilonewtons as fast as you
could but only left it there for a second.  In other
words, you put the pressure on and you took it Off,
would it break or would it stand? - A. The 20 figure is
completely hypothetical, is it not?

It is entirely hypothetical and I have deliberately
chosen a figure which has got nothing whatever to do
with any figures which you might get confused with? -
A. Yes, I understand.  It depends very much on the
flexibility of the structure. There is a difference
between applying a static load to something and
applying a dynamic load to it. It depends really
whether the force that is felt where the load is being
applied is transferred to the rest of the structure.
In a very quick pulse there probably would not be the
time for the whole barrier to feel the 20 kilonewtons
per metre. Under those circumstances the barrier would
remain standing. So if it was for a slightly longer
period then the barrier would feel it or have time to
react to it. So there is a difference between a static
applied load and a dynamic applied load.

In other words, time can feature in the equation as
well? - A. Yes, it can, yes.

Yes, I just was interested and I wanted to know. Just
bear with me one moment.  I knew there was a bit more
to it than pure inquisitiveness because the relevance
to that is in relation to your static model? - A. Yes.
                                             C. E. NICHCTSON



The leaning crowd because did you incorporate a time
factor into the model? - A. No, it is a purely static
model.

What you are saying is that once you have got the
theoretical load you are assuming it will be evenly
distributed and you will get your effect? - A. Yes.

So it would have to be applied, the model would have to
be applied, for whatever length of time it takes to do
the transmission? - A. Yes.  It is purely to illustrate
the effects of slope, the effects of the weight of
people, purely without any external force. The angle
would change the sum, the slope of the terrace will
change the sum and the weights.

I think I have understood but I was just wondering
whether any allowance for that had been made? - A. No,
we have not included anything dynamic.

Dr. Nicholson, every witness seems to take considerably
longer than I anticipated but I am most grateful to you
for your time and effort in explaining very simply and
very clearly what is obviously a most complicated topic
in many regards. Thank you very much indeed? - A.
Thank you.

     THE CORONER: Ladies and gentlemen, we are not
going home yet but we are stopping for another ten or
fifteen minutes and then we will begin with Dr.
Eastwood. We will clearly not finish but we will at
least begin.

     MR. TOULSON: Before you rise, may I just clarify
one matter? I think what I said yesterday was not 100
per cent accurate although it was substantially
correct.  It was in answer to your question about
Eastwood's method of numbering the barriers.  In fact,
on the Eastwood chart the relevant number was 502. He
actually numbered the spans. You will remember there
are three rows, 1, 2 and 3.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. TOULSON: So that where on his test result you
have got 1 to 2, the test rig was on spans 1 and 2. It
is then moved along and where it says 2 to 3, its arms
span 2 and 3. The result is the same but I was
incorrect in suggesting that he numbered the posts in
the opposite order. Dr. Nicholson has numbered his
posts 1, 2, 3, 4, with 4 being the nearest and 1 being
the furthest.
                                                 C. E. NICHOLSON



     THE CORONER:   Yes, I understand.

     MR. TOULSON: Eastwood on the test results sheet
that we were looking at, in the left hand margin, you
have got span numbers and so if you look at the nearest
section of rail, horizontal there, that span is No. 1.
Moving along to the left that span is No. 2, that span
is No. 3, so that on the first test recorded there the
rig is on both span 1 and on span 2. Of course, it is
being loaded from the other side. On the second test
it is on span 2 and on span 3 and in each instance that
which is recorded is the amount measured on the
trailing leg so that what is record is as I indicated.
That is to say, the first which is recorded is the
movement of the nearest section of span and what is
next recorded is the movement of the middle span.




                       /THE CORONER:     So what you are.
                                C.E. NICHOLSON



      THE COBSNER: So what you are saying is the
span between Eastwoods numbers 1 and 2 is known as
span 1/2, well it is known as span 1.

     MR. TOULSON:    It is known as span 1.

      THE CORONER: But the line which says 1-2
refers to the rig being applied to those.

      MR. TOULSON: Two spans, exactly. The resuiSt,
the net result is as I indicated but what I said was
not 100 per cent precise and therefore I thought it
right to mention it.
      THE CORONER: Dr. Nicholson, it makes no difference
to any of your replies, does it? - A. No, it doesn't.

But I am grateful to you for clarifying it because
otherwise later on we would get in a mess.

      THE CORONER:   Right we will now break.

               (Short adjournment)


      THE CORONER: Dr. Nicholson, could I have you
back for one more minute before we have Dr. Eastwood?

Dr. Nicholson, I just want to go back to this photgraph
MP1A 14, that is the 14.52 photograph, the one that
you weren't too happy with with regard to the figures?
- A. Yes.

And in a way, I have had a look at the paragraph in
your report, it is Section 52? - A. Yes.

I don't necessarily want an answer from you now but
it may be that you might want to go away and think
about it and if need be we could always have you back
for a couple of minutes just to deal with it, but the
figures which you obtained from that photograph are
of course substantially lower than the figures which
you obtained from the 15.03 photograph? - A. Yes.

The point I really want you to consider. There are
two possible explanations that occurred to me.
One, that the photograph is just so bad that you just
can't count the number of people. The other possi­
bility is that when you look at the two figures and
compare them, you say to yourself:  "Well is it
because it is so much lower that it can't be right?"
Do you see what I am saying? - A. Yes.
                                                           48

                                         C.E. NICHOLSON



Q.   That is really what I want to ascertain.      Yousee at
     15.52 Gate C was just opening? - A. Yes.

Q.   For its major opening? - A. Yes.

Q.    Is the explanation for the differences infigures because
     of that or is it because you can’t work from the photograph?
     - A. It is basically because we could not work the photo­
     graph to any greater accuracy and just trying to identify
     the heads on that photograph was much more difficult than
     the enlargedphotographs that we used for the other analysis,
     the Pen 3 analysis, so it was purely based on that visual
     observation of heads rather than any feeling that there
     should be less crowding at the time.

Q.   Or more as the case may be? - A. Or   more, whichever.

Q.   In other words you are saying it was a technical problem
     of counting? - A. Of identification.

Q.   Of identification sorry, which gives you the concern
     about its accuracy? - A. Yes, precisely.

           THE CORONER: Okay, well in fact you have probably
     answered my question on that. Thank you very much indeed.

           I don't think I need to ask anybody else whether
     they want to ask anything on that particular point.
     Mr. Russell, I think you dealt with it and Mrs. McBrien
     dealt with it as well. Thank you, Dr. Nicholson.

           MR. RUSSELL: Sir, before Dr. Eastwood is sworn
     may I raise one matter arising out of that and I apologise
     for not doing so more promptly.

            Would it be possible to see the photographs from
     which Dr. Nicholson attempted to calculate density at
     14.52?

           THE CORONER: The answer to that is yes but not
     today because we have not got it in the building but we
     know which one it is and we are sure we can find it
     and we will do that.

           MR. RUSSELL:    Thank you.


                          WILFRED EASTWOOD Sworn

                             Bv THE CORONER:

Q. Good afternoon, Dr. Eastwood* - A. Good afternoon sir.
                                 W. EASTWOOD


It is Dr. Wilfred Eastwood, isn't it? - A. That is so.

Perhaps you had better tell me your qualifications and
who you are? - A. I am a Fellow of Engineering sir.
I am the senior partner in Eastwood & Partners, Consulting
Engineers.
You too, I think, are a Doctor of Philosophy amongst other
things? - A. Amongst other things sir. The Fellowship
of Engineering is the senior qualification that I have.

Now Eastwood and Partners. You did not of course set
up your company straightaway. You were working for
somebody else and then eventually you formed the company
of which you are the senior partner? - A. I was Professor
of Civil and Structural Engineering at the University of
Sheffield and then became a Consulting Engineer and
started the firm of Eastwood and Partners.

You were appointed by Sheffield Wednesday to be the
consulting engineer to the Club. Is that right? - A. That
is so sir.
In about 1978 I think? _ A. Yes sir.

And you might be interested to know I think you are the
first witness who actually straddles, if I can put it,
the whole of the period of the Safety Certificate; the
terraces without pens and so on, so we will listen to
you with interest.
      Presumably the Club might well have had engineers
before your time, I don't know, but whatever the reason
you were appointed in 1978? _ A. That is so.

And in very round terms how did you see your task. What
were the parameters of your appointment? - A. I am of
course a professional engineer.  I had had some modest
experience in football grounds but I had never for
example worked to the 1976 Green Guide. It was the
first occasion on which I had come across the Guide.

Were you in fact instructed because it was known that
Sheffield Wednesday was going to become a designated ground
and would have to be licensed? — A. That is the reason sir.

So you then had to apply your mind to that Guide, I take
it? - A. Yes.
In order to advise them with regard to what was required?
- A. Yes.
 Is it right that at that time, if we just concentrate
 on Leppings Lane terracing as we have done for the
 last X weeks, the terracing was open? - A. That is so.
                                                         50

                                       W. EASTWOOD



Q. I don't know whether you can help me but were the perimeter
   fences in place yet or not? - A. Yes sir but not quite
   in the same form as they were on the day of the disaster.

Q. But there was some perimeter fencing already up? - A. Yes
   sir.

Q. But the terrace itself was a completely open expanse?
   - A. That is so.
Q.   Ithink I am right in saying that you set about your task
     and amongst other things you sought to work out the capacity
     for that terrace? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Am I right in thinking that as far as the floor area is
   concerned you used plans which had previously been
   prepared, you did not prepare new drawings? - A. That is
   so sir. The Club were able to provide plans for that end
   of the ground and the North Stand and my firm were
   commissioned to prepare plans for the South Stand and
   the Kop end.

Q. Itake it that those plans which you used    had been prepared
   by what you took to be competent ....    A. A highly reputable
   firm of consulting engineers.

Q. And you had at that time certainly no reason to doubt
   their accuracy? - A. None whatever sir.

q   . perhaps you could just tell me how one sets about, or
      at least how you set about in 1978/79 calculating the
      numbers, because we know what the numbers are in the
      Safety Certificate and they have not actually changed
      have they since that date? - A. No sir.

Q. So tell us how does one do it? - A. The calculations at
   that time were done rather more simply than in the 1986
   Guide.and substantially for each crush barrier, depending
   on whether it was the higher strength, the A barrier,
   or a lower strength, the B barrier, and depending on
   the slope of the terrace, the Guide at that time told
   you that you could take into account a strip of the
   terrace behind the barrier which was 3 metres, 4 metres
   or whatever long depending on the strength of the
   barrier and the slope and you could then draw on a plan
   all these areas behind the barriers and you added them
   up and then it was 5.4 to the square metre.

Q. Was it 5.4 per square metre if the barriers were type A
   barriers and 27 if they were type B? - A. The spacing
   had to be nearer if they were type B but it was still
   5.4 but it was a shorter distance behind the barrier.
                                                            51
A                                       W. EASTWOOD



    Q. So what you are saying is there was not a bracket? - A.
       No, it was either an A barrier or a B barrier and if it
       was an A you could take say 4 metres behind, if it was
       a B 2.8 or whatever the figure would be.




c



D




E




F




G

                            Q. It was going ....




H
                                              W. EASTWOOD


It was going to be 5.4 per square metre on that basis? -
A. That is so.
So no adjustments for other factors, as appears to be the
case in the 1986 edition? - A. No.
One of the primary tasks is to work out the square
footages and take the slope into account.   In what sense
did you have to take the slope into account, because if
it was always going to be 5.4, what difference did that
make? - A. Maybe I have misled you.   In working out the
square footage you took into account the slope.    Having
got the square footage, square metreage, you then
multiplied by 5.4 per square metre.

In other words you had to make appropriate adjustments to
the available space, depending upon the type of barrier
and the slope and once you had got to a figure of usable
space, in fact, you then multiplied that by 5.4 and that
gave you a number? - A. Very good, sir.
I think the number you originally arrived at was higher
than the number that eventually went into the Safety
Certificate? - A. Yes.
Why then did you decide to propose a lower figure than
that number? - A. The lack of gangways which are
recommended in the Guide was something that had to be
taken into account.   I suggested to the Licensing
Authority that a reduction of 10% in the calculated
number of people who could go on to the terrace might be
an appropriate compensation.
In fact the calculated figure was 8,000, presumably.
You suggested 10% off? - A. Seven thousand two hundred.
We will ignore the North West terrace for the time being.
Was this proposal in fact agreed by the powers that be,
so to speak? - A. Yes.   It was the only one of my
figures which was accepted.
What other figures were... - A. Well, it all documented,
but I suggested 16,000 spectators for the Kop, and they
gave a figure of 16,850.   They put my figure up by 850.
I took the actual number of seats in the ground, and they
actually took a lot of those seats out and took 600 off.
The result was that the Certificate finally said about
150 more people than I had proposed.   They did take one
of my figures; one they reduced, and the other they
increased.
In fact the only one they accepted, in the event, is the
Leppings Lane... - A. The whole of the Leppings Lane
terrace.
                                                            53

                                                   W. EASTWOOD


Q. At that time, of course, this was really when you were
   just taking over, there weren't crush barriers already in
   situ? - A. That is so.
Q. These had been installed by predecessors to you, I take
   it? - A. Yes.
Q. Did you at that time feel that the numbers were adequate
   or that you needed to do anything about them? - A. They
   weren't adequate if at any rate there was to be a
   reasonably large crowd on the terrace.   They weren't
   adequate and so we proposed additional barriers to
   supplement those already there.
Q. Do I take it that this supplementation was put into
   effect? - A. It was carried out.
Q. They were all grade A barriers?    - A.Yes.    Every barrier
   in the ground was grade A.    We   took the decision to have
   nothing but grade A barriers.
Q. Did you actually have to upgrade the old ones or were
   they grade As? - A. A number of them had to be upgraded.

Q. On the Leppings Lane terrace, did you have to upgrade
   those as well? - A. Yes, there was upgrading on the
   Leppings Lane terrace.
Q. In fact the way the Certificate works is that you had to
   carry out your testing of the barriers within seven
   months of the date and then you went on to your cyclic...
   - A. That is so.

Q. Just so we can dispose of this point: you had to test
   initially 20% per annum, which was subsequently increased
   to 25%? - A. That is so.
Q. It was agreed that these would be done in batches round
   the ground, rather than individually? - A. That is so.
Q. Did you at that time - it is a long time ago - were you
   concerned about the number of turnstiles available to
   service the area? - A. I didn't even know how many
   turnstiles there were, sir.   The Club had had long
   experience of administering those turnstiles with very
   much larger gates.   As recently as the mid-1960s they
   had been letting 65,000 people into the ground and now it
   was being reduced to 50,000.   Of course there was good
   management of crowds at the turnstiles by the Police and
   so I was asked not to regard turnstiling as being part of
   my duties.   You will find, sir, that nowhere in any
   document or any Minutes is there any reference to
   turnstiles to me or by me.
                                                               54

                                                     W. EASTWOOD


Q. Do I deduce from that in fact your task was specific in
   the sense you were asked to do things by the Club and
   then you did them?   Would that be right? - A. That is
   so, sir.

Q. Presumably if you were asked to advise on the capacity,
   you would then treat that request as implying not merely
   the calculation, but advising if you thought of anything
   else needed doing in relation to that? - A. Obviously any
   of the things that were clearly within my province, and
   there were large numbers of things which were not.   If
   it was within my province then obviously I have an open
   ended commitment to behave reasonably and carefully.

Q. I should have asked you earlier.   Are you yourself a
   football supporter? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you stand on the terraces or do you sit in a seat, if
   you can get one? - A. Nowadays Ihave two shareholder's
   seats, but as a young man I used to stand on the
   terraces.

Q. Therefore, looking back you can still remember a little
   bit about what terracing is like? - A. Oh, I stand on
   terraces now.   For example, after I had completed a
   design - the construction of the Kop, after it was
   completed, on several occasions I went and stood on
   various parts of that new Kop toget the feel of it and
   make sure everything was all right.
Q. You stand there and enjoy the match but you are also
   working at the same time? - A. I paid to get in, siri
          THE CORONER:     Did you hear that, Mr. Catchpole?

          MR. CATCHPOLE:     I am keeping my head down, sirI

Q.        THE CORONER:   I want just to deal with the issue of
     the gangways because I think it is a relatively simple
     matter which I can dispose of.   You knew there were no
     gangways on that terrace? - A. Yes.   I devoted a section
     of my report to the Licensing Authority pointing this
     out.

Q. Did you have any concerns about the fact there were no
   gangways, on the assumption that a reduction in numbers
   was made to allow for that? - A. Yes.    A reduction in
   numbers, sir...    Actually, I don't regard gangways as a
   major factor affecting safety.    They are much more for
   convenience.    After all, the calculated exit time from
   that very small pen is eight minutes and most people are
   within about 12 metres of the exit.    It takes you eight
   minutes to take twelve strides and it wouldn't be any
                                                            55

                                                    W. EASTWOOD


   less if there was a gangway because it is the tunnel
   which determines it.

   It is convenience and people wanting to go to toilets.
   Of course, if I may add, sir, if there had been a gangway
   on the day of the disaster, with a completely clear path
   with no crush barrier from top to bottom, almost
   certainly in front of the tunnel we would have had a much
   bigger tragedy.   In terms of causation it is a great
   blessing there was no gangway.

Q. You have mentioned the 12 metres, so I might as well
   dispose of that, it is right if you measure it certainly
   diagonally, you can get locations which are more than 12
   metres from a designated exit? - A. Yes.   It depends how
   one defines a designated exit, sir.   The two gates at
   the top of the two barriers, which are just over a metre
   wide, and it is 13 metres from back to front, so if you
   count those two in as well as the tunnel, there is a
   great sweep of people near the bottom who are within 12
   metres of the two gates in the radial fences, and then,
   of course, another great lot of people within 12 metres
   of the tunnel.   Even than, sir, I come back to the point
   that it is as much as anything for convenience rather
   than safety, because if you are going to take eight
   minutes to get from the front to the back, it doesn't
   matter whether you are going 20 metres or 12, you are not
   going to be in any more danger and you are not going to
   get out any more quickly.
Q. We have heard various interpretations of what the Green
   Guide means with regard to the 12 metre rule, but you are
   saying is that whatever it means you don't think having a
   gangway in that particular terrace would have made very
   much difference.   Indeed, you feel it might have been
   dangerous, depending where it was, of course. - A. No,
   not depending where it was, sir, anywhere in those pens.
   They were so full that they would have had to be packed.
   The gangway would have had to be packed and there would
   have been nothing to stop the pressure going right from
   top to bottom down that gangway.
Q. By definition a gangway has no barriers across it? - A.
   No.
Q. That is right, isn't it? - A. That is so, sir.

Q. I want to move to 1981 for a moment.   This isn't
   strictly an engineering question, but it might be within
   your knowledge as a footballer.   Were you aware that an
   incident occurred in a match in 1981 on that terrace? -
   A. I was aware of an incident.   I was not aware of its
   magnitude or nature.
                                                         56

                                                 W. EASTWOOD


Q. Did you know what type of incident it was? - A. It is
   very difficult now, sir, ten years later, to know exactly
   what I knew then and what I have learned since.    I
   remember talking to the Club Secretary a day or two later
   - I wasn't in Sheffield on the day.    I remember talking
   to him a few days later and being told there had been
   some crushing and the Secretary of the Club gave me his
   thoughts on why it had happened.    I was not aware there
   had been any injuries.
Q. In fact since then you have learned there were injuries?
   - A. I have learned since but only after the Inquiry.

Q. You didn't know it at the time? -A. I didn't know until
   the Inquiry.
Q. It would be right to say that at that point in time,
   whatever the extent, there were no radial fences at all
   on that terrace? - A. No, sir.
Q. Shortly after that incident somebody started discussing
   the possibility of radial fences.   Can you just tell me
   what your understanding was in relation to those? - A. My
   understanding was that it was the Club that was
   suggesting them and I regarded the proposal as having
   come from the Club at that time.   I now know, of course,
   from reading the papers at the time of the Taylor
   Inquiry, that in fact the Police instigated the putting
   in of the fences with the Club.   It was my firm
   impression until the Taylor Inquiry that it was entirely
   the Club.
Q. You were asked to do the design work.   Were you asked to
   make any recommendations in relation to them? - A. We
   were asked to split the terrace into three, approximately
   equal, by the Club, but I now know that was a suggestion
   of the Police, with good reasons.




          Q. Did you know why
                                                          57

                                               W. EASTWOOD


Q. Did you know why anybody wanted the fences? I realise
   you did not know it was the Police who suggested that
   but were you given any explanation as to what the
   purpose of them was? - A. Oh, yes. There was
   discussion at visits to the Ground, and when the
   Working Party went round we were invited to accompany
   them, although we were not members, and it was quite
   clear that there had been this incident in the semi­
   final in 1981, it was caused by a mal-distribution of
   the crowd, and that the splitting of the terrace into
   separate pens would make it possible when one of the
   pens was now comfortably full to prevent further
   spectators going into that pen, and hence you would get
   a reasonably uniform distribution. There might be a
   mal-distribution within a pen but you could get
   reasonable equality between the three.

Q. That was because there were, in fact, three modes of
   entry into the Ground? - A. Yes.s

Q. The central tunnel and round the two edges? -   A. The
   two sides, yes.

Q. We have heard from others that it also gave you
   flexibility with regard to segregation. Did you know
   that? - A. Yes. This was also another point although I
   always had in mind that the primary purpose was, as I
   now see in the internal Police memorandum when this was
   being instigated, Chief Superintendent Herald used the
   words, "More accurate control", as his main reason, and
   I took that to be more accurate control of numbers,
   because the use of the word "accurate" means to me
   numbers rather than behaviour.

Q. When you designed them you have already mentioned the
   gates at the back and I know we are only talking about
   three, and we have now got another two, but it does not
   really matter, was that always part of your design
   scheme that there had to be communication along or
   through these ...? - A. Yes. The very first drawings
   that were issued had those gates in, slightly wider
   than were actually put in. In my letter I said 1,150
   millimetres, and they were put in at 1,100, which I
   think was the Fire Service figure.

Q. An insignificant difference? - A. Insignificant, yes.
Q. Can you tell me, you designed the gates at the back -
   did that come from you or was it a suggestion which was
   put to you, that the gates should be at the back? - A.
   I cannot be sure of that, sir, no. There was a strong
   input from the Fire Service, for example, from the
   Police, from the engineer and the building surveyor of
   the Town Council. In those early days of the Safety
                                              W. EASTWOOD


Certificate there was a great deal of discussion and
to-ing and fro-ing both informally and on the
telephone, and where it came from I don't know. I
suspect that it did not come from the Fire Service
initially because I used 1,150 as the width, and their
magic number is 1,100 as you know, because it is two
people wide, but I could not be sure.

In any event, the proposals were put up and eventually
approved by the Working Party? - A. Indeed.

Having got that approval the work was put in hand and
these fences were   erected? - A. Yes.

At that time were   there already the littlegates in the
front of the perimeter? - A. Yes. Of the seven gates
which were there on the day of the disaster, five were
in existence. One was put in simply as a personnel
door by the Club and was not meant for use by anybody,
Police or anybody, and another one was put in, in 1985,
at the request of the Police, when the central radial
fence was put in.

Yes, that is what we call enclosure 5, is it? - A. The
new gate, sir, was in pen 4. Pen 4 now had a strip cut
o f f ___

And lost its gate. - A. Yes, lost a gate.

So you had to put   a new one in? - A. Yes.

At that time, perhaps you could just giveme your
thinking at that time as to what changes if any were
required to the Safety Certificate, having put these
radial gates in? - A. 1981, sir.

Not radial gates, radial fences, sorry. - A. Radial
fences. In 1981, firstly we had to adjust the crush
barriers, in two ways. Firstly, in order for people to
be able to get down we had had relatively long, lateral
runs of crush barriers. Now we were cutting into some
of these and in some cases they blocked up the way
down. In fact, in one case I think there was not any
way down, so we had to create an opening. In addition
to that there was the question of what to do about
those crush barriers which came right up to the radial
fence, and which it was thought would provide a
climbing over "horse", if you like, for somebody to get
on and go over into the next pen. Now, that was the
subject of long correspondence but in the end all the
ones up to the radial fence were left in, but some of
the fence lines, the crush barrier lines, had to be cut
with gaps left in them.
                                            W. EASTWOOD


What about the fact, as indeed you have told me, one of
the objectives of putting these fences was in order to
be able to improve control, or get more accurate
control I think was the word that you used? - A. Yes.
Did that not necessitate establishing figures for each
individual area and re-doing, if you like, the schedule
to the Safety Certificate, and if not why not? - A. Not
scheduling figures for each area because there was not
point. There was no way of actually counting the
number going into a pen so there was no point in doing
such calculations.

Why was there no possibility of counting the people
into the pen? - A. Without discreet paths into each of
the pens, with its own turnstiles, there was no really
manageable way of counting them in.

In other words, what you are saying is that unless you
had dedicated turnstiles and dedicated pathways, so to
speak, or walls, you could not tell where people would
go simply at the turnstile end, that is right? - A.
Exactly so, sir, and so in 1981 I did do the first of
my sketch schemes for creating separate paths into each
pen, with its own turnstile and own facilities.

That scheme, in fact, was not adopted in 1981, was it?
- A. No, sir. It was many years ahead of its time.
The Green Guide at that time made no mention of that
kind of thing and I had really no basis for pushing it.
I did prepare sketches and they were found on file, of
course, when our files were taken away.

But you say because you could not count the people into
the pen there was not any need tostipulate numbers in
the Certificate? - A. That is so.

But how did you then envisage that the estimation of
filling would be done, if you were only going to use
one of the pens, for instance? - A. If only one pen
were to be used then obviously the Police, whoever was
in charge of the ground, the stewards, whoever it may
be, who were in charge of the filling of the ground
would have to observe and use judgment as to whether
that particular pen was full, and shouldn't we now
switch to another one. That was not how it was
normally done, of course, sir. In fact, I have never
been at a game where it has been necessary to do it
that way; there was never an occasions for it. In
fact, you left it all open, or you had two pens open
and only enough people came for one or whatever.

So are you saying then that you continued to look at
the terrace as if it were a unit? - A. That is so, sir.
                                                              60

                                                   W. EASTWOOD


    Q. Did you base that view on the fact that there were the
       gates at the back which allowed passage along, or what
       other reason did you have for that? - A. Not allowed
       free passage, sir. When I submitted the scheme in '81,
B      the minutes of the meeting at which the Working Party
       considered it are now available, and there is a record
       of the discussion in which the Fire Service said that
       those gates have got to be under control, and the
       Police said they had to be under control, and in fact
       the letter which I received said that those gates had
       to be open and under Police control.

    Q. How did you interpret that, as a matter of interest,
       that expression? I recollect that you wrote and you
       did not mention control, but it came back as a
       condition, didn't it? - A. That is so, yes. The word
       "control", sir, in the sense of those gates at the top
       of the radial fences, is that what you mean?

    Q. Yes, that is what I mean. - A. My interpretation was
       that there would be a Policeman or Policemen actually
       at the gate or within easy reach of the gate, on days
D      when there were not many people there but nevertheless
       they could go there.

    Q. What function did you think that they would perform? I
       know I am taking you a little bit out of your field. -
       A. It depends on the game, sir, but if we come to a
       game like the one on the day of the disaster where you
       know it is going to be a full gate, a full terrace, in
       the early stages those gates could be used for people -
       early stages of filling - for people to go through.
       The people who come first want the best view and some
       will find their way automatically into the centre pen
       behind the goal. Others who did not know the ground
       might find themselves round the end and think, "I would
       like to be behind the goal" and provided there was
       still plenty of room it would be perfectly all right
       for the Police on duty to let them into the centre pen,
       but there will come a time, because it is the place
       most people want to be, where a decision has to be
       taken that at least for the time being no more people
       into that centre pen, and let's have a few more at the
       sides, and that it would work in that way.

    Q. When your scheme for individual turnstiling was turned
       down, for whatever reason, in 1981. - A. 1985, sir.

    Q. '81, I am talking about. - A. Turned down, sir, is
       rather a strong phrase to use. I prepared a sketch and
       showed it to the Club Secretary.

    Q. I see, well not proceeded with. Would you be happy
       with that expression? - A. Yes, that is better, sir.




H
                                           W. EASTWOOD


I was not intending it as a criticism, that phrase, I
was merely trying to convey that it was not
implemented. Did you consider that at that time,
without hindsight, that had any safety implications? -
A. As I said a few minutes ago, sir, I think that
scheme was very much before its time in 1981 and I was
not in any way seriously concerned about it. It would
have been more convenient and easier, but we were all
working in the aftermath of knowing that, for example,
for eight successive semi-finals between 1971 and 77,
eight successive years, there had been 11,600 standing
on that terrace, at each one, and we had now reduced it
to 10,100. We had put in a lot more crush barriers and
we had improved control by putting in radial fences.
Now, that overall picture was improving year by year
and you grew in confidence, and I should add that any
worries I ever had anyway were not about that end of
the ground. One is always more concerned about the
enormous Kop, which is not controlled.




             /Q. How many people
How many people do you get on the Kop? I have
forgotten it. It is a huge number, is it not?- A. It
was 21,000.

At that time? - A. Yes.

Obviously you were doing other work as well and you
were doing your rounds, doing your testing. You
yourself designed the rig which was used on the
barriers, did you not?  - A. I am sorry, sir, Ijust did
not catch you.

It is all right, you have the same problem as me. You
yourself designed the rig which was used for testing
the barriers and you did the rounds, so to speak? - A.
Yes.

We will come back to the barrier in slightly more
detail later? - A. Yes.

In 1985 or thereabouts I think further changes were
proposed to the terracing and tell me about that? - A.
Yes, a further radial fence was instigated by the
Police through the Club to divide the central pen into
two.  In addition, an additional radial fence was put
in which in part was at my instigation arising from the
Liverpool match in February 1985 when for the first
time we had that west end shared by home supporters and
away supporters in large numbers. There were so many
Sheffield supporters turned up, it was not the
preponderance of Liverpool ones —    so many Sheffield
supporters turned up to watch a good football team that
the Kop had to be closed and the Pen 6 had to be opened
for Sheffield Wednesday supporters. So you had the two
lots of fans with only a radial fence between them and
this made it difficult obviously for Police control and
I had the thought that if that were repeated it would
be good to have a no man's land and that that no man's
land would enable the Police to stand between the two
in the two metre gap and indeed use that to get up and
round into the crowd should it be needed.

Yes, I see. - A. So the Police asked for the central
one. I think it is true to say that I instigated the
other one.

It was a convenient access route and it also provided a
split? - A. Yes, one thought it would have had a great
value on the day of the disaster and, in fact, it was
never used.

Not significantly used anyway? - A. Not significantly,
                                                                   63

                                                           W. EASTWOOD



    Q. I think there was also some suggestion in 1985 that in
B      addition to the gates at the back some gates should be
       put into the radial fences at the front. Can you
       recollect that? - A. Yes, it was not quite like that,
       sir. The Police requested a further radial fence which
       was never built which, if we can look at the model,
       sir, or have we got a plan?

    Q. Put the plan up. It will be easier if you put the plan
       up because unfortunately the model is great but we
       cannot see the terrace? - A. Yes.

    Q. It is C.274 the plan (plan put up on screen). - A.
       Would it help if I pointed, sir?

    Q. Yes, I think it would. Would you mind going over? - A.
       The proposal, sir, is that the extra radial fence
       should be there which would have created a pen which
       had no direct access to any of the recognised exit
D      routes.  Instead of just having a gate at the top it
       was proposed there should be one at the bottom and also
       one here and one there in this particular radial fence
       as well. That idea I did not like at all for the
       obvious reason that there was a pen very much cut off
       and it never appeared on the drawing but the Police
       orally asked for a gate there and a gate there as well
       as the one which is already there and the one which
       would have gone there provided the fence had been
       constructed.

    Q. So what you are saying is that the gates in the front
       of the radial fences were not proposed for all the
       radial fences but for an offence which never existed
       which was never erected? - A. Yes.

    Q. And secondly into    - A. Into the no man's land.

    Q. In fact, you have indicated it would have been into the
       no man's land from what we now know to be Pen 6, not
       from Pen 4? - A. From Pen 6, sir.

    Q. It was not proceeded with because for a start that
       fence was never put up? - A. It was not proceeded with.

    Q. Putting in these extra fences, did that in your view
       make any difference to the premise with regard to the
       safety certificate? - A. Each alteration at the ground
       merits consideration and so far as I know very careful
       and punctilious consideration was given to all the
       changes by the Working Party. Certainly in the kind of
       conversations we used to have together they were
       considering the various things that were done and the




H
                                                                     64

                                                            W. EAS1W00D


          general opinion was that every time we did one of these
          things we were making the whole safer, weren't we?
    g     There was not a need to change.

        Q. So what you are actually saying to me is that whatever
           we might think today at that time —    and I am not
           making any judgment about what we are thinking today? -
           A. Yes.

        Q. At that time the understanding was that putting these
           fences in and gates at the back and so on was actually
           an improvement from a safety point of view? - A.
           Obviously I am not a member of the Working Party and
           the Licensing Authority.  I was not at their meetings
           but that was the understanding.

        Q. I take it that all these alterations, wherever they
           emanated from, once you had made your designs, done
           your designs and thought about them, were put up to the
           Licensing Authority or Working Party for their
    n      approval? - A. Yes, indeed. Everybody was very
           punctilious about that kind of thing and our drawings
           were always submitted, considered by Committees. We
           would get the responses back asking for changes or
\
           approving what we had applied for and then they were
           built. During the building they were inspected and
           when they were finished they were inspected by the
           Licensing Authorities.

        Q. Do I gather from that, so far as you were concerned at
           that time you had no intimation that the Licensing
           Authority was not happy with what was being done? - A.
           So far as I was concerned I gained the impression that
           everything that was done they were happy with.

        Q. In 1985 you had another go at splitting up the
           turnstiles, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. Just tell me again in your words, what happened and
           what you were asked to do or whether this was an "own
           initiative" job? - A. It was still an "own initiative",
           sir, because the 1986 guide had not come out. By the
           1986 guide there is a recommendation that ideally there
           should be the separate routes but we were still working
           to the old guide. There were discussions about the
           control of the crowd and so it was minuted after a
           meeting in February when the Working Party visited the
           ground. The words are that at some time in the future
           the Club would submit proposals for segregation and
           both the Club and we acted with alacrity because the
           minutes arrived a few days later.  I wrote on the
           minutes for my staff "Get on with this as quickly as
           possible" or whatever.  I have a copy of it. Within




    H
                                                                    65

                                                            W. EAST?OOD


       three weeks we had submitted to the Club the first
       plans and were encouraged by the Club and two or three
Q      weeks after that we put forward the firm proposal to
       the Licensing Authority.

     Q. I think in fact subsequently the Club had second
        thoughts about the way that they wanted the turnstiles
        arranged and you had to do more design work but the
        principle was always the same? - A. The principle was
        the same for three or four different schemes.

     Q. The principle was that you would have X number of
        turnstiles serving discrete areas? - A. Each
        compartment, yes.

     Q. Which would have meant that you would have been able to
        count in? - A. Yes.

     Q. As you have already said, of course, it does not mean
        to say that you would not have maldistribution within
J)      that pen? - A. Yes.

     Q. But at least you would be able to control the numbers
        who were going to that section? - A. That is so, sir.

     Q. The scheme, in fact, was approved by the Local
        Authority I think in principle.   I do not mean given
        formal planning permission but the Working Party said,
         "That seems okay"? - A. Yes.

     Q. It was not proceeded with because of the Bradford fire
        disaster? - A. That is so, sir, yes.

     Q. Is that because... - A. Club expenditure associated
        with the Bradford fire.

     Q. That was in fact my next question.  Is it because the
        resources which were available had to be reallocated to
        other remedial work? - A. That is so.

     Q. Which at that time was perceived to be more urgent? -
        A. Indeed it was not only urgent but it was imperative,
        some of it. The fireproofing of the South Stand was
        actually commenced within two and a half weeks of the
        Bradford fire, quite major works, which were taken very
        seriously by the Fire Service. The Chief Fire Officer,
        Mr. Wright, personally got involved in it and it all
        had to be done and, of course, it cost a lot of money.

     Q. The design work which you had done for the Leppings
        Lane end, you have already said that segregation was
        mentioned but was the safety aspect a factor in it? It
        was clearly a good scheme in the sense that you knew




H
                                                                    66

                                                           W. EASTWOOD


        where people were but was it segregation, safety or a
        combination, that applied? - A. From my point of view,
]£      sir, it was the controlling of the number of people in
        the various pens which was my prime responsibility.   I
        am not a crowd control expert at all but it was the
        thought of discrete numbers going in by discrete routes
        that was attractive.

     Q. If it had been implemented — this is a hypothetical
        question entirely because we know it was not — would
        you have assumed that the Safety Certificate in that
        situation would have had to be amended? - A. It would
        have had to be then because there were discrete pens
        instead of being joint to each other and it could have
        been amended at that time because there were now to be
        turnstiles whereas there was no point before in putting
        numbers in the Safety Certificate without turnstiles.

     Q. Are you in fact saying that you   could have done the
        exercise of saying it should be   X and Y, A, B, C, in
J)      each of these pens but it would   have been a meaningless
        thing because in the end it was   all one terrace? - A.
        Yes.

     Q. One was entirely dependent on visual control? - A. Yes,
        sir.

     Q. In 1987, we have already seen this exhibited, there was
        I think a Semi Final going to be played and somebody
        rang through to your company and said, "Are the
        capacities still right?" or words to that effect.   I
        think Mr. Strange dealt with the call in the first
        instance and his first reaction was, "I don't know.   I
        think we will have to adjust them downwards. We had
        better do it now. Sooner than later", I think he said.
        Do you remember this? - A. Yes.

     Q. I am putting it to you. Have I got it right up to now?
        - A. You are very good with the wording, sir, yes.

     Q. It was presumably referred to you? - A. It was.

     Q. Your comment was, leave capacity provided that gates at
        the back of the radial fences remained open or you may
        have said under control.  I cannot quite remember? - A.
        Those words are Mr. Strange's who wrote a very cryptic
        memo encapsulating in two sentences a discussion which
        took several minutes.  I do remember the discussion.
        Of course, it was only two years old at the time of the
        disaster and so it is not like these things ten years
        before. Some things you do remember and I recall that
        Mr. Strange met me as I went in my office. Normally I
        would say "Sit down" and I was going out again. We



H
stood and talked. He said he had had this request from
the Club as to whether the numbers were still the same,
the 10,200 it said instead actually of 10,100. I asked
him whether the Safety Certificate, did he know whether
the Safety Certificate, the new Safety Certificate, had
yet been issued by Sheffield City Council because we
had known from April 1986 they were working on it and
this was now a year later. I said, "Well, we should
always stick with the Safety Certificate". Just as
when I suggested 16,000 for the Kop and they gave the
Club 16,850 I did not object.
    I regarded the Committee decision, with a lot of
expert people, as being what we should go along with.
So we should not change the Safety Certificate unless
we have good reason. The other thing is that because
of barrier 144 having been taken out, the loss of
effective area there was of the order of 15 or 16
metres, 70 or 80 people. Suppose that the Licensing
Authority had decided to deduct 70 or 80 or 100 from
the 10,100 you would still have had 10,000 and they are
spread everywhere and the difference is 1 per cent. If
you are going to reduce the number in Pen 3 or Pen 4
then it has to be done visually and to take a hundred
out of 10,000 you are not going to get any different
answer that anybody could sensibly take account of.




                         /Q. You have very nicely led.
                                                   68

                                     W. EASTWOOD



Q. You have very nicely led me on to Barrier 144. We have
   already heard that at the first inspection after Sheffield
   City Council became the Licensing Authority the Officers'
   Working Group were doing its rounds. I think although
   you weren't ai.member you were present? - A. No.

Q. Forgive me. So do you know in fact what prompted the
   decision to remove that barrier? - A. Since the disaster
   of course I have had access to the files. There is a
   Minute on the file of the Club that on 18th of June or
   whatever, a day in June of that year, there was a meeting
   with senior Police Officers which discussed a number of
   things, but one of the Minutes says that the Officers
   gave notice that when the, and they did not say the next
   annual visit of the Working Party, they said that when
   the special visit was paid to the ground with regard to
   the new Safety Certificate that we were all waiting for,
   that they would be suggesting the removal of certain crush
   barriers.

         Now that information was never passed to me or
   anybody in my firm. The Police may have said it to other
   people than the Club but they did not notify us. It
   was not raised at a meeting associated with the new
   Safety Certificate, it was the normal annual inspection,
   or as it had been with South Yorkshire twice a year
   inspection, and they met on the 7th of August.

Q. 1985 I think wasn't it, or was it 1986? - A. 1986. They
   met on that day. I was not present; had no advance
   notice of what was being proposed but one of my assistants
   Mr. Strange was and of course the City Council's engineers
   who ___    Most of the time there is a continuing figure
   sir, which is Mr. Sheriff of the City Council but
   Mr. Sheriff has had heart trouble and there are good
   reasons why I am sure you have not called him. He is
   a very senior Engineer, full fellow of the Institution
   of Structural Engineers, the highest grade, Chartered
   Engineer, and he has been a continuing link. He I think
   was present that day plus I think Mr. Butler who had
   newly become part of their team, but Mr. Sheriff in
   effect is the senior of the two.

         Now they were there and Mr. Strange but of course
   it is not an engineer's job. An intelligent engineer can
   make a contribution but the real experts in what goes
   on on the terrace have to be the Police who are there
   and have the job of controlling it; controlling the
   crowd; they see them at close quarters, so it was a
   Police suggestion that it should be done and they took
   the decision then and there I think are the words that
   have been used.

Q. That is what I was going to ask you. We have been told
   but as far as you know the decision was actually taken
                                                   69

                                    W. EASTWOOD



  by the Working Party on site? - A. On site and I had no
  prior knowledge. I did not know anything about it at all.

Q. Who took the barrier out, I don't mean physically did you
   do it, but was it done under your control? - A. Yes, a
   number of things were requested that day, not requested
   required I think is the word, particularly the barrier
   because the Police had the concern on August Bank Holiday
   Monday the first match of the season was to be Everton,
   a very large crowd expected. The Police had perceived
   this danger from the location of Barrier 144. In their
   internal memos, as well which I have now seen, they
   refer both to going in and coming out of the pen and they
   were very anxious that it should be out within the next
   two weeks so Mr. Strange called on the Club Secretary
   on his way out of the ground and told him what had been
   required and the Club took the view if it was required
   do it straightaway before that game and then, either later
   that day or the next day, probably the next day, Mr. Strange
   wrote a long Minute of that meeting which now appears to
   be the only Minute anybody has got and it is not a Minute
   of a Meeting it is the things that affected us, but he
   brought that to show me, including taking this barrier
   out and told me of the discussions that had gone on about
    the pros and cons.
Q. You obviously accepted it because the barrier came out
   but did you express, have any fears at the time? - A.
   As far as these balanced judgments, I went to the ground
   in the following two days, I don't know which of the days
   but I went on holiday on the Friday and this is a Tuesday,
   and I went before going on holiday to have a look and
   went upstairs to look and I could fully see the reasons
   why Inspector Calvert who had been working on those
   terraces for at least the last 10 years, the whole of
   the time that we had been Engineers to the Club and whose
   views we respect very highly and that he was the one who
   had put forward the case for removing the barrier.

         I considered the pros and cons and decided that
   it was not appropriate to object. That does not mean
   that I had serious misgivings about it, it was one of
   these balanced judgments one has to make. In any case
   I am not the expert to make that judgment, it was the
   person who was asking for it and the Police who are the
   real prime experts, but the rest of the Working Party
   we are all now by this time experienced in football
   grounds and intelligent people so we can't absolve
   ourselves, but I did not regard it as being something
   which I should write objecting to.

Q. This is the final question, you have already answered
   it once. If - and indeed you may well have done the
                                                           70


                                        W. EASTWOOD



      sums since - but if you had sat down and worked out the
      effect on capacity of removing that barrier, what
      reduction would it have made in capacity overall? - A.
      The length that was taken out was about 4 metres I think
B     sir and the strut behind which it was calculated to
      cover just under 4 metres probably, so we are talking
      of 16 square metres at 5.4 to the square metre, so we
      are talking of 87 people out of 10,100 and that would
      just have been meddling with the total.

    Q. In other words you thought it was an insignificant
       reduction in relation to the total? - A. To the end
       of the ground as a whole and that is what we were
       dealing with.

    Q. I did say it was my last question but I will just ask
       one more because I will forget it by next week.

             ffhe Green Guide obviously, from what you have
       said, stipulates the area behind the barrier as being
       the crucial one. What about the area in front, because
       if you look at the plan, as you will I am sure be able
D      to visualise, you actually get quite a long strip all
       the way down to I think it is Barrier 128 at the bottom
       there? - A. You quite rightly pointed this out in
       earlier evidence with Dr. Nicholson that gap and it
       was that gap which caused Mr. Strange some concern when
       the decision was being taken. He wanted to extend the
       barrier which has the gap that goes down to the next
       one, he wanted to extend it into the safety fence.
       He told me that day or the day after that he had
       suggested this and the feeling of the Working Party
       had gone with the Police that this was another jumping
       off point and this was not a matter of whether we cut
        one out, which it had been the first time, this is
       whether we put one back in where there had never been
       one before and at the end of the end of the discussion
       it was decided to leave it.

    Q. So what you are saying it was actually considered? -
       A. It was considered yes.

    Q. And for whatever reason the Working Party decided
       against it? - A. That is what I was told.

             THE CORONER: Dr. Eastwood we are stopping but
       unfortunately we have to carry on on Monday so Monday
       is a 10.30 start for us, so would you be kind enough
       to be back on Monday at 10.30.

             You are on oath now. Technically you remain in
       the witness box until we finish.  I am most grateful
       to you for being here this afternoon.




H
                                                        71


                                        W. EASTWOOD



      THE WITNESS:     Thank you sir.
      THE CORONER: Ladies and gentlemen, Monday we start
with Dr. Eastwood. Tuesday morning come what may, well*
we had better not say come what may because you never
know what may come, but the plan is the Club and ®ur
walkabout.
      Can I just remind myself what you specifically
want to do. You want to see the Club Room; you want to
have another look at the Control Box I think, is that
right, the Police Control Box; you want to climb up
where Mr. Motson sits and where the Press congregate
where Mr. Curry was and I think you were interested in
looking through binoculars as well. We do miracles in
this place and we have managed to borrow a pair. We
rang the man and we found out what magnification he had
and we have managed to find a pair of equivalent magni­
fication, so we should be able to lend it to you but you
must r e m e m b e r that they will be empty but at least you
will have some idea of what it looked like through
binoculars.
      If we can retrieve the binoculars from the jury
before we leave then of course I have no objection
to other people looking through.
      Perhaps I could say the binoculars are being lent
to us by Dixons for which I am very very grateful
because they are not a standard pair.
      MR. KING:      Sir, they now have sponsorship on the
transcript.
      THE CORONER: That is right.   (Laughter)   Well it
is only fair that we should mention it because they very
kindly agreed to do it.
      MR. TOULSON: Sir, may I enquire whether it is
your intention to conclude this witness's evidence
before the next stage of the view because he is to continue
on Monday?
      THE CORONER: Hopefully Dr. Eastwood will be con­
cluded on Monday but if for some reason he were not then
we would continue with Dr. Eastwood in the afternoon. I
would not postpone the viewing because we have got* to
make transport arrangements and all kinds of things and
it is just too difficult to do it. If we don’t finish
with Dr. Eastwood on Monday afternoon then we will have
to carry on as soon as we come back.
                                                       72

                                  W. EASTWOOD



      MR. TOULSONs  I wonder just in those circumstances
whether if we were in measuring distance - I mean I hope
as you hope sir that we will be well through Dr. Eastwood
on Monday, but if that were not the case I wonder if
you would consider sympathetically sitting a little later
on Monday to conclude his evidence?
      THE CORONER: You would like me to go on a bit later
on Monday is what you are saying?
      MR. TOULSON:   If necessary to conclude Dr. Eastwood's
evidence.
      THE CORONER: Perhaps I could say I think we would
go on till 4.30 on Monday.  If you finish with Dr. Eastwood
earlier obviously we will not, we won't start with another
witness, but I don't like going beyond 4.30 becaase we^have
tried it I think once and we found it quite hard, didn't
we, so we will do that but I don't think we will do more.
I think it is also terribly inconvenient for everybody
else to go on beyond 4.30. 4.30 I accept. You accept
that as well don't you if it is necessary?

      Estimating time is dangerous but I don't think that
I am going to spend very much longer with D r . Eastwood
myself.  I will pick half-an-hour shall I say and then
of course it depends how long your colleagues take.

      MR. ISAACS: Sir, no other witnesses apart from
Dr. Eastwood on Monday?
      THE CORONER: Definitely no other witnesses
scheduled on Monday apart from Dr. Eastwood. I can't
realistically see that we can fit anybody else in.

      Anybody else have anything to say apart from a
nice weekend. Thank you all very much indeed. Monday
then, 10.30.
         (The Inquests were adjourned until 10.30 on
                Monday, 25th February, 1991)
