   HER MAJESTY'S COROWER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)




        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRC6P

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

                The Town Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

             24th January, 1991




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




    Fro* the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
         Official Shorthand Writers,
     55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                              Page

ARTHUR BUTLER Recalled

     Cross-Examined by MR. KING                1*
     Cross-Examined by CATCHPOLE              23.
     Cross-Examined by MRS* McBRIEN           33.
     Cross-Examined by MR. FOSTER             42.
     Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN   44.
     By THE CORONER                           46.
     Further Cross-Examined.by MRS. McBRIEN   47.
     Further by THE CORONER                   49.
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE      52.
                       r..   T   *   ■


LEGAL DISCUSSION                               58.

ARTHUR BUTLER Recalled

     Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE       63.
     Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN   64.
     Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL             74.
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING        81.
     Further by THE CORONER                    82.

DAVID MALCOLM BOWNES

     By THE CORONER                           83.
                THIRTY SEVENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                  THURSDAY. 24th JANUARY. 1991

     THE CORONER:        Good morning.   I think we had got to
you, Mr. King.

                     ARTHUR BUTLER Recalled

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
                           •   «


Mr. Butler, one of the last questions which my learned
friend Mr. Payne put to you, the gentleman who asked you
a nuaber of questions, was what was obvious with
hindsight.   I want to ask you a few questions about what
was obvious as a result of structural changes which you
told us about at the West Terrace, without dealing with
hindsight for the moment just what the obvious result of
the changes were as they took place.   If I could take
you through those changes.   Could we look at C.383,
which is that helpful little plan which Mr. Payne
produced for us yesterday showing the changes on the West
Terrace, on the Leppings Lane standing area?

Mr. Butler, originally when the Safety Certificate was
issued in 1979 we know that the standing area of the
Leppings Lane end, the West Terrace standing area, was
just one wide open expanse from the left to the right
until one came to the fencing leading into the far right
hand pen, is that right? - A. As far as I understand,
sir.

There always was a fence dividing off the right hand pen,
wasn't there?    I wonder if Mr. Griffiths can just point
out what I mean.    That which is described as the North
West Terrace was always divided off, wasn't? - A. I would
not know that, sir.

So be it, but I just wonder if Mr. Griffiths can help.


274   .   THE CORONER:   No, not that one, I think the plan,


     MR. KING:   I wonder if Mr. Griffiths might use his
famous pointer and first of all Mr. Griffiths point out
the West Terrace in its entirety?   Keep your pointer
there and then move slowly across the terrace and
Mr. Butler follow the pointer with Mr. Griffiths.   I am
now taking you across the West Terrace as it was in 1979.
You would have no radial fences.   You would just keep
going straight across, wouldn't you - from the
documentation? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                  A. BUTLER


If Mr. Griffiths keeps going eventually we come to the
area which in the Safety Certificate is described as the
North West Terrace.   I wonder if that could be pointed
out.   Now that area was itself not part of that wide
open expanse.   There was a different route to get to
that? - A. Yes, indeed, sir.

Then the first changes came in 1981 and those changes
were at the request, as I understand it, and can you
confirm this from the. documentation, that it was a
suggestion of the Police? - A. As far as I understand it,
sir.

That was to introduce two radial fences, and if we look
at C.383, they are the radial fences which are now known
as the radial fence between 2 and 3 and the radial fence
between 5 and 6, but they are the two radial fences which
cause the terrace to be divided into three sections, do
you agree with me? - A. As I read from the documentation
it was divided into three sections.   I am not certain as
to which of the two fences were erected first.

I understand that and I have used those numberings to
help ourselves because we have given them numbers now,
but basically the effect of those changes in 1981 was to
divide that terrace into three sections? - A. As I
understand.

Then in 1985 there was a further change which divided
that centre section into two?   That is correct? - A. The
centre radial fence was erected at that time.

The effect of that was to divide that centre section into
two sections? - A. Yes, sir.

All those changes were discussed at these various Working
Parties you have described? - A. As I read from the
documentation.

We know the 1981 proposal emanated originally from the
Police and I understand the 1985 changes, indeed, came
from the Police as a suggestion.   Is that also revealed
in the documentation? - A. As far as I read it, sir.

Now the   obvious effect of those changes was that the
terrace   which had originally been a wide open terrace,
was now   divided into a number of small separate sections?
That is   right, isn't it? - A. As I understand it.

One doesn't need hindsight for that, one can see that
from the very fact of the changes? - A. Yes, sir.

They had, of course, exit gates at the back, the radial
exit gates at the back to lead from one section to
                                                             3

                                                    A . BUTLER


   another?   That was shown on the documentation, wasn't
   it? -A. Yes.

Q. However, for all intents and purposes they were separate
   self-contained sections, weren't they? - A. There were
   separate sections, yes, sir.

Q. They had exits at the top, but they were self-contained
   within themselves.  That is to say, the radial fencing
   dividing up was continuous? There were no gaps in the
   radial fences as they -went down? - A. That's right.

0. If you didn't go out o£ .a pen, a section, via that side
   top radial gate you could not get out of the section once
   you were in it by going sideways because you would meet
   the radial fence?   That's obvious, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. The need to ensure that the numbers in any given area at
   a football stadium did not exceed a number which was the
   safety number was obvious?   That need to ensure that
   numbers did not exceed a safe number was always obvious.?
   As a proposition it is always necessary to ensure that
   the numbers entering a football ground into a particular
   area should not exceed a safe number, that is obvious? -
   A. Yes.

Q. My learned friend Mr. Payne was asking you about that
   very early on in his cross-examination of you because he
   said that as a result of these changes and the dividing
   up into separate sections, how could you control the
   numbers going into the individual sections.   He asked
   you that question, do you remember? - A. I remember many
   questions.

Q. Yes, but I suspect you remember that question.   Of
   course that question was directed to how you ensure that
   the numbers getting in don't exceed a safe number.   Do
   you understand? - A. I believe so.

Q. Obviously one way was if one had a system whereby the
   numbers entering an individual section were separately
   counted in some way.   That is obviously a system, isn't
   it? -A. It is.

Q. Of course, it was pointed out to you yesterday that the
   only system for counting the numbers entering this West
   standing area was through the turnstiles and those
   turnstiles simply counted the numbers entering the whole
   of the West Terrace?   That is what was pointed out to
   you yesterday? - A. Yes.
                                                A . BUTLER


The counting system could only tell you whether or not
10,100 people had entered, because that was the number
fixed for capacity?   That's right, isn't it? - A. I
don't know that particular figure, but yes.




        0. Well, whatever the figure was
                                                        5


                                        A. BUTLER' -


Q. Well whatever the figure was it could only tell you how
   many were entering the Leppings Lane standing area generally,
   it could not tell you how many were entering the individual
   sections.  That is right, isn't it? - A. That is right sir.

Q. That was obvious as soon as those changes were made
   because no change was made to the counting system, so
   it was obvious, wasn't it? - A. Being that this was looked
   at by others I cannot answer for what was obvious at that
   time sir.

Q. I am not dealing now with hindsight I am just looking at
    it as a fact.  You have got the factual division of the
    terrace into individual .sections, because you have des­
   cribed that to us. All right, that is a starting point.
   You understand that? - A. I understand it.

Q. You have got a fact that you have got a counting system
    through turnstiles which only tells you how many are
    entering the terrace generally, it does not divide it
    up into sections the counting system, but that is a fact,
    isn't it?

          MR. PAYNE: While Mr. Butler is considering his
   answer I wonder if I might just be allowed to say that
   if it is being put to him as a matter of fact that some­
   thing was obvious,   then in fairness to Mr. Butler it
   ought to be put to   whom it was obvious.

         THE CORONER:   Mr. King, you may well be developing
  that, but you did put to Mr. Butler that the 1981 alteration
  was a Police suggestion.   Perhaps you could draw my attention
  at the end to the document or reference on which you have
  based that because I can't find it in my documents?

        MR. KING:   Sir, I was asking that question because
  of information received and I was therefore asking whether
  or not it was revealed in the documentation.

          The information received, sir, if you ask me, comes
   at paragraph 125 of the Taylor Report sir.   That is where
   I find the sources of the suggestion and that is why I
   explore it with this witness.

         THE CORONER:   The reason why I query it is because
  there is a letter from Dr. Eastwood in September 1981 in
  which he says:   "I have been instructed by the Club to
  put up radial fences" or words to that effect.    He may
  of course have heard it from the Police, I don't know.

         MR. KING: And sir it may be in his documentation.
  What we have not done sir, and for obvious reasons, is
  brought out all the documentation which he has.  I am
  simply asking that which I believe to be the case to see
  whether or not it is in the documentation sir.  As I
  understood it he agreed with me.
                                                           6



A

           THE CORONER:  Yes, well that is what he did but
    what I am concerned about it is easy for a witness to
    agree with something Which happened 10 years ago when he
    was not in charge.   I just want to be sure that it is
    correct.
B
           MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, might it be beneficial if
    the jury would not mind stepping out for five minutes and
    then we could explain.   I don't think there is going to
    be a dispute about this.   It might be we can explain
    well what my understanding of it is.

           THE CORONER:. Yes, that might be easier because
    it might save us a lot o f ;questioning if we can get it
    right.   Just leave us for a few minutes.

                   (The jury retired from Court)


          MR. CATCHPOLE:   I don't know whether in this instance
    you want Mr. Butler to remain or not?

           THE CORONER: Oh Mr. Butler, perhaps it is technically
    better if you go out as well so you don't hear and Mr. Bownes
    as well.

           MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, my understanding is after the
    1981 incident the Police informed the Club that Leppings
    Lane terraces should be sectioned vertically.   There is
    a memo dated the 30th April 1981.   The suggestion came
    from the Police that there could be better crowd control
    on Leppings Lane.

           Then of course there is an obligation on the Club
    once that suggestion was received to notify the Local
    Authority in writing.  That is what I was going to develop
    with Mr. Butler.

           THE CORONER:  I am quite happy with that.  It was
    just that I had not got a copy of that memo.   The first
    reference that I could find or that I remembered. I must
    admit I had overlooked the paragraph that you mentioned
    in LJT's report, but the first reference I could find was
    the letter from Dr. Eastwood I think in September time or
    thereabouts when he says, when he actually puts up the
    proposal.

           MR. CATCHPOLE: Would it be helpful if we got some
    copies made of this, because I got a bundle prepared which
    included Dr. Eastwood's proposal and it may be better if
    we had this one prefacing it?

          THE CORONER:   That might be a good idea.




H
                                                           7




       MR. PAYNE:  May I just interject this word of
caution.   The way in which this exchange has arisen is
that Mr. King has put it to the witness that the suggestion
emanated from the Police and then he is going to go on
to develop further questions.

       Now if this point is going to assume any importance
then the matter must be seen in context.       There are in fact
a batch of documents.       I have not actually counted them
but I should think there are probably about 50 documents
spread over the period and it goes over from the Spring
of 1981 well into the Summer of 1981 when the proposal to
introduce the f e n c e s was.discussed on a good number of
occasions.   There are a lot of meetings, a lot of letters-
passing between all the parties and it certainly does riot
give a fair picture to say that the idea emanated from
the Police and then just leave it at that.

       As an illustration of what I am saying I am looking
at a meeting of the Officer Working Party on the 8th June 198:
when all and sundry, if I may say without disrespect are
present, all the people who we have been discussing over
the last day, and on the first page of this minute it says
at the bottom:

       "Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Semi-Final
       match the Club were considering revised arrange­
       ments on the terracing in front of the Stand.   An
       assurance was given that the Officer Working ^Party
       would be consulted when these had substance."

Now that is just one little fragment in the midst of con­
sideration given to this idea by all interested parties.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, perhaps I can lay Mr. Payne's
fears at rest. What I was intending to do was to put to
Mr. Butler not that particular Officer working Party minute
but the application made by Dr. Eastwood.   There is then
a minute of an Officer Working Party meeting on the 11th
of September which was convened for the sole purpose of
considering the proposals, so there is no suggestion from
my part, at leasts that this was a Police suggestion that
was railroaded through.    What I am going to be putting
is it was fully considered by everyone and everyone had an
input into it and no one thought it was unsafe at that
time.

      THE CORONER:   If I may say so my feeling is if we
are going to say that because a person has made a suggestion
to a body made up of experts therefore that person must
carry responsibility because the body eventually agreed to
it, that seems to me to be an almost forgive me ludicrous
suggestion and I don't suppose for a minute that you would
suggest that, because not only does it mean that nobody
                                                        8




in his right mind would ever make another suggestion, if
that were true, however safe or unsafe it would be, but
it also would mean that you instantly totally absolve
everybody else who has applied any thought to it, so in
that sense it does not matter much to me whether the
suggestion came from the Police, the Club, the passer-by
on the street, it does not make any difference where the
suggestion came from.

       Your concern is .that if we start with that we may
leave the jury with the implication that it is all the
Police's fault for making the suggestion.    I don't think
for a minute that the jury are going to fall into that
trap.




                         MR. PAYNE:   It just depends
     MR. PAYNE:  Sir, it just depends how it is left. At
the moment it has been put in a very bald question.  My
friend has drawn attention to this point.  He has
introduced his question by saying that the idea emanated
from the Police.  Then he is going to go on and question
the witness.  The impression left with the Jury is that
this is a Police idea and that is that whereas actually we
know there are about nine months of correspondence,
meetings, memoranda and letters passing between the
parties.  So I think the usefulness of this present
exercise is to demonstrate that when one is introducing a
question as Mr. King was-doing, and it is very important if
one is going to make a general point, to make it a fair
general point and not just to pick on one particular aspect
of it.                     •:

     THE CORONER:    That is true.  Just one second, Mr.
Maxwell, I will give you an opportunity later.   It is also
true that even if one left it at that and said nothing more
it is equally arguable and it is certainly a thought which
crossed m y mind that out of the whole of the Working Party,
prima facie the only people who thought about anything in
relation to safety on the terrace were the Police.   You can
argue it that w ay round as well if you wish.  I am not
saying that that is a fair argument either but it depends
which way you want to construct an argument.

     MR. PAYNE:  Sir, may I comment that what you are
saying is eminently sensible and shows a full appreciation
of the whole picture.  What I am concerned about is that
the Jury may not quite grasp it the same way.

     THE CORONER:   I understand that as well.   Mr.
Maxwell, I beg your pardon.

     MR. MAXWELL:  Not at all.  Sir, you will remember that
Mr. Butler has no personal knowledge of these matters and
what we are in danger here of doing is using him as a
vehicle to bring in the contents of documents.  To some
extent that is quite a convenient way of proceeding where
matters are not in controversy but it gives rise to
problems whereas Mr. Payne rightly points out this is in
effect the tip of an iceberg.  There is a huge amount of
documentation which, if we wanted to or you wanted us to,
we could introduce before the Jury.  That is something none
of us do want to do but the problem arises does so if we
are given any encouragement or permission to do this.   In
the context of this witness I say, with respect, it would
not be appropriate bearing in mind his lack of personal
knowledge of the relevant matters.

     THE CORONER:   It is a very difficult problem, Mr.
Maxwell.

     MR. MAXWELL:   It is, sir.
     THE CORONER:    This whole Inquest is bedeviled by
difficulties not least that Yorkshire County Council is
non-existent.   It has demised and disappeared.  Some of the
people at least who might have been able to give better
evidence I have not called or I am not calling.   That is
point one.   The second thing is that it would be totally
unfair to fix Mr. Butler with knowledge or foresight of
events which happened long before he had anything to do
with it.   I think it is not necessarily unfair to say to
him as an expert, as a surveyor, "If you had been sitting
in that chair" - it is hypothetical I admit - "and using
your professional experience at that time without hindsight
and without knowledge of what we know today, what would you
have thought?".   I do not think that necessarily is an
improper question.   It depends how far it is developed but
to me the problem, the issue, is a relatively
straightforward one irrespective of the timings and that
is, what was it like in 1979? He can tell us that from
hearsay, I admit, from his readings, were there any changes
made and were they done in two stages? Not that that
matters actually.   "Did that in your judgment affect the
Certificate?"

    The Certificate is only important in the - the paper is
not important - sense of what is behind the paper which is
the crucial question.  Did that affect the Certificate or
should it have affected the Certificate and were any
changes made in respect of that? That is basically all we
are asking and then if you wish - and Mr. Payne explored
that at great length - what happened from 1986 to 1989 as
far as further adjustments, if any, to the certification.
I use that word simply because it is shorthand.  I know
what I mean and I hope you do.

     MR. MAXWELL:  I have no further comment to make, sir,
if that is the way you want to develop it but it is
potentially a huge area.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, and I am determined that we will
not introduce 50 documents or 500 or however many.  We
might have to introduce a few.  I do not see how we can
avoid introducing a few because we are investigating the
question of how these people died as you have reminded me
before, and indeed as everybody has reminded me, and I
think it is relevant to know, to the issue of how, to what
extent, if any, bearing in mind we are actually talking
about the safety of the spectators or the reasonable safety
of the spectator, whether the activities which were
directly aimed at the issue of safety, what happened.   I
think that is relevant to determining the question of how
when we then put the whole thing together to the Jury and I
will do it to the best of my ability and you will judge
whether that is good enough or not.  I will do it to the
best of my ability.

     MR. MAXWELL:  I respectfully agree with all of that
but can I also respectfully remind you of what you said
earlier when you described them as being a cut off point
beyond which you would not go. My recollection is that you
gave as an example a football match in 1981 which had led
to certain problems on the terrace which, as I understand
it, had in turn led to the suggestion being made of having
radial fences to avoid lateral surges.  That is an area
which at an earlier stage, as I understand it, you said you
would not want to go into. What we are now about to do is
to open up that area.

     THE CORONER:   I do not remember actually saying that.
If I did say it I never ever intended to say that because
the 1981 football match is important to understanding not
only why the fences are there but - we have not got the
Jury and so we can say it -•it is important to understand
that in fact an incident occurred on an open terrace,
totally undivided, a crushing incident.  That is on these
very terraces which we are now talking about.

     MR. MAXWELL:   If that is right, sir, then I retract
what I have said.

     THE CORONER:   You may be right but I do not recollect
that I actually said that. What I have said is that I do
not want to examine and investigate every single football
match all over the country or indeed all over the world and
I do not intend to go into great detail into the 1981 match
because I do not think it is important.   I think we can get
all we need from the witnesses because basically all we
need to know about the 1981 match is that it took place,
that the terrace was open, that there was a crushing
incident and as a result of it people thought what can we
do or what should we do or what do we do.   Whether the
right decisions were taken is another matter.

     MR. MAXWELL:   I am not going to occupy more of your
time, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I raised it because I asked
you what your reference w a s .




                             /Q. MR. KING
                                                    12

                                              A. BUTLER


      MR. KING:  Sir, I remained very silent throughout
what has just occurred.  It did not have the sinister
connotations which everybody puts on it.   It is an
important fact only because it demonstrates the
involvement of parties in decision making, in
considerations, what is going on.   My source of the
information that it emanated from the Police was the
Taylor Report, and I took a gamble.   It may be a
calculated gamble that that which Lord Justice Taylor
had arrived at as a fact probably had some evidential
basis to it, and therefore it is possible that there
might be some documentation in support, otherwise it
would be unlikely that Lord Justice Taylor, out of the
blue, would have suggested it, although he may have
done.

     Since you, sir, and I don't mean this as a
criticism of you, had used this witness to ask him what
the documentation showed in your examination-in-chief,
I did not think it was illegitimate for me to put it to
him in that way.

     THE CORONER:    MR. King, I did not criticise the
questioning.  The only thing that worried me was that
having seen what I had seen it looked on the evidence
as if it had not come from the Police, and my only
concern - as I have done once or twice with Mrs.
McBrien - forgive me, I take you as an example - I
don't like putting to witnesses things which may not be
factually right but which I know, you know, and
everybody knows, if you put something to a witness,
particularly a stressed witness who has already been
giving evidence for six hours, it does not take very
much for that witness to agree with a point which he
may not appreciate the significance of.   If you put it
to him and say you did it yourself, then he would
respond because he can understand the issue.   He may
not necessarily understand all the issues which are put
which are peripheral to the question, and that is all I
was concerned about.

     I don't think we need prove the point.  If there
is a document which indicates that, then I am quite
happy and we just press on.  I think Mr. Payne has got
a valid point, you have not finished your cross-
examination, and I will wait to see where we go.

     MR. KING:   Sir, so there can be no further
interruptions, I will tell you now my line of cross-
examination so that everybody knows it.  I am quite
prepared to tell you all.  Sir, I am developing a
question and answer which my learned friend Mr. Payne
asked.  He asked the witness earlier on in the cross-
examination, "By what means could the numbers be
                                              A. BUTLER


controlled entering the ground?", and he got the
answer, "Well, I would have looked at the numbers going
through the turnstiles".  Mr. Payne developed that and
he got the answer from the witness, and I have a note
of it, that the witness suggested that you would have
to use the Police and stewarding to aid the
distribution of the fans, and then he said, "... by
turnstile count, together with the safe distribution of
spectators by policing and stewarding."

     We then got, near.the end of the cross-examination
by my learned friend, a similar line of questioning
which had similar answers from the witness, which I am
entitled to explore because he put it to the witness,
near the end of his cross-examination, as to the
certified number, and, "... you could have 7,000,
2,000, going into the centre pens, without being in
breach of the certificate ...  - you remember that line
of questioning, sir?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I do.

     MR. KING:   And the answer came back, "I believe
not, it would be for the Club to have responsibility
for safe stewarding, and not have 7,200 in the pens.
It would be up to the people on the day to see an area
was not overcrowded to be dangerous proportions." My
learned friend did not leave it there because he worked
to obtain an answer that it was obvious with hindsight,
in effect, that you had to give attention to the
numbers going into the pens, and the only way you could
control it was by controlling numbers, and that was an
answer he was seeking and I am entitled to develop the
two-pronged answer.  It is not a criticism of this
witness, in fact, at all, but the two-pronged
understanding of this witness in those answers that, in
fact, there was not simply the controlling of the
numbers by a mechanical count, but also, and that was
his evidence and he can't just be left there, by the
safe distribution of spectators by policing and
stewarding, and that is important.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.  In effect that will be his
opinion, and I am not stopping you asking that.   Mr.
Catchpole will then no doubt quite correctly feel
entitled to ask, as indeed we know from the
certificate, that there was no provision for stewarding
on those terraces.  He will be entitled to ask that and
I accept that.  That is because of the way the
questioning has gone.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I intend through this witness,
because it is important as I understand it to the
Police case, relying upon the fact that there were not
                                                     A . BUTLER


safety numbers for individual pens, that in some way
explains any criticism made of their conduct - and I
only say that because that clearly was the line of
questioning - sir, I am entitled to examine what was
known at the time, through this witness, because it was
a witness who was asked, and I am going to refer him to
just one or two paragraphs in the Green Guide on the
safe distribution of fans across the terraces, not
aimed at saying who should be doing it, but aimed at
explaining that that was part and parcel of the safety
system which he understood existed, and so it is
important.

     THE CORONER:     L e t ?us see how we get on.

     MR. PAYNE:   Of course Mr. King can develop the
line of cross-examination, and that is not what this
present discussion is about.  The reason that time is
being taken at the moment is because he introduced it
by the comment that the radial fences were put in at a
suggestion which emanated from the Police.  Now all he
has got to do is to rephrase that question or that
introduction to the question by saying that the radial
fences were put in after consultation with the Officer
Working Party, and all interested people, including the
Club and the Engineer, and then he can go on and
develop whatever line he wants.

     MR. KING:      I have no intention of rephrasing my
question, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I have taken the point.  I think we
will get the Jury back and we will just press on. All
I can say, before the Jury comes in, is can we please
put our questions as succinctly as we can to get our
points.

      MR. ISAACS:   May I just make a comment about
that?   I have no direct interest in this witness nor,
in fact, in the next, although I did ask one or two
questions, only to help me in my understanding.

     What I am concerned about in listening to the
questions asked by both my learned Mr. Payne and my
learned friend Mr. King, albeit briefly so far, I am
concerned really in the same way as my learned friend
Mr. Maxwell is concerned.  This witness is being used
to a degree as a sounding board for matters which he is
not really competent to answer questions about, because
his expertise, as I understand it, is in relation to
structure, and he is now being used by both my learned
friends, to give answers really from a commonsense
point of view.  In other words, just to take an example
of my learned friend Mr. King, he says well, if you do
                                                  A. BUTLER


this, and then you do that, the result is such and such
is it not, and of course the answer to a degree must be
yes, but he could say that, so could I say that, so
could you say that, sir, and this is happening, or
could happen, with regard to any number of witnesses.
His expertise is in structure, not, as we now find out,
in counting or design or anything like that.   If these
sort of questions are put to each and every witness who
comes into the witness box who has any sort of
responsibility whatsoever, then it is going to take up
time, and that is the'point I seek to make.

     THE CORONER:    Y e s ? I appreciate that.

      MR. KING:   I d o n ’t necessarily object to anything
ray learned friend has said but I am responding to what
nas already taken place with my learned friend Mr.
t’ayne, that is all I am saying, and I am entitled to
respond through my questioning to the line of
questioning which has already taken place.      It would be
grossly unfair to stop it there, that is what I say.

     THE CORONER:    L e t ’s get the Jury in.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, I will just pass, through
Hr. Griffiths, a copy of the memorandum I referred to,
even though it does not need to be proved, for your own
information.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.     Can we have the Jury
and the Witness back, please?
                                                 A . BUTLER


     THE CORONER:    Members of the jury, five minutes
always takes longer!

     Yes, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:   Mr. Butler, if I can just remind all of
us.   I had referred you to the question which was put to
you yesterday by my learned friend Mr. Payne as to what
means were available by which you could control the
numbers going on to thje terrace once it had been divided
into these sections and one of the answer which you gave
was by a turnstile count? - A. Yes, sir.

As far as that part of your answer goes you would agree
that the turnstile count which was in existence, both in
1979, any changes which had developed, when these radial
fences were put in, in 1989, the turnstile count only
told us how many were entering the terrace generally.
The turnstile count didn't tell us how many were entering
individual pens? - A. As I understand it.

When I asked you that was obvious, can I put it this way:
that would be obvious to anybody who was turning his or
her mind to how one controlled the numbers going into any
individual section.   If one asked oneself that question
one would come back with the answer, "The turnstile count
cannot help me", that is right? - A. I am not certain,
sir.   The reason why I hesitated was that I am not
certain of the operational method that was employed at
all games, being there was a wall.   I am referring to
C.274 as the plan of the ground.

Mr. Butler, may I help you in this way:  unless one had a
system of individual turnstiles controlling individual
sections then the turnstile count couldn't help?    You
would have to have an individual turnstile controlling an
individual section in order to use the turnstile counting
system to regulate how many were going into an individual
section?   That must be right? - A. Again I am not
certain of that, for those turnstiles to affect the
individual area.   The turnstiles are in two separate
banks and there is a wall in between the two, being that
the gate was closed and other controls were effective,
then the individual banks of turnstiles would show a
capacity within a particular area.

I understand that.  All I am saying to you is that if a
turnstile count is going to be useful it has to control a
particular area, doesn't it?   You would agree with that?
- A. Yes, sir.

By "a particular area", I am looking at the individual
sections on the terrace as were created by 1985.   That
                                                    A. BUTLER


is what I am talking about.     You understand that? - A.
Yes.

If in fact the turnstiles didn't control individual areas
then we have to use something else to help ensure that
the numbers in an individual section don't exceed the
safety number, don't we?   You have to use another system
if we haven't got the turnstile system? - A. Yes.

That is what I am coming to because you yesterday not
merely referred to thV-turnstile count you said, and
these were your words, "The safe distribution of
spectators by policing .and stewarding", that is what you
said yesterday? - A. I believe so.

You stick by that,   I'm sure? - A. I would   consider that
reasonable.

Indeed, when you were asked again later on in your
questioning yesterday as to how one could ensure that the
numbers in an individual section didn't get overcrowded*
you were saying it was up to the people on the day to see
that an area was not overcrowded to dangerous
proportions?   Again you said yesterday you would either
the Police or the stewards controlled the situation.
Those were your answers yesterday, you agree? - A. I
remember referring to those matters.

I want to develop that slightly if I may because it is
important.   Can I refer you to the Green Guide which you
were referred to yesterday?    You were referred to
paragraph 12 of the Green Guide.   Can we just remind
ourselves of this, Mr. Butler, this Green Guide was a
document which was used by you as a member of the Working
Party and your organisation for input purposes, wasn't
it?   It was a valuable document? - A. It was used as a
guidance, sir.

The Working Party consisted not merely of yourselves but
of representatives of the club, the Police and the other
Services?   I beg your pardon, not representatives of the
club.  It include representatives of the Police for
certain? - A. Yes, sir.

Move on from paragraph 12 which we have already looked
out, could you read out paragraph 16? - A. I am just
endeavouring to read paragraph 12 again, sir.

So be it.   Mr. Butler, paragraph 12 related specifically
to the maximum number of spectators liable to be in the
ground? - A. Yes.
                                                              18

                                                      A. BUTLER


Q.. Paragraph 14 is headed "The Problems" and describes four
    types of safety problems to be consider within a ground.
    Do you see that in paragraph 14? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    I just want you to read out one of the following^
     paragraphs dealing with those problems and that is
     paragraph 16.    Could you read paragraph 16 out? - A.
     Yes:

          "The second type, is far more important and involves
          crowd pressures. • • When large crowds are present and
          densities are high, pressures build up within the
          crowd either through motion or swaying which make it
          difficult, or even impossible, for individuals to
          control their own movements.     Under these
          conditions crowd pressures can escalate to a
          dangerous level and if a person stumbles or falls
          the crowd cannot adapt to avoid him or to stop to
          help.  Since this type of danger arises from crowd
          pressures its remedy lies in their removal or
          restraint within safe limits.     These dangers arise
          in particular on terraces and in exit routes, and so
          careful attention must be paid to restraining surges
          and similar pressures on the terraces and to
          ensuring free movement throughout the exit systems,
          such free movement is dependent upon the capacity of
          all the various sections of the exit systems and
          interactions between them."

0. Having read that out could you then turn to page 31,
   which is Chapter 8 of the Green Guide, keeping your
   finger at that paragraph 16?   Can you see page 31? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Tnis is Chapter 8, headed "Terraces and Viewing Slopes".
   Could you just read the first paragraph beginning
   "Arrangements..." - A. Yes:

          "Arrangements should be made to encourage the even
          distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide
          ease of access and egress;  to control and
          facilitate movement, particularly if a local
          emergency should arise during the event; and to
          contain pressures before they reach dangerous
          proportions.   The provisions set out here will
          assist in achieving these conditions."

Q. So Mr. Butler when you were saying to us yesterday that
   apart from the turnstile count, what one should have
   regard to is the safe distribution of spectators by
   policing and stewarding, would you have in mind this need
   which you have read out from the Green Guide to ensure
   even distribution of spectators across the terraces?
                                                A . BUTLER


     MR. PAYNE:  I am interrupting.   I don't think
Mr. Butler said that at all.   What happened yesterday
was I was cross-examining him about the need to have
access to the separate sections controlled by turnstiles
and in that context he then said, "Yes, but in the Safety
Certificate there is something about stewarding and
distribution."   Then we looked at the Safety Certificate
and we found there wasn't that at all about distribution
by stewards and the passage that Mr. Butler referred us
to was paragraph 7 which talked about the orderly and
lawful behaviour of the spectators, but not at all
dealing with this point which I agree is an important
point, about controlling the distribution of spectators
into particular sections.

     It is quite wrong in my submission for Mr. King to
take that out of context, then to ask the witness to look
at the introduction to Chapter 3 in the Green Guide which
particularly refers to the provisions set out here, then
to proceed to ask a question without referring to the
provisions set out here, which on the point he is now
asking about is paragraph 101.   This talks about the
division of the ground into separate sections,^each self-
contained with its own entrances, exits and toilet and
refreshment facilities.

     In my submission Mr. King is taking an answer out of
context.

     MR. KING:   Sir, with respect, the answer which I
was developing of this witness came very early on in the
cross-examination of my learned friend Mr. Payne.    Not
at the end when he was looking at the Safety Certificate
and it referred to the answer of this witness when he was
being pressed as to the adequacy of the turnstile count
and he said, "I suggest there would be the use of the
Police and stewarding which would have aided the
distribution of the fans."   He referred to the safe
distribution of spectators by policing and stewarding.
Sir, I am entitled in those circumstances to investigate
what he meant by the safe distribution of spectators by
policing and stewarding.

     THE CORONER:   Now doubt we can find it in the
transcript.   I can't find it at the moment, precisely
what he said.  Surely, Mr. King, what you want to know is
irrespective of what he said to Mr. Payne what his view
is with regard to the distribution of the crowds on the
terrace if you can't use the turnstiles exclusively.
That is what you are asking?

     MR. KING:   Indeed.
                                                                         20

                                                              A . BUTLER


                THE CORONER:      You can phrase your question in that
        way i

             MR. KING:         Which in fact was raised yesterday,   I
g      agree, sir.

            THE CORONER:    What I mean is, you don't necessarily
       have to refer back because that is hardly the issue.      It
       doesn't really matter what line Mr. Payne took, or even
       what answer Mr. Payne, got.   What you are saying is you
       want to ask this question because you feel you are
       entitled to because Mr. Payne said this, that and the
       other, but it is neithe.r here nor there what answer he
       gave to Mr. Payne.   Ask him the question you want the
       answer to.     You don't need to do it by reference back to
       anything he   may or may not have said to      Mr. Payne.

             MR. KING:   Sir, that is important so there is no
        suggestion that I am introducing a topic which this
        witness should not be asked on a flight of fancy of my
        own.   This was an answer he gave when being pressed by
        those representing the Police on the issue of the
J)     exclusivity of the turnstile

             THE CORONER:   It doesn't look to me as if anybody
        is going to   raise that objection at the moment.

            MR. KING:   I am not sure what the objection is to
       my line of cross-examination, sir, that is my difficulty.
       Let me proceed, sir:

     Q. You were being asked yesterday about what was obvious
        with hindsight.   You told us yesterday and today that
        one of the important ways in which you control numbers on
        a terrace, not only is by the turnstile count but by safe
        distribution of spectators by policing and stewarding.
        That is what you told us yesterday and you are telling us
        that today, aren't you? - A. Yes.




                 Q. I refer you to the.




H
                                                     21


                                         A. BUTLER '



Q. I refer you to the Green Guide because the Green Guide was
   a document which was in the possession of all members of
   your Working Party and the predecessor Working Party of
   yours when all these structural changes took place.  That
   is right, isn't it? - A. No, with respect, sir, when those
   structural changes took place then it was the prior document
   to this one which I have been reading from.

Q. If necessary I can refer you to the same passages which
   you have readout in the .Green Guide which was in existence
   from 1979 until 1986.   I: €on't particularly want to because
   we will waste time, but if you want to check that those
   paragraphs appear as y o u ?have read out in exactly the same
   words in the earlier Greeri Guide I will give you a copy to
   check if you want to. Would you like to check? - A. I
   don't know whether the Coroner believes ....

         MR. KING:   They are word for word the same.

         THE CORONER:   Well I think that you can accept that.

         MR. KING:   I am obliged sir.

Q. Coming back to the structural changes which were made by
   1985 and looking back at C383 again, the safe distribution
   of spectators across those terraces has to take into
   account, does it not, that there are now from 1985 onwards
   radial fences dividing the terrace up into the different
   sections which we see there.  That is right, isn't it?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You cannot obtain even distribution across that terrace
   without taking into account, can you, that there are solid
   radial fences dividing it up into sections.  That is a very
   obvious consideration, isn't it? - A. With the addition
   that there are gates in those fences.

Q. At the very back.  The radial gates at the very     back you
   are talking about? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Mr. Butler, none of this is a criticism of you.  What I
   am investigating, Mr. Butler, is what you understood, what
   you understood - the context of the Safety Certificate and
   the safety arrangements - what you understood would be
   taking place to control the numbers getting on to the
   terraces into the various sections.  You have told us that
   one of the matters which you would expect would be the
   safe distribution of the fans across the terrace by
   stewarding and policing? - A. Yes.

Q. You used the expression:  "It was up to the people on the
   day to see an area was not overcrowded" by which I assume
   the people who were organising the game, be it the Club,
                                                          22


                                           A.. BUTLER •



      be it the Police, whichever organisation took charge of
      the distribution of fans, it was up to them to see that
      it was not overcrowded.  Is that right? - A. That was
      my understanding.
B   Q. I don't want to go in with you, because you won't know,
       who it was who took charge of the responsibility of the
       distribution of the fans on this terrace in 1989 because
       you don't know, but I do want to explore a little more
       with you, using the Green Guide because it was in the
       possession of the Working Party, was again specific
       references to this even distribution of fans across
       the terraces.

              Could you just have a look at page 56 please.
       This is a chapter headed "STEWARDING", isn't it? - A. Yes.

    Q. Could you just read the opening paragraph please? - A. You
       are talking about the paragraph from "Effective to
       "emergency"?

    Q. Beginning "Effective stewarding"? - A. Yes.
D            "Effective stewarding should prevent over­
             crowding in sections of the ground, reduce
             the likelihood and incidence of disorder,
             help disperse spectators in such a way as to
             reduce crowd pressure and provide the means
             to investigate, report and take early action
             in an emergency."

    Q. Right.  Leave aside for the moment who would carry out this
       stewarding, which is not a matter for you to go into,
       Mr. Butler.  All right? But in that Green Guide you have
       here a provision relating to stewarding to help disperse
       spectators in such a way as to reduce crowd pressure.
       That is an aspect, I assume, of the safe distribution of
       fans to which you have already referred? - A. Yes.

    Q. And in paragraph 195 on page 56 there is a reference,
       isn't there, to the duties which in this context stewards
       were being called to carry out.  Do you see that? — A.
       Which particular reference is that sir?

    Q. 195, just below the paragraph you have read out. - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you see it says:  ".... there are five basic duties which
       stewards are called upon to carry out." - A. Yes.

    Q. Just read out "a", no more than that, the first of those
       duties. - A. It says:

              "a. controlling or directing members of the
              public who are entering or leaving the ground,




H
                                     A. BUTLER



      to help achieve an even flow of people to
      the viewing areas and safe dispersal of
      spectators on the terraces or viewing
      slopes."

So leave aside for the moment who it was who took responsi­
bility for that stewarding of the dispersal of spectators
across the terraces.  You would agree with me again that
quite separate from the turnstile count what was obvious
and important was arrangements for the safe dispersal of
fans across the terraces -to provide even distribution.  You
agree with that? - A. Yes.

Would you agree with me also that a piece of paper telling
you the numbers which can be allowed in does not of itself
prevent or help your even distribution of spectators.  It
is not the piece of paper which is helpful on how you
achieve even distribution, is it, it is people who matter?
- A. It is people that matter.

Would you agree with me that even distribution means that
where you have got different sections which were created
after the structural changes on the west Terrace by 1985,
even distribution means that you should seek to ensure
that you did not have some sections obviously full and some
sections obviously half empty because that would be uneven,
wouldn't it, that would not be an arrangement one would
seek to have, would it? You would not want some pens to
be full and some pens to be half empty, would you, because
that would not be even distribution.  You agree with me?
- A. I hesitate to answer that one being that there is
a definition as to what is full being that something can
be filled but not to be over full.

Mr. Butler, I am not arguing about that for the moment.
I am just talking about what is meant by "even distribution"
Even distribution means as best as you can have the same
sort of level of people in each section, doesn't it? - A.
Yes.

      MR. KING:   Thank you very much.


             Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Mr. Butler, can I just go back in general terms to the
Officer Working Party and the Advisory Group because I
want to give a fair impression of what that comprised of.

       We know it was comprised of a number of experts
in different fields.  There is yourself, being the
building division, the Fire Service and the Police.   That
is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.
                                      A. BUTLER'



And later on I believe the Health and Safety? - A. It was
constituted with those.

And the purpose of the Officer Working Party was to provide,
in very general terms, independent professional advice to
the Certificating Authority about the safety of sports stadia,
including Hillsborough? - A. Yes sir.

And the composition of the Working Party was designed so
that all possible aspects of safety were covered by people
with different expertise ail having their own input.  Is
that right? - A. I must hesitate on that one being that
after this particular tragedy then there was additional
expertise brought in by the Ambulance Service and therefore
it depends as to which particular point in time you are
talking about.

I accept that, that is correct, but at the time, and I
don't think we are going to hear much in relation to the
Ambulance Service in relation to this tragedy, but at the
time it was thought that the full range of expertise was
being provided by those members.  Is that fair? - A. I
believe so.

And from the way you   have given your evidence    it is quite
obvious that you take your job very seriously      indeed. You
are a professional man and I have got no doubt     at all that
you are very proud about the way you discharge     your duties.
Is that fair? - A. I endeavour to do my best.

And you would expect    the same of other people in your
Department? - A. Yes.

And you would expect the same with all the other experts
that were on that Officer Working Party? - A. I would
expect an equal professionalism.

I am not challenging that.  I want to be absolutely fair
that you get the opportunity to express exactly what was
going on in the Officer Working Party, what it was there
for.

       It is also fair to say, isn't it, that when a
proposal was put forward by whoever it was, whether it
be from the Club to change the ground, or from one member
of your Officer Working Party, the Police, anyone, you
would look at it with your expertise, you would make your
comments.   You would know that the other experts were
looking at it and they would make their comments, so that
at the end of the day you can be confident that any parti­
cular proposal had been viewed from all aspects of safety,
all the comments would be weighed up by the Licensing
Authority.   Is that fair? - A. Yes sir.
                                    A. BUTLER'



And you would expect from that system that with that
input of knowledge and expertise that if there had been
any aspect of Hillsborough Ground which posed a threat
to the safety of the spectators, that would have come to
light and would have been altered.  Is that fair? - A. If
it had been brought to the attention of that ground.

And you would have expected any proposal to have been
properly checked by all the experts there and come out
so that the proposals that went forward and were implemented
were in the eyes of everyone reasonably safe otherwise they
would not have been given the go-ahead.  That is right?
- A. That is true, yes. . .

And so it would be fair to say that if anyone was making
a proposal, be it the Police or the Club or its engineers,
they would know at the end of the day the process that
had to be gone through was one of close scrutiny by an
independent body of experts in different fields, all of
whom give their comments and at the end of the day if
the green light is given for that proposal being implemented
the conclusion is that that independent panel have also
come to the conclusion that it was reasonably safe.   Is
that fair? - A. It is fair.




                    Q. Can I just
                                                       A. BUTLER


Q. Can I just go to the changes that were made in 1981?
   Take it from me you were correct in your reading of
   the documents that the original suggestion of the
   radial fences emanated from        the Police. You will no
   doubt hear evidence as to why that suggestion was
   made from other witnesses.      Perhaps I can just take
   you very briefly through some documents which I hope
   are on your file.  I should stress, Mr. Butler, that
   the documents I am going to refer you to are by no
   means a comprehensive list of documents.         They are
   simply extracts hopefully to highlight the most
   important features. - A:. ?Y e s .

     THE CORONER:   This is page 1 of the minutes of the
meeting of 8th June 1981.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:     Yes, sir.

       MR. BEECHEY:     C.384, sir.

Q.      MR. CATCHPOLE:  Before we actually look at that
     minute, Mr. Butler, would you be kind enough to take
     up the Safety Certificate?

       THE CORONER:      It is C.381 and it is in that volume.

Q.       MR. CATCHPOLE:  Do you have the Safety
     Certificate, Mr. Butler? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you turn to page 9 which has at the top,
   paragraph 29? All I am concerned with is to look at
   the obligation that is actually on the Club if it
   wants to make any changes.  I do not think this is
   going to be contentious but it is to help the Jury
   understand what the Club have to do.  Do you see it?
   Paragraph 29 says:

           "The Stadium shall be maintained with the
           facilities and structures including all
           crush barriers...and strength existing at
           the date of the Certificate and indicated
           on the plans and no alteration shall be
           made thereto unless prior notice in
           writing is given to the County Council in
           accordance with paragraph 5(2) of this
           Schedule."

     The obligation on the Club is to notify the Council,
     the Certificating Authority, if it wants to make any
     alterations.  If you look at clause 5(2), which is on
     page 3, you will see that that in effect requires 21
     days notice to be given to the Council.  Take up the
     minute you have been handed now and take it from me
     that the suggestion did originally come from the
                                                     A. BUTLER


   Police and was put to.the Club.  You will see this
   minute is dated 8th June 1981 we see under 2(b) with
   the heading "West Stand", the last paragraph:

         "Following experiences at the FA Cup Semi
         Final match the Club are considering
         revised arrangements on the terracing in
         front of the stand. An assurance was
         given that the Officer Working Party
         would be consulted when these had
         substance."
                        ...   •   •


   As I say, I am skipping some documents.     I am not
   sure whether they have been handed out.

     THE CORONER:      Do we need them?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Yes, sir, because it does show I think
that these matters were taken very seriously by all parties
concerned and in the particular case of radial barriers a
special meeting was convened of the Officer Working Party
to consider the benefits of them being installed.  I have
tried to contain them as far as possible and it is really
to see that a lot of thought did go into them being placed.

     THE CORONER:   While it is being handed out the
Eastwood letter of 2nd September 1981 will be C.385 and the
minutes of the meeting of 11th September will be C.386.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Do you also have a copy of the
Eastwood letter of 9th September 1981 which should follow
on? They should be taken together really.

      THE CORONER:  Yes, I was going to say shall we make
C.385 the Eastwood letter of 2nd September and 9th
September? Then there is another one of 14th December
1981.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     Yes, sir, they should go together as
well.

     THE CORONER:      Yes, all C.385 and the minute can be
C.386.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  I am being told by m y learned friends
that they do not have copies and so I will have to wait for
them to be handed.

     MR. ISAACS:      Two letters are C.385 and the minute is
C.386.

     THE CORONER:   There are three letters actually, Mr.
Isaacs, 7th September, 9th September and 14th December all
in 1981 and they are all C.385 for convenience.
A                                                                 28

                                                           A. BUTLER



    Q.      MR. CATCHPOLE:  I will go through this very
         quickly, Mr. Butler.  Can you take the letter headed
B        "Eastwood and Partners" dated 2nd September? - A. I
         am sorry, I haven't got a copy of this. ( handed \

    Q. Can I take you first of all, Mr. Butler, to the
       letter dated 2nd September 1981 headed "Eastwood and
       Partners" at the top?- T.If you just read the first
       page you will see that this is a letter setting out
       the instructions to install the radial fences.    It is
       addressed to the County? Council and it says that they
       are going to divide the terrace into three equal
       sections each served by its own entrance.    It then
       says:

               "By dividing the terrace more control
               over supporters should result.  A
               visiting team with only a few followers
               will be allocated one section, with the
               other two sections retained by the home
D              supporters.

               Larger contingents of visiting spectators
               could be accommodated in two or all three
               areas as their numbers dictate."

         It is plain the plan was that the terrace could be
         used for all one team or it could also be used for
         home and away teams.  Then there are details of the
         gate and it says:

               "The gate could be left open, but
               fastened back, to connect the areas
               during a game if adjacent ones are
               occupied by supporters of the same
               t e a m ."

         That is quite plainly a letter to the Council
         notifying them of the plans that the Club and the
         engineers have drawn up in the light of the
         suggestion that was made to them, that is right, is
         it not? - A. Yes.

    Q. If you turn over you will see the letter of 9th
       September 1981 you will see the first paragraph and
       Dr. Eastwood has written back to the County Council
       who have obviously written to him saying:

               "I am grateful to you for accepting our
               letter of 2 September as giving the
               formal 21 days notice under paragraph
               5(2) of the General Safety Certificate."




H
                                                  A. BUTLER


In other words, the Club have complied with their
obligations under the Safety Certificate in relation
to the proposed changes and that is right, is it not?
- A. Yes.

I think which I am again not challenging because
there may well be evidence brought to support it was
that the plan for the terraces, the idea behind the
radial barriers being^ installed was really threefold,
to prevent lateral movement, to assist the Police in
crowd control and also to assist in segregation on
the occasions on which those terraces were used for
both home and away fans. That was your evidence
yesterday and I do not suppose you are going to
change that? - A. That is right.

If you look at the minute, C.386, dated 11th
September 1981 you will see that all the members of
the Officer Working Party are present including third
from the bottom, Mr. Sheriff, who I believe was from
your particular division, is that correct? - A. Yes,
sir.

The Club and its engineers are not present, that is
right, is it not? - A. Yes, sir.

You see under 1 "Purpose of Meeting":

      "The purpose of the meeting was to
      consider the letter dated 2nd September
      and plans submitted by Messrs. Eastwood
      and Partners on behalf of Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club Ltd. relating to
      the propose erection of Radial Barriers
      on the West Terrace for crowd control
      purposes and Security Gates at various
      locations around the North Stand now that
      the gymnasium was open to the general
      pub l i c ."

We see then there is a fairly detailed minute under 2
about the radial barriers on the West Stand, that is
correct, is it not? - A. Yes.

The last full paragraph starts off:

      "It was AGREED that Mr. Vaughan..."

who we see is South Yorkshire County Council, and Mr.
Bownes' predecessor, that is correct, is it not? - A.
Yes.

It continues:
                                                   A. BUTLER


     "... should notify M e s sr s. Eastwood and
     Partners that the Officer Working Party
     sees no objection to the proposals to
     instal...radial barriers, with 1.15 metre
     wide gates at the rear on the West
     Terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium,
     subject to..."

and then there are three conditions.   One relates to
further calculations by the Building Authority,
secondly confirmation about adequate headroom, and
thirdly that the gates at the rear of the terrace be
under the control of the Police.   We look at the
third letter, which I think is also C.385 dated 14th
September, we see that this is actually the letter
from the Chief Executive of the South Yorkshire
County Council, who was Mr. Vaughan, and that is
directed to Dr. Eastwood and it sets out the terms of
the minute.   It informs the club and Dr. Eastwood of
the decision.   That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.




                        /Q. We know that the barriers.
                                                A. BUTLER


And we know that the   barriers were installed, so one
can take it that the   conditions that the Officer
Working Party sought   to impose were complied with, is
that correct, as far   as you are aware? - A. As far as I
am aware.

What we see, and I stress it is only extracts, there
were plenty of other minutes, as I am sure you are
aware? - A. Yes, sir.

There was a detailed consideration of the plans by
various experts who made up the Officer Working Party,
in relation to the installation of those radial
barriers, that is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Each would have had their own input and expertise,   that
is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Had any of those people thought that the system that
was installed or was proposed was in any way a threat
to the safety of the people attending at that stadium
they would have no doubt objected and the proposals
would not have been implemented, and that is correct,
isn't it?  If any of those members of the Officer
Working Party had thought that these proposals were
dangerous, would they have just stayed silent? - A. No.
It was that they may have expressed doubts during that
meeting, but they would have been confirmed at the end
of that meeting, as to whether it was safe or
otherwise.

It would have been confirmed at the end of the meeting
as to whether it was safe or otherwise? - A. I would
have taken that as being the normal course of events.

Sorry, I did not hear that? - A. I would have taken
that as being the normal course of events of a meeting.

And there would have obviously been detailed
discussions, everyone putting in their own particular
expertise and weighing their suggestions or comments
against what everyone else said? - A. I would take that
as the normal course of a meeting.

So when it was put to you yesterday by the learned
Coroner that there was no application for a variation
sought by Sheffield Wednesday to the Safety
Certificate, we have seen there is no obligation, no
requirement for them to seek a variation.   They
complied as far as we can tell from these documents
with their obligation to notify the Council, and that
is correct, isn t it? - A. In regards to these
alterations, yes, sir.
                                                      A . BUTLER


And it is also fair to say that when you answered a
question, again put by the learned Coroner, that the
Officer Working Party, and he put it as, "... were well
aware ..." of what was going on, in truth what had
happened was that detailed consideration had been given
to the plans, as one would have expected from the
professional people involved, and they came to the
conclusion we see set out in that  minute, and that is
correct, isn't it? - A. As I read  it from that minute,
sir.

That is all I can ask you to do.   I think the only
other matter, Mr. Butler, that I am going to take up
with you is if you could turn back to the Safety
Certificate itself, it is a matter we touched on
yesterday, I would just like to make it plain - I don't
think it is going to be disputed - if you could look at
paragraph 9 of the Safety Certificate, on page 4, you
will see that it requires the holder, which is
Sneffield Wednesday:

     "... shall arrange for the attendance at every
     Specified Activity of such number of Safety
     Stewards as may be required by Part 2 of Schedule
     O             II
     J    • • ••


That is the obligation on Sheffield Wednesday, and
those Safety Stewards are for three purposes, which are
set out there:

     "(1)          Manning of exits as indicated on the plans
      (2)          Control and direction of spectators entering
                   using or leaving the Stadium
         (3)       Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any
                   emergency including raising ah alarm and
                   extinguishing any small fire."

If we then turn to Part 2 of Schedule 3, which is on
page 10, we can see from Part 1, about the technology
used.  It has got the Spion Kop, West Terrace and North
West Terrace, and then Part 2, which is what we are
concerned with, says:

     "The minimum number of Safety Stewards required
     for each function shall be as follows ...."

and then there are those three requirements that we
saw, the manning of exits, which is 26, the second one,
which is probably the most important for this purpose,
the control and direction of spectators entering or
leaving the Stadium, 38, and then the third one, two,
in relation to patrolling the Stadium.  We then see the
words:
                                                       A. BUTLER


     "The Stewards shall be distributed as follows
               ft
     • • • •



and we see "Section of Stadium", and it is correct,
isn't it, that neither the Spion Kop nor the West
Terrace nor the North West Terrace are included in that
list.  That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, sir.

And we see that in relation to where it says, "Number
required for each function", the function being the
ones set out in (1),T(2) and (3) above, under (2),
"Control and direction of spectators entering or
leaving the Stadium", we have got South Stand 12, West
Stand 8, and North Stand 18, making a total of 38, and
that is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes, sir.

So there is no requirement in the Safety Certificate
itself for any stewards to be put by the Club either on
the terraces or entering, using or directing the fans
going onto those terraces? As a matter of fact that is
not^included in Safety Certificate and that is correct,,
isn't it? - Taking it from those extracts that we have
read, then yes.

Take it from me that there are not any others - I would
not mislead you - but from those extracts there are
not, that is right?  I think the answer was yes.  Thank
you very much, Mr. Butler.

     MISS SINCLAIR:            I have no questions, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.           I was just going to say
we have got to stop for coffee.

                         (Short Adjournment)

     THE CORONER:   Miss Sinclair, you have said you
have no questions, that is right, isn't it?

     MISS SINCLAIR:            Yes.

     THE CORONER:            Mrs. McBrien, any questions of this
witness?

                    Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Butler, as Principal District Surveyor with the
City Council since 1985, you obviously have access to
various documents, as you have told us, that is
correct, i s n ’t it? - A. Yes.

And you also told us that the Safety Certificate was to
be used in co-ordination with the Green Guide? - A. It
is to be, yes.
                                              A. BUTLER


Now, you said that you were concerned mainly with
buildings, the building and structure of the ground,
that you were not directly concerned with numbers
entering the ground? - A. That is right.

And you also said that somebody else was responsible
for that side of things? - A. I believe I did.

Yes.  Now, would you agree with me that it is Dr.
Eastwood who works out the figures for those terraces?
Do you know that it is ;Dr. Eastwood? - A. I am sorry,
this was - at the time we are referring to - was before
my time with the Council and therefore I am not sure as
to who did actually work those figures out from
scratch.

No, but as you have got access to various documents,
did you know that Dr. Eastwood was appointed in 1978? -
A. He was appointed by the Club as their advisor on
these matters.

Yes, and the Safety Certificate was issued in 1979? -
A. Yes.

And the figures that are given in the Safety
Certificate - the numbering on this Safety Certificate
is different to the one Mr. Catchpole has been reading
out, but the page that gives the numbers for the
various places, it is numbered 11 on my sheet - I think
it is 10 on the other.  It says "Crowd Capacity".
"Schedule 3, Part 1 ...."

     THE CORONER:   Just let's have a look at what Mrs.
McBrien has got.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I can tell you I gave her a
copy of the Safety Certificate from my bundle, whereas
the numbering we have been referring to was put on by
my learned friend Mr. Payne, and the copies everyone
else has got are from his bundling with his numbering.

     THE CORONER:   So it is exactly the same, yours is
a computer print-out and they have divided the pages
differently, is what you are saying?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   No, it was actually from the
Sheffield Wednesday bundle that was used at the
Inquiry, so it had the same pagination.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   So my numbering is different to
everybody else's, but it is the one that refers to
"Crowd Capacity"?
                                                 A . BUTLER


     THE CORONER:     Yes, "Schedule 3" it is headed,
isn't it?

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes:

Now, those figures that you see there, do you know that
they were worked out by Dr. Eastwood?

     MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, I do hesitate to interrupt
at this point but what is being put to the witness is
factually inaccurate7and if I could just show her Dr.
Eastwood's report, in fact?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you, Miss Sinclair.   What
Dr. Eastwood worked out were the numbers for the
terrace, the North West Terrace I think it is ....

     THE CORONER:   I think what you need to ask the
witness is does he know, either from his own knowledge
or from any documents which he has seen, who worked the
figures out?

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Not these here.   I am not now
referring to these.

     THE CORONER:     So you are withdrawing that
question?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   That one, but the one I would like
to refer to is the terrace itself, the 7,200 and the
2,900, making up the 10,100:

I do believe Dr. Eastwood did draw up those figures.
Are you aware of that? - A. I am not aware as to who
drew those figures up*

You are not.  Are you aware that when Dr. Eastwood
designed the system that he designed it for turnstile
entry only? - A. Which particular system is this that
we are referring to?

Well, Dr. Eastwood was appointed as the Engineer for
Sheffield Wednesday Club and he designed the system, as
the Engineer, which was for turnstile entry.  He did
not design it so that people would go in through gates,
in other words? - A. Sorry, I understand the question,
yes.

     THE CORONER:   Dr. Eastwood, like everybody else,
inherited a situation.  I think what you are asking is,
is it this witness's understanding that when Dr.
Eastwood was thinking about how people would get it, he
had in contemplation entry through a turnstile, not
through gates, that is what you are asking, isn't it?
                                                   A . BUTLER


     MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Could you answer that? - A. That is
what I intended the answer to be.

Your answer is yes, you believe that to be correct? -
A. I believe so, yes.

     MRS. McBRIEN:       When the Safety Certificate was
first issued Leppings Lane, as we know, was an open
terrace, and we h a v e h e a r d said a couple of times at
least that it was at the request of the Police
sometime, w a s it in 1981, that radial fences be erected
for the purpose of segregation and crowd control.         You
agree with that, don't you? - A. It is my understanding
of the reading.

Now, I know there were many discussions and many
meetings, and the ultimate result was that it was
agreed, but from your own personal experience do you
tnink the safety of the fans was fully considered at
those meetings before those barriers were erected? - A.
From my personal experience I cannot answer the
question, being that I was not at those meetings.
Those meetings were held before my appointment to this
City Council.




            /0. You were not involved
                                                          37

                                                   A. BUTLER


So you are not involved at all in that* Would you agree
that the Police who made the suggestion are not
engineers? - A* I would accept that anybody can make a
suggestion regarding safety.

Yes, but any suggestion should be looked at very
thoroughly before it is agreed to, would you agree? - A.
Yes.

There was a meeting on the 7th of August, 1986.     This was
to discuss the crush barriers.

     THE CORONER:   I think Mrs. McBrien is referring to
the inspection in August.

     THE WITNESS:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:    That is right, that   is what you have
got in mind?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:   It wasn't simply to discuss crush
barriers.   That happened to be discussed but it was an
inspection.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Again, the Police suggested that a
particular barrier, number 144, should be removed as it
was causing an obstruction? - A. Parts of that barrier.

Yes, all of it from pen 3 and a small section in pen 4, I
believe, of that one barrier, is that right? - A. Yes.

Now once again there was a lot of discussion, but the
Police said they wanted it removed and ultimately it was
removed and all parties agreed to it? - A. Yas.

As I said earlier, and you agreed with me,the Police  are
not engineers.    I know they are free to make
suggestions, but again any suggestions of this type
should be looked at very thoroughly, and you agreed with
me? - A . It should be looked at thoroughly.

     THE CORONER:   He also said that anybody can make
suggestions with regard to safety.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes:

Obviously when it was constructed the engineer intended
it to be used as a filter for people leaving the ground.
Would you agree with me on that?   If you take a barrier
away you have got much freer access out of the terrace.
If you have got a barrier there it is going to hold you
back and slow you down? - A. That may have been the
                                                     A. BUTLER


original intention of that barrier.   However, since it
is ageing back to probably the 1930s, then it was
obviously before 1985 and therefore prior to my
involvement in the matter.

Also the wall...

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, if we could have the plan of
the tunnel.   If there is a photograph where the tunnel
comes on to the terrace, showing the walls?

     THE CORONER:     The little walls that jut out?

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes'.

     THE CORONER:     Yes, C.269.   Can you see it,
Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes, thank you:

You will see on that photograph that the wall, as fans .
come down the tunnel, juts out on to the terrace area? -
A. Yes.

Therefore to have a barrier in front of that as well
would act as a very effective filter system?   It would
be like forming a queue?   Instead of people going out in
a mass they would be filtered?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, that may be so, Mrs. McBrien,
but what is the question?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   When it was agreed to remove the
barrier you were taking away the filter system? Would
you agree?

     THE CORONER:    For egress?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, for egress.

     THE CORONER:   How is that going to help us with...
Assuming that you are completely right, let us just
assume that, in what way is that relevant to these
Inquests?

     MRS. McBRIEN:     I am going to come to that.

     THE CORONER:     It wasn't my impression that egress
was the problem.     I thought we were talking about
ingress.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    It wasn't on that day, of course.
                                                         39

                                                  A. BUTLER


      THE CORONER:    Well, that is what we are interested
in.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   However, in the Green Guide it does
say that egress too has to be controlled.

     THE CORONERS   Yes, Mrs. McBrien, I don't deny that
for one moment.   You are absolutely right that egress
has to be controlled but is it relevant to the Inquests?
If this disaster had^happened because everybody had
rushed out and something had happened at the end of the
match then, of course, the question would be very
relevant and we would pot interested in how people got
in, but we are only interested in the ingress, basically.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   It does say in the Green Guide, I
don't know where exactly, that a lot of accidents and
injuries are more likely to happen when people are
leaving the ground because of the very large numbers
involved.   It seemed to be necessary to have that
slowing down process from the terrace.

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, I don't want to be
unkind to you.    You may be making a very good point for
all I know but nobody has yet suggested at these Inquests
and I have heard nothing to suggest that people were
injured because they were leaving the stadium through
that tunnel.

      MRS. McBRIEN:    I understand that.

     THE CORONER:   So the fact that they might have
been, isn't relevant.   I don't think you should pursue
this line.  I'm sorry.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Could I just say that if it were
that way you could also reverse it?   If there was an
inrush into the ground, that barrier would have a slowing
down effect on the people coming in.

     THE CORONER:   That is right, but you have got to
ask a question.   You can't draw a conclusion.   This
witness has already told us several times that they did
think about removing this barrier.  Whether they were
right or wrong is another question, but they did think
about it.   You can ask him whether in his view removing
that barrier would increase the rate of flow into the
terrace.   I would accept that question because that is a
structural question and we will see what he answers.

      Shall I ask it, or do you want to put it?

      MRS. McBRIEN:   Would you?
                                                             40*

                                                      A. BUTLER


Q.        THE CORONERS   Mr. Butler, did you hear what I said?
     What Mrs. McBrien is trying to ascertain is whether the
     effect of removing that barrier would have increased the
     potential rate of inflow into the terrace and whether
     that was a factor which was considered when the decision
     was taken by the Officers* Working Party to authorise its
     removal? - A. The flow rate would be the same through the
     tunnel.   However, the design was to slightly increase
     the flow rate actually on to the terrace, being that the
     problem which was sta.ted by the Police at that time was
     that spectators were causing an obstruction at that
     barrier and therefore obstructing other spectators from
     entering the terrace.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: Going into the terrace?    I missed
     that.   Did you say they were causing an obstruction to
     people going into the terrace or on to the terrace,
     rather than coming out? -A. Yes.

Q. I thought yesterday that it was they were leaving it was
   causing an obstruction.

          THE CORONER:    As they were coming in:

Q. You have always said that, haven't you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: Did any safety problems arise when
     the barrier was in place before it was removed? - A. I*m
     sorry, would you repeat that please?

Q. Were there any safety problems arising from the barrier
   being in that position? - A. Potentially so, yes.

Q. What were they? - A. Being that there was any localised
   group of spectators, then there may have been a potential
   for a problem inside the tunnel, which could not
   necessarily have been seen with the same ease as it would
   in the open.

Q. If the ground was considered potentially unsafe for
   spectators before the 1989 semi~final, why wasn*t the
   ground closed down?

          THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien!   I'm sorry, you leave
     me speechless!    Where is the evidence for saying the
     ground was considered potentially unsafe for spectators
     before 1989?   Give me the evidence.

          MRS. McBRIEN:    Should I put it in another way?

          THE CORONER:    I hope so.
                                                           41

                                                     A. BUTLER


Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Was the ground considered unsafe
     before the 1989 semi-final?   Was it considered safe for
     the spectators? - A. As far as I was concerned, then I
     considered it safe.   As to whether anybody else
     considered it to be any other than that, then that was
     not voiced to me.




             THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, you have
                                     A., BUTLER-



       THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, we have spent a lot of
time and I am not rushing you.  I would rather you took
your time and had your say.  I will stop you if I think
you are asking a question ....

       MRS, McBRIEN:  I am really sorry about this. With
my other papers I have lost the papers that I really need
at the moment.

       THE CORONER: Do you wish Mr. Foster to ask a few
questions and that gives you a chance ....

      MRS. McBRIEN:   I don't know where they are and they
were very very important issues.   I am very sorry about this.

       THE CORONER:  Sit down.  Look for your things and I
will let Mr. Foster ask a few questions if he has any and
then we will come back to you.   Just take your time and
look for what it is you are after.


              Cross-Examined by MR. FOSTER:

Mr. Butler, stadium capacity. Would you accept that a
number of disciplines would be involved in providing the
information which was necessary to make a final decision
on stadium capacity? - A. Yes sir.

Would you accept that one of the disciplines which would
have such an input would be the discipline provided
uniquely by the Department which you are involved in?
- A . Being that everybody would have a chance to voice
their concerns at that meeting then probably yes.

And there would be some matters relating to stadium capacity
which no one but the Building Surveyors' Department could
have anything intelligent to say about? - A. Being that
we are concerned of this particular time that these
capacities were laid then I cannot say what the input
was since it was not by myself sir.

Then let me give you an example.  There was a meeting on
the 7th August 1986. Correct? - A. Yes sir.

Were you present at that meeting? - A. Yes.

I think at that meeting the issue of the removal of
Barrier 144 in Pen 3 was discussed? - A. Yes sir.

Did the Building Surveyors' Department represented by you
have anything to say about the removal of that barrier?
- A. Yes.

What? - A. I believe that we have already gone over this.
Do you want me to repeat the issues that were concerned?
                                                       43



                                        A. BUTLER



Q. Just precis it very quickly? - A. There were a number of
   issues that were considered all to whether it would increase
   safety of the spectators.

Q. So the source of advice for the effect on holding capacity
   of the structure of the terrace including the crush barriers
   was the Building Surveyors' Department? - A. Sorry, would
   you repeat that please?

Q. Would it be fair to say/that the source of advice for
   the effect on holding capacity of the structure of the
   terraces, including the crush barriers, would be that of
   the Building Surveyors' Department? - A. It was not put
   to me in those words.

Q. But at the meeting on the 7th August 1986 it was not
   expected for instance of the representatives of the Fire
   Service there, that they would be able to contribute
   usefully in answering the question how holding capacity
   would be affected by the removal of the barrier? - A. I
   don't believe that the situation was raised in those words
   sir.

Q. Let me put the question more directly then. Were the Fire
   Service representatives present at that meeting? - A. Yes
   sir.

Q. Did they contribute in any way to the discussion relating
‘ * to the removal of Barrier 144? - A. From memory I believe
    so sir.

Q. What did they have to say? - A. I can't remember sir.

Q. There is no note made of that meeting, is there? - A. That
   is right sir.

Q. Would you accept that the issues relating to the effect
   of the removal of Barrier 144 are essentially matters
   which can only be addressed by the Building Surveyors'
   Department and/or Dr. Eastwood? - A. Being that anybody
   who considered that there was concern would voice an
   opinion and that would be expected.

Q. What could the Fire Service have said which was relevant
   to that discussion? - A. I can't pre-empt as to what
   one would have said.

Q. It is not pre-empting, Mr. Butler, this happened in 1986.
   Can't you help at all? - A. Or what one would say at a
   meeting no matter what time it was held.

Q. You know very well what the particular expertise of the
   Fire Service is.   You know their role in the Officer
   Working Party.   What could they have contributed to
                                                              44   -


                                           A. •BUTLER '



   that particular discussion? - A. Any comments regarding
   the crowd movement; the means of escape figures; any
   effect that it would have upon those subjects.

Q. Yes, would you acknowledge that it was the Fire Services's
   function within the Officer Working Party to deal with
   matters relating to egress from the ground? - A. That was
   a function of the Fire Service.

Q. And there is correspondence which indicates that the Fire
   Service accepted the stadium capacity brief only insofar
   as the questions relating to stadium capacity were related
   to the question of safe egress from the ground? - A. I
   don't know which correspondence you are referring to sir.

          MR. FOSTER:    Then I will go through that with
  M r . Bownes.

          THE CORONER: Just as I said to Mrs. McBrien, that
   egress is a very interesting topic but not what we are
   discussing. We have got enough problems without discussing
   egress.   Let's just concentrate on ingress and what con­
   tribution if any the Fire Service made to the issue which
   you have raised, namely the removal of the barrier.

         MR. FOSTER:   Sir, the irrelevance of the egress issue
   is precisely the point I am trying to make.

Q. Did the Fire Service have any brief which covered or related
   to the issue of ingress to the ground? - A. As far as I
   am aware they had a joint input to the capacities of the
   stadia.

Q. But you can't help as to what the Fire Service expertise
   might have to contribute specifically to the issue of
   ingress? - A. The only document which I have on this one
   is the implementation of the Safety at Sportsgrounds
   document from the County which under the heading of
   "Estimation of safe ground capacity" then leaves the
   primary responsibility with the County and to be consulted
   as far as the Police, the Fire Authority and the Building
   Authority.

         MR. FOSTER:     Thank you sir, I have no more questions.

          THE CORONER:    Have you found what it is you are
   looking for?

         MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes.   I am sorry about.   I got
   completely mixed up.

            Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Now there was a discussion or a meeting and it mentioned
                                     A.. BUTLER



separate entrances.  I can't remember the reference now
but Mr. King did bring the point up about the ground was
going to be made into three different sections.

       I have got down here Proposal 299.   I don't know
if anyone has that document here.

      THE CORONER:   What is the question, Mrs. McBrien?

      MRS. McBRIEN: Well it is the proposal to have
three separate section^-Tand separate entrances into
those separate sections and it was proposed, the proposal
number is 299.

      MR. KING:   Sir, if I can help, I suspect what
Mrs. McBrien has in mind, that you are aware of sir, are
proposals which were never put into operation but are
in the internal documents of the Club and Dr. Eastwood.

      THE CORONER:   This is what I suspect as well.

       There was a reference to three separate entrances.
You raised it when the radial fences were put in but
that was not the same.   The trouble is there is such a
lot.

       I am just trying to see how I can help you,
Mrs. McBrien, without dealing with things which are
totally irrelevant because what did not happen is neither
here nor there.

       MR. KING:  Sir, could I generally help. One of
the matters I was putting to Mr. Butler was that one of
the ways one could have controlled numbers going into
individual pens could have been a system of separate
turnstiles and separate entrances, but given that system
didn't exist then went on to another matter.

       MRS. McBRIEN: Yes, I understand Mr. King was saying
these things could have happened and in fact they were
proposed at one time in that proposal but they did not take
place.

       THE CORONER:  Yes, that is right.  Now ask the
question.  You are right, but what is the point that you
are trying to get out of this witness with regard to that?

      MRS. McBRIEN: Were you aware of that proposal or
have you had access to documents referring to it? - A.
Which specific proposal are we talking of?
                                          A. BUTLER



The one relating to the three sections of terracing.  It
was an open terrace and then there was a proposal to divide
it into three sections with separate entrances.  This was
just a proposal.  Do you know anything about it? - A. I am
sorry, I can't help you on this one at all.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Is that 1986 if somebody else could
help?

       THE CORONER:   I^know, I will just ask this witness
two questions.   Just a minute.


                        By THE CORONER:

You weren't there, I know that, but from your study of
the documents you knew that a proposal had been made to
divide the terrace into three sections in 1981 because
Mr. Catchpole referred you to various letters and that this
was discussed by the Officer Working Party at that time.
That is correct, isn't it? - A. This was the one that
was Implemented in 1981?

That is right, in 1981, and if one was going to use sections
individually for segregation purposes then it follows that
one had to have ingress into each of those sections
individually.  That is right, isn't it? - A. Sorry, yes,
I believe there was a proposal for some rearrangement in
order to create something of that.




                               Q. No, you have jumped
                                                   A. BUTLER


No, you have jumped a little bit.  In 1981 the
proposal was simply to divide the terrace with radial
fences with gates at the back and to use the existing
means of access to the terrace which in effect was
three means of access, the central tunnel which you
know about, the north tunnel and round the south side
so that you could get into the three sections
individually if you wished.  That is right, is it
not, Mr. Butler? - A.-Yes, sir.

Are you aware at some point later another proposal
was made which would have constructed totally
individualised turnstiles and entrances to sections
of the terrace? Were you aware of that? - A. I was
aware of this on the search through the documents
after this tragedy, sir.

That was something which did not happen in 1981 but
happened about 1985 I think, 1984 or 1985, would that
be about right?  It was never implemented in any
event.  Is that correct from your trawl of the
papers? - A. There is a minimal amount of information
that has been made available to me          on this one and I
am sorry I do not know the date of t h a t .

   THE CORONER:   Does that make   it any clearer for you,
!. McBrien?

  MRS. McBRIEN:   A little.

        Further Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

So you are aware of it, Mr. Butler? - A. I am aware
of it now.

In Proposal 300 there was a discussion about the
centre pens.  Were you aware of that? - A. I don't
know which document or Proposal 300 that you are
referring to.

It refers to the central pens.     I have not got the
document here either.

  THE CORONER:    Neither has the witness, so I am sorry.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   There were drawings and also
there was a proposal to construct a gate to let
people in with tickets.  That was considered but it
was completely rejected by Dr. Eastwood.  Do you know
anything about that? - A. When was this proposal?

I presume it is relating to Proposal 300.
                                                        A. BUTLER


     THE CORONER:   But he does not know what Proposal 300
is and nor do I . So it is no use talking about things that
we do not know.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Could somebody help on that please?

     MR. KING:  I have a number of documents which were
from the Taylor Inquiry dealing with these m a t t e rs . They
are paginated and I suspect 300 is the page of this bundle
of documents because mine for the relevant period begins at
204.  Unfortunately mine does not end at 304 but ends at
296 but none the less I suspect that is where it comes from,
because it is too much of a coincidence.  It is the
pagination of probably either the core bundle or one of the
bundles collected for the Taylor Inquiry.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you.  It is certainly not a
page.     It is a proposal numbered 300.

     THE CORONER:   I am afraid, Mrs. McBrien, we cannot
pursue it if you have not got it. None of us have it. We
do not know what it is about. We cannot pursue it and I am
not going to spend any more time on it.

        MRS. McBRIEN:     Mr. Butler is not aware of it either?

        THE CORONER: He says he was not    aware of it anyway.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Were you aware there was a safe
     capacity for that ground, Mr. Butler?

        THE CORONER:    That pen, did you say?

        MRS. McBRlEN:   No, for the terrace.

     THE WITNESS:   There was a capacity stated in the
Safety Certificate.

Q. In the Green Guide and the Safety Certificate it
   would advise that that would not be exceeded at any
   time, do you agree? - A. Yes.            ;

     MRS. McBRIEN:     I have got here a reference. I think
it is a letter from  Mr. Chester and it is item 2. That
relates to the gate I mentioned earlier if anybody has any
knowledge of that.  I haven't got a page but I have the
actual words that were said.

     THE CORONER:       But you do not know when, is that
right?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   It is just Mr. Chester, item 2, and it
is relating to the gate to let people in at an all ticket
match.
A                                                                     49

                                                            A. BUTLER



         MR. MAXWELL:  Sir, I will try to help if this is a
    letter to the City Council.  I am not sure to whom it is
B   addressed.  If Mrs. McBrien can identify it then I will see
    whether I can help her.

         MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you very much,        I believe it is
    to the engineer, Dr. Eastwood.

            THE CORONER:    In that case he will not be able to
    help.

         MRS. McBRIEN:   I am not absolutely sure.       All I have
    got down are the words from it.

         THE CORONER:   Read the words and we will see what it
    says and see whether it is relevant.

         MRS. McBRIEN:   It says, "Can we let them in through a
    gate?".  That is what I have got down here and the engineer
    said, "Definitely not".  That proposal was not to go ahead.

         THE CORONER:   I do not think we can draw that
    conclusion from that extract, Mrs. McBrien.

         MISS SINCLAIR:  Sir, if I have a minute I believe I
    can find it.  It is a phone conversation.  I am not sure of
    the exact date.

         THE CORONER:   While you are doing that, Miss
    Sinclair, which I appreciate I will ask the witness a few
    questions which the Jury have drawn m y attention to and
    which fall much more within your field.

                           Further bv THE CORONER:

    Q. Did you know that the crush barriers were tested from
       time to time? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You did know that because I asked you that? - A. Yes.

    Q. What was the selection method which was used to
       decide which crush barriers should be tested? - A. It
       was on a rotation right round the ground.

    Q. Was it to be done within a certain period so that
       each crush barrier was tested every so often? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. I think initially there was a five year cycle and it
       subsequently reduced to a four year cycle, is that
       right? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                 50

                                                          A. BUTLER


    Q. Were the tests recorded so that the same barrier was
       not retested and others missed out? - A. Yes, sir.

B   Q* So there were records kept as to which barrier had
       not been tested? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. In fact, I think the Safety Certificate deals with
       this specifically saying that a barrier once having
       been tested it should- not be tested again for four-
       and-a-half years I think is what it says.

           MR. MAXWELL:   Condition 25, page 8.

    Q.        THE CORONER:    That is right, is it not? - A.
         Yes, sir.  This reference is on page 7 in my
         particular document.

    Q. It does not matter what the page is but it is the
       number? - A. Yes, I beg your pardon, sir.

    Q. It is 25.2.ii? - A. That is right, sir, I have found
       that one now.

    Q. Were these crush barriers tested annually, their 20
       per cent or 25 per cent or however many were tested
       each year? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Do you know when the last check was carried out,
       first of all in relation to the barrier that failed?
       Do you know that by chance or can you look it up and
       tell us? - A. I believe that all the barriers in that
       section were subject to the same regime of testing
       and that that was 1988 when they were last tested.

    Q. In 1988 and do you by chance know the last time that
       any barriers were tested prior to the match? Was
       that the 1988 test or had the test in 1989 already
       taken place? - A. I have no record of that with me,
       being that even if a test had been done in 1989 it
       would not have affected the barriers at this
       particular end of the ground, sir.

    Q. Because they had already been tested in 1988 and
       were, therefore, automatically excluded from further
       testing for so many years? - A. True.

    Q. One final question; was there any reason why all
       barriers were not tested every year? - A. There
       probably was many reasons but the Guide to Safety at
       Sports Ground only suggested that they should be
       tested at those intervals.  Secondly, probably the
       additional cost which would be placed on the Club to
       test every one of the barriers every year, sir.




H
                                                     A. BUTLER


Q . I want to ask you o n e .question which the Jury have
    not raised but which arose out of your reply to me in
    connection with the meeting in August 1986 when I
    asked you a question.     I asked you, "What aspects of
    safety were considered at that time?".     You will not
    have this written down but I did ask you and you
    started off by saying that there were many matters
    and then you listed several items which had been
    considered including that people who were managing
    the ground had made this request, that there was a
    problem with obstruction up in the tunnel, that there
    was a good view of the terrace from the Police
    Control Box and you also said because you perceived
    or understood - I cannot remember the exact word -
    that there would be a Police presence actually on the
    terrace? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. There is no minute of this meeting, of course. Was
   this list which you gave me, when you were listing
   things, off the top of your head in answer to my
   question - and I do not want to be critical at all -
   or is this something you recollect was definitely
   agreed and said at that meeting on the ground in
   1986? - A. It was directly from recollection of that
   meeting, being that it was raised by a Police Officer
   who had told me he was responsible for that part of
   the ground and that he had Officers on that terracing
   at that time.

Q. You are quite satisfied that that is a correct
   recollection of what was said to you at the time? -
   A. I am quite satisfied of that, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, have you sorted out your
questions?

Q. The Jury have asked a question on the method of
   testing.  I have already asked you if you were
   satisfied with the method and you said yes, do you
   remember? - A.   Yes,sir.

     THE CORONER:    We will hear from Dr. Eastwood in a
limited way about a very complicated matter which we are
not going to explore in detail. We need to know a bit but
not too much otherwise we will be here until next
Christmas.

     MR. PAYNE: Would it be convenient, sir, there is a
matter I would like to ask Mr. Butler about arising from
questions which have been asked further down the rank?
Would it be convenient to do that now?

     THE CORONER: Yes, because      then Mr. Maxwell can pick
up anything else.     You are happy with that, Mr. Maxwell?
                                                   A . BUTLER


     MR. MAXWELL:     I am perfectly happy, sir.

        Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Mr. Butler it is about some letters and a minute that
were put to you, which we have now got numbered as
C385, so if it is possible to get those out, these are
the letters from Eastwood and Partners to South
Yorkshire County Council back in 1981, and in asking
you to look at this I make it perfectly clear that it
is entirely understood ;that you were not personally
involved at this time at all, and there is nothing
personally directed to you about this at all.   It is
merely to bring out what in fact was being said to then
licensing authority.  Do you see this letter of 2nd
September, 1981? - A. Yes, sir.

From Eastwood and Partners to South Yorkshire County
Council, right? - A. Yes, sir.

It starts off:

     "We have been instructed by the Club to organise
     the installation of two radial fences on the
     terrace at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

     It is intended that these fences are so positioned
     that they divide this section of the terrace into
     approximately three equal areas, each served by
     its own entrance."

and then go to the very last paragraph, over the page:

     "Six copies  of our drawing 3563/1 together with
     two copies of our drawings 3563/2 arid 3 (for
     reference only) are enclosed."

Now just go on in this sequence.     You can miss out the
next   letter of 9th September then there is one of 14th
December, again from Eastwood to South Yorkshire County
Council - have you found that? - A. Yes, sir.

It starts off:

     "The work on the radial fences andsecurity gates
     indicated on our drawings 3563/1-3 which we sent
     to you on 2 September 1981, is now substantially
     complete."

Do you see that?    - A. Yes, sir.

Now   go on to the minute of the meeting which    refers to
this, which is C386.   This is the meeting headed
"Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975", dated at the top
                                               A . BUTLER


11th September 1981.  It is the minute which starts off
with a list of all the people attending, representing
the official bodies that you were listing yesterday.
Now, look at the "Purpose of the Meeting:

     "The purpose of the meeting was to consider the
     letter dated 2nd September ...."

- that is the one we just first looked at -

      ... and plans submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and
     Partners ...."

and so on - right? - A I ?Yes, sir.

What I want you to do just for completeness, please, is
to look at the plans which are being referred to in
those letters and in that minute.  (Copies of the
plans 3563/1-2 were handed round)

     THE CORONER:   We had better have separate numbers,
for these.  3563/1, what number is that?

     MR. BEECHEY:    C387.

     THE CORONER:    So 3563/2 will be C388.

      MR. PAYNE:   Just have a look at these plans.
This is what was sent to the County Council and
discussed at the Officer Working Party, as we have just
seen.   Look at plan 3563/1, will you, number C387? - A.
Yes, sir.

Look at the title at the very bottom of the page.   It
has got the name "Eastwood and Partners Consulting
Engineers" and their address, then "Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club Ltd. Radial Fences and Turnstiles at
Leppings Lane (Possible Scheme No. 1)".  You see that?
- A. The bottom of mine is obliterated.

It is not very easy to see but we have all got the same
copy and you can just about make it out? You can see
the words, but half has been chopped off? - A. Yes.

Now look down the right hand side of this diagram which
we know is the terrace.    At the top we have got "N.W
Terrace, 2,800, Turnstiles Provided * A" - do you see
that?   I just want you to work through this drawing so
that the Jury have a chance to look round it, Mr.
Butler.   I am asking you to help me, please.   Can you
see that at the top? - A. Yes, I can see it.
                                                 A . BUTLER


To the right below that is "2,400" - it looks as if it
might be crossed out - "Turnstiles Provided « 3" - do
you see that? - A. Yes.

Then below that, "New Radial Fence"? - A. Yes.

Then in the middle there is a big section marked
"2,400", which is crossed out with a double line, and
underneath that, "Turnstiles Provided = 4" - do you see
that? - A. Yes.

And below that "New Radial Fence", and then we come
down to the bottom, "Pen 2,400 + (550)", and below
that, "Turnstiles Provided » 3 + (1)" - do you see
that? - A. It is a bit difficult to make out, the last
part of it, but I can see where you are referring to,
sir.

As a surveyor, Mr. Butler, does it appear to you that
the author of this drawing, as a consulting engineer,
has obviously applied his mind to how many turnstiles
should be provided for each of these sections? Does it
appear to you, as a surveyor, in your expert opinion,
Mr. Butler? - A. It shows that the mind has been
applied, yes.

In addition to that does it show that the consulting
engineer has applied his mind to what should be the
safe capacity of each of these new pens, and he has
written a number down, although in some cases he has
had second thoughts and crossed it out, but he has
applied his mind to what the capacity of these new pens
should be.  Does that appear to you in your expert
opinion? - A. Those figures would appear to be for that
purpose.

Now go behind the Stand, will you, and let's look at
the layout of the turnstiles.  First of all starting at
the top, do you see that there is that big bank of
turnstiles which we have seen in lots of drawings, and
on the present layout - do you see that, with the
words, "North Stand" at the top? - A. Yes, sir.

We can see that turnstiles 1-6, which are not marked in
individually, they are lined up to go to the North
Stand - can you see that? - A. Yes, sir.

Then we come to turnstile 7, and they are not numbered
as we go down, until we come to the end of the next
section, where the rest of the turnstiles are blotted -
do you see that? - A. Yes, sir.

Does it appear to you that the author of this drawing
has applied his raind to a particular number of
                                              A . BUTLER


turnstiles, which should provide access to the area
marked "North West Terrace, 2,800, Turnstiles Provided
= 4"? - A. Yes, sir.

And does the same apply then as we work our way across
the turnstiles?  He has divided up the concourse area
with some kind of barriers in this sketch, yes? Can
you see that in your expert opinion, Hr. Butler? - A. I
can see it, sir, yes.

And he has applied a Tparticular number of turnstiles to
each of these new sections that he has sketched on this
drawing? - A. Yes.

In particular he has had to grapple with the problem of
the new central pen, which we can see to the right of
the drawing under "Turnstiles Provided = 4".  Now if we
go through the tunnel we come to the back of the Stand,
there is the concourse area, and there are the four
turnstiles that he is provided in two pairs - two pairs
of two - can you see that? - A. Yes.

Those seem to be the turnstiles that he is going to
provide for the new central pen, then there is then a
little segment of turnstiles which are provided which
only give access to the stairway leading up into the
Stand - do you see that?  Is that difficult for you to
find, Mr. Butler? - A. Which particular ...?

If you look at the bottom of the Stand, you can see the
staircase going up at the back of the Stand? - A. Yes,
indeed.

Now, just run your eye back across the concourse there
from that staircase? - A. Yes, I do understand now that
I have had more of a chance of reading more of the
drawing, yes, sir.

And there are some turnstiles provided, and if you go
through those turnstiles that will only lead you to the
staircase up into the Stand, won't it? - A. Yes.

You can't get round the corner of the Stand because if
you look just below the staircase, where there is that
new little batch of turnstiles, there is a little line
marked between the turnstiles and the back of the
Stand, is that right? - A. There appears to be more
than one line.

On this sketch it looks as if he is intending to shut
off entry from that particular segment on the concourse
so that people can't get round the corner? That is
what it looks like, doesn't it? - A. That appears to be
the application of the mind at the time.
                                                 A . BUTLER


Thank you very much.  Then in order to get people into
the bottom pen on the right hand side, with the 2,400 +
550, in order to get them in there he has created some
new turnstiles at the very bottom of the concourse
area.  Can you see that? - A. This is the intention
shown on the drawing.

Marked "New Turnstiles and Queueing Area", right? - A.
Yes.

I just want to complete this exercise, if you would be
very kind, and just take the 1986 edition of the Green
Guide, which I appreciate is published well after the
date of this drawing, but take the 1986 edition, which
is the one that we have got, and look at paragraph 101.

     THE CORONER:   What is it you are trying to
establish, Mr. Payne?

     MR. PAYNE:   That the design which is being
prepared here, which we are looking at, sir, complies
with the guidance which is given in the Green Guide,
about what should be done to control the capacity of
each section of the ground.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, but isn't it correct, Mr.
Payne, that this proposal, whatever its merits, was
never implemented?

     MR. PAYNE:     Certainly, that is absolutely true.

     THE CORONER:   So the fact that the proposal was
put up which complies but not implemented does not get
us any further forward, does it?

     MR. PAYNE:   Our submission is that in terms of
the Jury determining how this disaster occurred it does
get us further forward.

     THE CORONER:     I don't see how it does.

     MR. PAYNE:    Because what it shows is that
consideration ....

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  If my learned friend is going to
make a speech, he should do so in the absence of the
Jury.

     MR. KING:   I agree, sir.    This is a tactic we
have seen before, sir.

     THE CORONER:   No, it is not a tactic because Mr.
Payne fell into it because I asked some questions.  Mr.
Payne, I don't think that there is any purpose
                                                 A . BUTLER


whatsoever in pursuing this line as to what might have
happened if some different proposal had been put in
place.

     MR. PAYNE:   On the contrary, our submission is
that it is very material as to how the disaster
occurred.  Now I appreciate that we are not allowed to
address you as to fact, and the best we can do really,
I suppose, I would like you to understand how we put
this point because we submit that it is of great
importance as to how"the disaster occurred.  I am
accepting the restriction that I am not allowed to say,
make facts, in front of the Jury, so the best I can
suggest is that we should be allowed to do this with
the Jury out, regrettably.

     THE CORONER:   Well, we are going to have lunch
anyway so we will break for lunch whatever happens, and
I will consider the matter further, but I must tell you
unless I can come up with some bright idea as to why
this is relevant I think I am going to ....

     !1K. PAYNE:     Sir, you have not heard me ....

     THE CORONER:      I think we have spent a great deal
of time ....

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, you have not heard me about it.
1 would be grateful if before saying anything about it
you would at least hear me first.

     THE CORONER:   Okay.  Ladies and gentlemen, I will
hear Mr. Payne before I call you back so take until at
least quarter-past - but we should be back at 2.

                   (Luncheon Adjournment)
     (In the absence of the jury and the witness)

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I think I have been able to solve
the problem about addressing you on fact, on the question
which you raised before the adjournment, in this way,
when you raised the question of "where is this getting
us?", meaning in what respect is this material to an
issue which the jury Jhas to consider, then that is a
question of law as to what is material.   Sir, on that
basis perhaps I may be permitted to answer?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I said I was going to listen to
you and that is why I didn't invite the jury to come in.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, I take it I don't need to address
you on the relevance of the need to amend the Safety
Certificate by including the capacity for the new
individual pens.    I am going to proceed on the basis
that that is material, the need to amend the Safety
Certificate.    The question which is being raised is in
what respect is it material to refer to these particular
drawings.

     Sir, our answer to that is that they are material to
the question because they are illustrations of occasions
when specialist experts, in this particular case
Dr. Eastwood, have had to consider the implications and
consequences of putting radial fences on to the terrace.
When they have had to consider those implications and
consequences and applied their mind to the point, they
have answered their own question to themselves by working
out the capacity of each individual section, working out
the number of turnstiles required and making sketch
drawings to show the result.   These are illustrations of
the way in which it is material that the capacity of each
new section does have to be assessed and provision has to
be made, once the capacity has been assessed, to control
the number of people who go into it.   It is no good
fixing a capacity limit unless you also devise a means to
control the numbers going into that pen.

     This all does come back to the relevance of the
Safety Certificate itself, and the way in which this is
material to the question of how the disaster occurred,
because if the Safety Certificate had been amended, as we
submit it ought to have been, then by putting the new
numbers for each individual pen into the schedule in the
Safety Certificate, that would have had the necessary
implications that there would then have had also to be a
means of counting and control of the people going into
those new sections in order to make sure that the
certified numbers were not exceeded.
     It is not, as somebody said earlier, just a question
of a piece of paper with numbers on it, the implications
of the paper with numbers on it are first of all that
people know what the number is, and secondly, there has
to be a means of counting and control.   Our submission
is that the only realistic means is by turnstiles.

     Sir, that completes the circle now and I am back to
the drawings.  We submit these drawings are illustrations
of the exact working of the concept I have been
explaining, that the engineers agree with the point I am
now putting, namely, that when one applies one s mind to
the fact that there has to be a capacity for each
individual pen, then it follows from that there has to be
a means of control, viz, turnstiles.

     That, in our submission, is the relevance of these
drawings.   Now these happen to be the drawings in 1981,
but, sir, as you probably know, there is a set of
drawings in 1985, eight in all, which illustrate exactly
the same thought process when the club was addressing its
mind to the introduction of the further barrier dividing
the central pen.

     Once again when the engineer addressed his mind to
this question of how the capacity is going to be
controlled, he came up with the same answer, namely
separate access controlled by its own individual
turnstiles.

     You will probably also know, sir, there is a drawing
in 1987 which shows that the individual capacity of each
of the new pens was worked out and written on to a
drawing, so that just as these drawings which I am now
referring to in my submission are material as
illustrations of the correct consideration which should,
and, indeed, was given to the point we are making.   It
was done in 1981, then in 1985 and then in 1987.

     I just need to say one further  thing and that is I
have been helpfully told by several  of my learned friends
that in fact the letters which gave rise to my
introduction of these sketches at this moment, are in
fact referring not to the drawings which I have just put
in, but are referring to detailed engineering drawings of
the structures of the radial fences themselves which
happen to have the same numbers as the drawings I have
put in.

     I will have to correct that in  front of the jury
because I have made a mistake there.I thought that
because of the numbering these were the sketches.    That
is a mistake which I have made but it doesn't affect the
submission which I am making because the only consequence
of that will be that instead of putting in the drawings
at this stage I will seek to do it at an appropriate
stage, which probably will be when Dr. Eastwood is giving
evidence, so that they go in then.

     However, on the question of whether or not they are
material, on the question of how the disaster occurred,
the same point arises: about which I have just made my
submissions.

     MR. MAXWELL:    Sit,, they might be material but they
are not material in the hands of this witness.     This
witness never had these proposals put before him at any
stage.    Those proposals never came to the attention of
the Council.    I hope that that is conceded.    It was a
matter that was gone into at great length before Lord
Justice Taylor when the same mistake was made when
originally it was thought that these drawings, these
proposals, were those that were referred to in the letter
of December 1981, saying that the work had been
substantially completed in accordance with drawings with
a number.

     This witness cannot deal with that which is said to
be material.   There may be another witness who can.
All that is happening is that this witness is being asked
to comment upon the thesis that the Police put forward.
He is not the right person to do that because he is
really being asked for an opinion and we ought to concern
ourselves with the facts that he can deal with.

     On that narrow ground that he, the witness, ought
not to be asked to speak as to documents that never came
to his attention, and which never came into the Council's
possession, I invite you to say that this goes beyond
that which could possibly be regarded as material.

     It is in that outer land of a document which ought
not to be used at this stage of the Inquests.   It may be
that when Dr. Eastwood or somebody else gives evidence
that it might be used at that stage, but not with this
witness.

     THE CORONER:   Your objection is not necessarily to
the issue which Mr. Payne is seeking to explore.   It
sounds to me as if what you are saving is you agree it
has met the reality as far as the how" is concerned.
Your issue is that this the wrong person to deal with it?

     MR. MAXWELL:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Anybody else want to say anything?
     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, I am grateful for my learned
friend, Mr. Payne, indicating that he is going to correct
the matter, his misapprehension, in front of the jury.
I wonder if I could respectfully invite him just to
briefly show the jury one of the very large plans that I
know my learned friend Mr. Maxwell has, which shows
detailed engineering drawings, as you would expect?    It
is only fair both to Tthe engineer and the club that any
impression that has s 6 far been generated that the scheme
that was given to the Council did not have particular
figures on it, did not rtwve any particular detailed
information.   Indeed, the one which was actually made
was wholly different to these plans and it is completely
corrected so there is no possible prejudice to either the
club or its engineer.

     THE CORONER:   Did you say you had a copy of these
plans?   Can I just glance at one of them just for my own
personal benefit?

     MR. MAXWELL:   You will find that the numbers are
written on in pencil.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I just want to have a quick look
at them.




             I am sure you will
                                                62




       I am sure you will appreciate that in general terms
to put a plan like this in front of the jury in an Inquest
is, putting it bluntly, a waste of time because they are
not engineers, I am not an engineer, and it is not terribly
important, but in other words these are plans of the con­
struction of the radial fences basically, isn't it, not of
the overall concept.
      MR. PAYNE: No, I am quite happy to say that. I have
clearly got to put that right that the drawings which I
thought were the ones wei^e not actually sent.

       THE CORONER: I think, Mr. Payne, that the way to
deal with this is this: -we have got to get the record
right so that we don't leave the jury with the impression
that it all proceeded on the back of an envelope. I know
this was more than the back of an envelope a little tiny
sketch plan (a). I do intend to call Dr. Eastwood by then
and he will have to no doubt deal with certain issues
which will be raised including his application to the
problem.   I agree with Mr. Maxwell Dr. Eastwood is a better
man.
       What we can do in order to end this section is to
put to this witness whether or not he had ever seen these
plans.   If he says he had seen them then I suggest that
we finish as shortly as you can on the second plan so that
we don't leave everything up in the air. If he says no
he hadn't then I would suggest that we just stop the
examination of this issue with this witness.

       As I say unless something happens to Dr. Eastwood
or to us, he is definitely the person who is on my list
of witnesses to call.
       MR. PAYNE:   I will correct the position with the
witness.
       THE CORONER: We ought to correct it so the jury
aren't left with a misapprehension as to what we are
talking about.
      MR. MAXWELL: Sir,     could I voice a hope which is still
springing eternal just at    this end. It relates to Mr. Bownes
He is not in this room at    the moment. His evidence is also
a matter of public record    so everyone knows what he has
said.
       The hope is this: that having regard to the way
in which Mr. Butler has been used as a sounding board for
a variety of opinions and the way he has gone through a
lot of documents that he has no personal knowledge of,
that we won't have to do the same exercise with Mr. Bownes
whose evidence might, perhaps, fingers crossed, and all
other superstitions abided by, his evidence might be
dealt with more briefly.
                                     A. BUTLER



       THE CORONER: Well that is certainly my intention.
I think insofar as he says things which Mr. Butler hasn't
said, and there are one or two items, in fact I can only
think of about two or three things which I need to ask
Mr. Bownes which we have not already covered and I don't
see any purpose whatsoever in going over the same ground
with him for another two days, so that is my feeling as
well.  We have got to be sensible as well as thorough.

       Shall we have the. jury back? So, Mr. Payne, if
you would deal then with ;the plan, the correction first.

               (The jury ^return into Court)


                  ARTHUR BUTLER Recalled

          Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Mr. Butler, can you just take those two drawings that I
was asking you to look at before lunch, 388 and 387?
- A. Yes.

Now I would just like to make something clear which has
been shown to me during the adjournment, and the numbers
on these drawings if you look in the bottom right-hand
corner are 3563/2 and /I as we know? - A. Yes.

And those are actually the numbers in the letters which
were shown to you by Mr. Catchpole earlier in your
evidence? - A. I believe so.

However, I am told and I accept that these numbers, these
drawings are not actually the drawings which were sent
to South Yorkshire County Council with these letters but
some other drawings were sent and just so that the jury
can see and are not misled by my mistake, I am going to
ask that one of the drawings should be opened up and just
shown to the jury so they see what it looks like.  I don't
think it is necessary to look at it in detail unless any­
body wants to.

       THE CORONER: We are not going to exhibit this.
This is an error because of numbering, but just to show
you the sort of drawings which were being submitted rather
than the type which we have been looking at. Can you see?

      MR. PAYNE:  This is it, 3563/1 and the other two,
although they are not the same drawing, are also engineering
drawings of the structures which it was intended to put in
place and not of the layout of turnstiles and numbers in
the pens and numbers of turnstiles applied as shown in
this drawing.
                                      A. BUTLER’


       If I may say so, to complete the picture, I under­
stand and I accept, I have been told this by Dr. Eastwood
and I accept from him or through his Counsel, what the
jury have got was an internal document prepared by
Dr. Eastwood which was not then sent to the Council.

      I don't ask you any more questions about that.

       THE CORONER:   Just one second because I have got
to go back to Mrs. McBrien because she was sorting out
some paperwork.   Have you succeeded in sorting out what
it is you were after, Mrs. McBrien?

      MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes', •to the best of my ability I have.


         Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Butler, I asked you were you aware of certain proposals
number 299 and 300.  Do you remember? - A. I remember the
question.

I think the point where we adjourned I was asking if you
were aware of a telephone conversation between Mr. Chester
and Dr. Eastwood.

       THE CORONER:  The question is, Mr. Butler, were you
aware of a telephone conversation between Mr. Chester
and Dr. Eastwood?

       MRS. McBRIEN:  I am sorry, sir, I have got down here
Mr. Chester, item 2, but I think the conversation was
between Mr. Strange.  Miss Sinclair has just pointed out
that it was Mr. Strange who spoke to Dr. Eastwood.

      MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, I am so sorry I have just
added to the confusion.

       My understanding is that this was a conversation
between Mr. Chester at the Club and Mr. Strange at
Eastwoods.

       THE CORONER:  I think, Mr. Butler, listen to me.
Were you aware of a conversation at some point in time
between a Mr. Chester who was an employee of the Club,
a telephone conversation when he spoke to Mr. Strange,
who is an employee, or Associate of Eastwood and Co. which
is the firm or company with which Dr. Eastwood is
associated.   Do you know anything at all about a con­
versation in relation to that at the time when you took
up your position, or at any time prior to 15th April 1989?
- A. No sir.
                                     A. BUTLER



Just to complete this question, not that it is relevant,
were you aware of it since the 15th April 1989 that you
can think.  Can you recollect anything in relation to
that now? - A. I believe in searching through many papers
which have.been available to me from various different
sources, that there is some notes of a telephone conversation
or telephone conversations and I believe they were appended
to the statement which was prepared by Eastwood and Partners
for the Taylor Inquiry.   However, which particular telephone
conversation that we are.Treferring to now then I would not
know sir.




                   Q. And in any event you
                                                      A. BUTLER


Q. In any event you definitely knew nothing of it prior
   to the 15th April 1989, that is a fact, is it? - A.
   That is a fact.

        THE CORONER:   I do not think the he can help you on
that.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   You have had access to these
     documents since the tragedy you were saying? - A. If
     the conversation is one which was within that set of
     documents that was issued with the Eastwood and
     Partners' statement then* yes, I have seen that.  If
     it is not then I cannot be of any help.

Q. The reason I am bringing it up is two words in
   particular which stick in my mind, gates and
   disaster.  That is why I remember the document.     Do
   you recall...

        THE CORONER:   I do not think the witness can help
you.     What can he say?

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   You did agree this morning that
     entry into the stadium was by turnstile, didn't you,
     and that it would be as recommended in the Green
     Guide? - A. As was considered that the only entry
     into the stadium would be by turnstile for the
     spectators, of course.

Q. That gave not only a certain rate of flow into the
   stadium which controlled the numbers and how they
   were going in but it also allowed for dispersal of
   the fans as well, didn't it? They weren't all
   directed into one spot if they went in via
   turnstiles? - A. That is right.

Q. I would like to go back to the capacity.  I mentioned
   to you this morning that there was a safe capacity
   and a maximum limit to the numbers who were allowed
   to go into the stadium.  You are aware of that,
   aren't you? - A. I am aware of the capacity which is
   stated within the Safety Certificate.

Q. I was wondering, could we look at the Safety
   Certificate?  It is clause 151.

     THE CORONER:      There is no clause 151 in the Safety
Certificate.

     MRS. McBRIEN:      It refers to the occupier of the
Certificate.

        THE CORONER:   I am sorry?
                                                                       67

                                                                A. BUTLER


           MRS. McBRIEN:     The occupier of the Certificate.

         MR. PAYNE:       I think probably, Mrs. McBrien, you mean
B   15(1).

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, I am sorry.  The terms of
         admission are hereby proposed, yes? - A. I am sorry,
         I am having difficulty in hearing.

    Q. The holder on the capacity schedule, going down a
       bit, 15(4) I have got down here.
                                    f t


         THE CORONER:     I do not know what you are referring ,
    to, Mrs. McBrien.  I am terribly sorry.   I have got 15(1)
    in front of me and it does not sound anything like what you
    are reading.  What is Mrs. McBrien looking at? Could
    somebody help me?

         MRS. McBRIEN:   Could I just read the part that I
    think is relevant to the Inquest then please, sir?

         THE CORONER:   No, tell me where it is in the Safety
    Certificate.  You said that it was in the Safety
    Certificate.

          MRS. McBRIEN:      Yes,     I have   got it    down here.

           THE CORONER:     Point     it out   to me.

         MRS. McBRIEN:   "The         Holder   shall refuse admission to
    certain categories".

         MR. MAXWELL:      Clause     6(2) at least      begins with those
    words, sir.

           THE CORONER:     What is the question, Mrs. McBrien?

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Are you aware, Mr. Butler, that
         certain categories would be refused admission into
         the stadium?

         THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, whichever way you look at
    it, not only does it not say that in the clause, that is
    point one, but secondly this witness is a structural
    engineer.

         MRS. McBRlEN:       I thought he was aware of the Safety
    Certificate though.

         THE CORONER:   He is aware of the Safety Certificate.
    That does not mean to say that bit of it applies to him but
    even if it did you should read the clause, with great
    respect.  I will read it to you.  It says:




H
                                                     A. BUTLER


     "The Holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate
     spectators from, the Stadium or any part thereof at
     any time before or during a Specified Activity upon
     receiving instructions so to do from the Chief
     Constable."

What is your question of this witness on that wording?

     MRS. McBRIEN:     I haven't a question then, thank you,
not on that.

     THE WITNESS:  Dr. Popper, can I just correct one
matter there, sir?

Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, certainly. - A. I am not
     qualified as a structural engineer.

Q. You are a surveyor? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   The point I made applies whether you be
a surveyor or engineer but thank you for drawing it to my
attention.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     I will leave that line of questioning
altogether.

Q. Yesterday Mr. Payne asked you where the exits were
   from Pen 3 and you replied that there were three, the
   tunnel, the radial gates and Gate 3. Then he
   referred you to paragraph 66 in the Green Guide.
   Could you turn to paragraph 66 please? The heading
   at the top of page 25 is "Exit doors".  Those, would
   you agree, refer only to exit gates for fans leaving
   the stadium and they are not for gates for fans to be
   allowed into the stadium? That is the meaning of
   exit gates or doors, isn't it? - A. That was my
   impression of this document.

Q. But when Mr. Payne asked you about the exit gates
   from Pen 3 and you said the tunnel, the radial gate
   and Gate 3, they would not come into that category,
   would they? - A. I believe the question there was the
   exits and I did give that answer.  I was not
   necessarily referring to something which was by
   definition within this document.




                                 /Q. I think I remember us.
                                                           69

                                                   A. BUTLER


Q. I think I remember us looking at a photograph of the
   tunnel and the doors of it and the fact that the doors
   swung inwards, I think that did come into the
   questioning yesterday, but the route from the tunnel,
   from the terrace, that was an entrance and an exit,
   wasn't it? - A. The tunnel was, yes.

Q. Yes, it just wasn't an exit door, it was a dual purpose
   door or entry?

         THE CORONER:    Channel would be a better word.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Channel, yes. - A. I am not sure
     of what the purpose of those doors actually was.  The
     tunnel was certainly used for access and egress.

Q. Yes, it was for both purposes, but the exit gates that
   are referred to on page 25 mean exit gates only, don't
   they? They mean that fans only go out of the ground
   via those doors, they do not come in through those
   doors, so that are different? - A. I take it as that
   implication, seeing that it does refer to outside
   intruders within the particular paragraph.

Q. Yes, and also the radial gate was regarded as an exit
   gate on the terrace, but there again that had a
   different purpose, that was for movement from one pen
   to another pen, wasn't it? They were not just put
   there as exit gates? - A. That is right.

Q. Also, gate 3 in the perimeter fence, you could hardly
   describe that as an exit route, could you? That surely
   would be for the use of the Police who were on the
   pitch, to use when they felt necessary?  I am not
   absolutely sure myself of the purpose of that gate, but
   perhaps you could tell me? - A. Gate 3 in particular,
   although all the other gates had been provided
   relatively recently before this tragedy, with quick
   release latches that had it of been purely for Police
   access into the pens then I cannot see the reason why
   quick release latches had been provided to those gates.

Q. I am not absolutely sure I know what you mean by that?
   - A. What is the particular problem?

Q. I did not really follow your answer that time, I'm
   afraid. - A. If I understand correctly, you were asking
   as to whether the intention of those gates was for
   Police access into the pen.

Q. Yes. - A. Or for spectators to exit from the pen under
   certain situations.
                                                A . BUTLER


Yes. - A. Being that the release mechanism for that
gate, and indeed all of the gates around the stadium in
the perimeter fencing, had recently been revised to
include a quick release mechanism, then that the
mechanism that was put on was so that a pressure build
up behind the gate could still be allowed to be
relieved by using the quick release mechanism.

Do you know if those gates in the perimeter fence are
manned by Police all the time?  Is that one of the
conditions? - A. I have found no reference to that in
documentation and I assume that you are talking about
the time up to and including the fateful day, rather
than afterwards when the Taylor recommendations were
put to the ground.

     THE CORONER:   Confine your answers to up to and
including 15th April.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, I know they are now, but I
was wondering if they were before? - A. This I have no .
knowledge of.

The radial gates in the radial fences, were they manned
by Police or were they supposed to be manned by Police,
up to the date of the disaster? - A. The reference
within documentation is that they should have been
manned by Police.

So the exit doors mentioned on page 25, they should be
padlocked at all times, it says, and manned by stewards
- paragraph 66 again.

       THE CORONER:   Which gates are you talking about
now?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I am going out now to the
perimeter of the ground, the exit gates A, B and C.

     THE CORONER:     I cannot see the word "padlocked*1
in there.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   No it isn't, it is in my notes,
sorry.  It says "a panic type bolt" in here:

You knew that they were supposed to have a bolt and be
fastened against intruders, so that people from outside
were not able to come through them easily? You know
about that? - A. Sorry, we are talking about which part
of the structure?

The perimeter of the ground.  I am referring to the
large concertina gates, A, B and C. - A. Yes.
                                               A . BUTLER


     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I don't want to be
unkind to you but it does not say that. It says:

     "Where exit gates have to be secured against
     outside intruders ...."

You might decide not to secure your exit gates.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Oh, it is a guide ___

     THE CORONER:   If you decide that they have to be
secured, if, then you should have panic bolts.  That is
wnat it says.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Oh yes, because this is only a
guide.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, a guide.

     MriS. McBRIEN:  Yes, I was wondering how the guide
was applied to Hillsborough Stadium, how the exit gates
at Hillsborough were operated, and how they were
manned.

      THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien.  We know the gate
was opened.   Nobody has argued about that.  Whether or
not the construction of the gate followed in the
minutiae to the Green Guide makes no difference to
that.   There is no suggestion that the gate was not
opened, it was opened, so we are not going to go down
that line.   No, I am sorry.  You see, there are
nundreds of things in this Green Guide, Mrs. McBrien.
We could talk about the depth of the steps and whether
there were three and three-eighth inches or three and a
quarter, and whether or not that complied with the
Guide, and we could talk about 10,000 other issues
wnere there may be deviations - completely irrelevant -
it does not make any difference, and that goes to that
as well.




       Q.     MRS. McBRIEN:    Mr. Butler, you were ....
                                                A. BUTLER


     MRS. McBRIEN:   Mr. Butler, you were asked about the
separate pens that had been created on the terrace and it
seems as though it was suggested it was an impossibility
to disperse the fans across that terrace, but it had been
done in 1988, hadn't it, as a photograph showed clearly?
- A. I'm sorry, I am not following the question.

There was only one lot of turnstiles for the ground.
Well, there were more than that, but for Leppings Lane
there were twenty-three turnstiles.   There wasn't a set
of turnstiles inside the ground, on the concourse for
instance, operating the separate pens? - A. No.

It was all done by the one entry into the ground at the
turnstiles, the twenty-three turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Now it was a simple process, really?   Do you agree?
This was quite a simple process.   Fans didn't have to go
in through that set of turnstiles and then go into
another and look on their tickets to find out what pen
they had to go to? - A. That's right.

They only had to go through a turnstile, show a ticket on
that particular day, and then look for the terrace, the
standing area?

     THE CORONER:   In that case it isn't twenty-three
turnstiles, Mrs. McBrien, it is seven, A to G.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, I'm sorry.

     THE CORONER:    Move on to your point.  I think I
know what the point is you are trying to ask, but you
haven't got to it yet and I don't think he is the right
man but you can try.

      MRS. McBRIEN: I am just saying that the turnstiles
A to G were the only ones used for fans entering the
Leppings Lane terrace?   There were no others used inside
the ground on the concourse? - A. Of that I am not sure.
There was internal division.   Have we a larger scale
plan?

     THE CORONER:   I think what Mrs. McBrien is asking
is this: as far as you are aware, apart from the
turnstiles A to G, which led into the concourse area -
can you see it on C.274? - A. That was the drawing I was
searching for.

Can you see A to G on there? - A. Yes.

Once you have got through A to G was there any further
bank of turnstiles which you had to traverse before you
could get on to the terracing? - A. No.
                                                 A. BUTLER


     THE CORONER:    That is the first part of your
questioning?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Now the second part is this - I'll
ask and see whether I have got it right:

Are you aware whether or not  this same arrangement
applied in 1988 with regard to entry     intotheterracing
area? - A. As far as I -am aware, yes.

Are you aware of anything which was reported to you by
virtue of your membership of the Advisory Group, or in
any other capacity, that there were any significant
problems with regard to dispersal of    peopleacrossthe
terracing in 1988? - A. No, sir.

You are not? - A. No, sir.

Are you aware whether or notin 1988 any  exit gates - if
you look at that plan for a moment, the exit gates I am
referring to are marked either as Gate A, Gate B or
Gate C, can you see them? - A. Yes, sir.

Are you aware whether any of those gates were opened that
year in order to allow the ingress of spectators to the
match, or was that at any point reported to you? - A.
Until.••

Nineteen eighty-eight we are talking about, the previous
year. - A. Until after the tragedy I was not aware of
exit gates being opened at any ground in order to admit
spectators.

After the tragedy it was reported to you that in 1989
exit gates were opened and that was news to you? - A.
Yes, sir.

That is the difference between 1988 and 1989 as far as
you are aware? - A. Quite certainly, sir.

     THE CORONER:    That is what you are trying to
establish?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   That has covered it all.    Thank
you, Mr. Butler.
                                                               74

                                                       A. BUTLER


                   Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL:

B      Mr. Butler, it follows from that that you always believed
       that spectators would enter through the turnstiles? - A.
       Yes, sir.

       Therefore that no-one ever suggested to you that
       spectators might enterT through a gate such as Gate C? -
       A. Certainly not, sir.

       By no-one I mean no-one -from the Council, the County
       Council, the City Council, the Police Authority, the Fire
       Authority and, as they might have done if they had chosen
       so to do, the club, Dr. Eastwood.    Absolutely no-one? -
       A. Absolutely no-one, sir.

      If anyone had known of that possibility would you have
      expected such a possibility to be made known at the
      ■••tings of the Officer Working Party? - A. Very much so,
      sir.
D
       Had such a possibility been made known, is it a matter
       that you think you would have been interested in in terms
       of ground safety? - A. Yes.

       Were you aware, that is, you, Arthur Butler to your
       individual knowledge, were you aware there was any risk
       of overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. No,
       sir.

       Or any risk of a barrier being damaged in the way that it
       is understood occurred? - A. No, sir.

      Or any risk of lethal crushing on those terraces? - A.
      No, sir.

       If anyone else had known of such a risk would you expect
       to have been told about it at the Officer Working Party
       meetings? - A. I certainly would have, sir.

      Had that occurred is that something again you would have
      had an interest in in terms of ground safety? - A. Very
      auch so, sir.

    Q. Would you have wanted to take action about such matters?
       - A. Very much so.

    Q. Were you aware before the 15th of April, 1989, of any
      defect, flaw, call it what you will, affecting the Safety
      Certificate? - A. No, sir.

      Had you been aware of any such would you have wanted any
      action to be taken about it? - A. Yes, sir.



H
A
                                                                 75

                                                        A. BUTLER


    Q. It was said I think by Mr. Manning that it was the duty
       of Sheffield City Council to enforce the provisions of
B      the Safety Certificate.    You may be aware that by the
       Act of Piarliament, the Safety at Sportsgrounds Act, it is
       the duty of Sheffield City Council to enforce the
       provisions of that Act? - A. As I now understand it, sir.

    Q. Would you look at the Certificate to see what the
       Certificate says about enforcement, and go to the first
       of the general terms and conditions.   Do you see 1 (1):
                              •   •

            "The Holder's nominee for the time being approved in
            writing by the County Council shall be present
            whenever the Stadium is used for a Specified
            Activity and he shall on behalf of the Holder ensure
            that the terms and conditions of the Certificate are
            complied with at the Specified Activity.

    Then at (2):

D           "The appointment by the Holder of a nominee to
            attend each Specified Activity shall not absolve the
            Holder and any responsible person (as defined in
            section 12(2) of the Act) from their obligation to
            take all reasonable precautions and exercise all due
            diligence to avoid the contravention of any term or
            condition of the Certificate."

       A. I see that, sir.

    Q. Did you think that the Safety Certificate, by its terms
       and conditions, created any risk of any person being
       hurt? - A. No, sir.

    Q. I wonder if while the jury and you have the Safety
       Certificate we might very briefly look at some other
       conditions which are of relevance and which may interest
       the jury who made an enquiry about the testing of the
       barriers.   It is right, isn't it, that annually the club
       arranged the testing of the crush barriers and
       appropriate certificates were issued? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Would you look at Condition 24, which is on page 7, which
       concerns some other certificates that had to be issued
       and they are sometimes called Certificates of Ground
       Safety, as opposed to the Safety Certificates issued by
       the local authority.   Just look at 24:

            "The Holder..."

       the club:

            "... shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by
            a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural


H
                                                            76

                                                   A. BUTLER


        or Civil) in the presence of a representative of the
        County Council within 7 months of the date of the
        Certificate and at least once in each period of 12
        months thereafter and the Holder shall as soon as
        possible after each inspection supply to the County
        Council a Certificate by the said Chartered Engineer
        as to the current compliance or non-compliance with
        good engineering and building practices and with the
        relevant British Standard Specifications and Codes
        of Practice and with the appropriate provisions and
        recommendations of* the Guide of all structural parts
        of the Stadium excluding the crush barriers and
        handrails."

  Crush barriers and handrails come in for special
  attention in the next clause - 25.   This is the one you
  have already been referred to.   Is it correct that in
  this case the engineer made an inspection, I think in
  July, 1988, and issued his appropriate Certificate of
  Ground Safety accordingly? - A. I believe that that was
  the date, sir, but it definitely was issued.

Q. The jury also enquired about the records that were kept,
   or may have been kept.   If you would refer to 28 (4) on
   page 8, the bottom half of that page, is that a provision
   requiring, if you look to the right of the figure 28:

        "The Holder shall make and keep the following
        records which shall be made available for inspection
        at all reasonable time to Authorised Persons: '

  The fourth category at the very bottom says:

        "(4) A record of all inspections, tests,
             maintenance, repairs and renewals carried out
             at the Stadium.

   I am asked to read category 1 as well:

        "(1) A record of the numbers of spectators admitted
             to the Stadium during a Specified Activity and
             to each area of Spectator Accommodation therein
             mentioned in Part 1 of Schedule 3."

  Again, while this document is to hand, would you refer to
  clause 9 on page 4?   This relates to the use of stewards
  and it is the clause that requires:

        "The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at
        every Specified Activity of such number of Safety
        Stewards as may be required by Part 2 of
        Schedule 3..."

   - A. Yes, sir.
                                                A. BUTLER


So for every activity the number specified in the
schedule has to be provided and if you go to the
schedule, is it apparent from that that what is required
for every activity is that:

     "The minimum number of Safety Stewards required for
     each function shall be as follows:"

That is the minimum number? - A. Yes.




          Q. Occasionally they demand
                                                         78


                                         A. BUTLER*'



Q. Occasionally they demand more.    Is that right? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And is it your understanding that at a large event such as
   this semi-final, more than the minimum number were in fact
   provided? - A. I understand that that was so.

Q. I go now please to a different subject matter entirely.
   It is Barrier 144.  You told the jury, I think twice now,
   of the meeting in August 1986 and the various considerations
   that you had in mind when balancing what you were prepared
   to agree to, at least on: behalf of the City Council.

         Was it the assumption then made by you that the
  persons entering Leppings iane terraces would enter through       •
  the turnstiles? - A. I did not know of any other way in
  which they would enter that sir.

Q. And that therefore the flow, the rate of flow, would be
   such as the turnstiles permitted? - A. Certainly.

Q. Does it follow from that that in considering the removal
   of Barrier 144 you did not contemplate the sudden intro­
   duction of a large number such as may have occurred here
   through Gate C? - A. Certainly not.

Q. You were asked questions by my learned friend Mr. Foster
   on behalf of the Fire Service.  Is it quite clear as far
   as you are concerned there is no criticism whatsoever to
   be levelled at the Fire Service? - A. Sorry, I did not
   understand that?

Q. Is   it clear that as far as you are concerned there is
   no   criticism whatsoever to be levelled at the Fire Service
   of   any kind Mr. Butler? - A. I would leave that for others
   to   determine sir.

Q. You make no criticism of them, do you? - A. No sir.

Q. You were asked though what possible concern they might
   have with numbers.  Do you remember being asked that? - A.
   I did sir.

Q. Is the Fire Service concerned with evacuation? - A. Yes sir.

Q. From a place like the terraces? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And in order to evacuate such a place is it appropriate
   to work out what is called an egress time, that is the
   number who can be got off in a certain time? - A. It is.

Q. Is it a necessary part of the calculation that you begin
   with a number of persons.  You have to know the number
   before you know whether you can get them off in a certain
   time? - A. It is indeed.
                                                               79



                                         . A. BUTLER   '



Q. And to that extent, and no more, would the Fire Service
   have considered the numbers on the terrace? - A. Possibly
   so.

Q. I would like you to help clear up something that arises
   from the two occasions that you have been referred to
   paragraph 66 of the Green Guide. Paragraph 66 relates
   to exit gates. Do you remember that? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Do you have the book open at that paragraph? - A. At page       25
     sir, yes.

Q.   And the questions that were put to you were put really
     in the context of the gates in the perimeter fence.   Do
     you remember that? - A. Yes indeed sir.

Q.   Would you please look first      of all    at paragraph        206,pag
     Do you have that? - A. I do sir.

Q. "Crowd movement".

           "Crowd movement on terraces should be strictly
           controlled in order to give the police the
           fullest opportunity for crowd control.  Less
           problems occur when terraces are subdivided
           as far as possible into sections by use of
           both radial and lateral barriers or railings
           which should comply with the strength require­
           ments set out in Chapter 9. Each section
           should ideally be self contained and should
           be serviced by its own entrance/exits,
           refreshment facilities and toilets ....
           Special care is needed to ensure that sections
           and subdivisions are provided with sufficient
           exits for use in an emergency."

     Now would you go over the page please to 209.   The question
     that will ultimately be put from this reading is:   "Are
     these the provisions that relate to perimeter fence gates
     rather than paragraph 66"? - A. Yes sir.

Q. 209.

            "Access to the pitch must be made as difficult
            as possible in normal circumstances while at
            the same time ensuring that the police have
            effective access to the terraces for the
            purpose of crowd control and enabling the
            pitch to be used (where appropriate) in the
            event of a serious emergency (see also
            Chapter 11, paragraph 186)."

     And it is there, and finally, to which we turn.       Would
                                        A. BUTLER'



  you go there please, paragraph 186 at the bottom of
  page 52.  It begins first of all by describing a situation
  that is not relevant.

         "Where the playing area or perimeter track
         is accessible to spectators and is considered
         suitable as a place of safety, evacuation
         onto it can be taken into account in calculating
         the emergency evacuation time. Where there is
         a pitch perimeter fence or wall it should have
         access points in Accordance with Chapter 15,
         paragraph 215 which can serve as exits and
         which can be.taken .into account in the calculation
         of the emergency evacuation time."

  A. Yes sir.

Q. Seeing those paragraphs now are you satisfied that that is
   where you look to to find a description of the Green
   Guid e 1s recommendations in respect of perimeter fences
   and the access points in them? - A. Yes sir.

Q. You have been asked a lot of questions about the pens.
   One question proceeded on the basis of putting to you the
   pens were self-contained and separate units and you in
   your answer accepted the word "separate".  "Yes", you said,
   "they are separate units", but you did not expressly
   adopt the description "self-contained"? - A. For a very
   good reason sir.

Q. Tell the jury what the "very good reason" is? - A. Being
   as the sections are defined in this Guide then they should
   have their own refreshment facilities and other facilities
   and certainly they did not.

Q. Well I want to ask you about the radial fence gates at
   the back of the radial fence.  You will appreciate the
   item that I am referring to. Do you? - A. The gates in
   the radial fences?

Q. Yes? - A. Yes.

Q. The gates which were to be kept open on occasions? - A.
   Those which were to be, agreed in the minutes to be manned
   by Police Officers.

Q. Yes, and where the whole of the terrace was to be used by
   one group they, the gates, would on occasions be kept open.
   Is that right? - A. As my understanding of the documentation.

Q. In your view is it possible to regard each pen as self-
   contained while the gates are kept open? - A. Not
   necessarily sir.
                                      A. .BUTLER



If you had a method of counting people into the pens would
it be an effective method if there was such an exit point
as the radial fence gates? - A. No sir.

And why not? - A. Because people could pass through that
from one pen to another and therefore negate the counting
system.

      MR. MAXWELL:   Yes, I have no further questions.
Thank you.

      MR. KING:   Sir, it was I who put the question as
to "self-contained” .and obtained the answers which my
learned friend has questioned on.

       Sir, may I be permitted to ask a question arising
out of that and if necessary of course for my learned
friend to respond to it?

       THE CORONER:  So long as it is one question. When
I say "one" I don't mean literally one, but a short series
because I intend to bring this to an end. Mr. Butler has
had a fair innings.

       MR. KING:   I agree, sir, but it was also a piece
of evidence which came out not when I was speaking about
the Police manning the gates sir which drew my attention
to it.   If I might divide it into two parts for the moment?


           Further Cross-Examined by MR. KI N G :

Your evidence was, Mr. Butler, that those radial gates at
the back were to be manned by the Police.  Is that right?
- A. Yes sir.

I take it from that during the course of the game or a
match when spectators were present on the terrace? - A. I
would assume so.

You were asked about the presence of those radial gates at
the back meaning that because they were there you could not
regard the pens as self-contained.

       Would you agree with me that if those radial    gates
become blocked and inaccessible, invisible because    of the
presence of spectators in the way, then they cease    to have
the function of a radial gate? - A. If that was to    be so
then yes I would agree.

If, this is an if but it is an important if, if in practice
there were no Police on the terraces manning those radial
gates and if in practice spectators when for example the
centre pen became full up or filled, would stand and block
                                     A. BUTLER



the radial gate at the back so as to obstruct the vision
and accessibility of those entering that pen, then you
would agree with me that that radial gate would cease to
have the function which you have indicated? - A. It would
cease to have that function.

      MR. KING:   Thank you.


                  Further By THE CORONER:

Can I just ask you this one question.  You said you under­
stood that the Police were to man the gates.  Is that based
upon, I think we were being referred to one of the minutes
where it talks about, yes C386, where at the bottom of the
page it says:  "The new gates at the rear of the terrace
also being under Police control".  Is that what you are
basing your reply on? - A. There was a reference in Working
Party minutes that the Police presence would be at those
points sir.

This is an Officer's Working Party minute which I am
referring you to, 11th September 1981.  It is C386.  If
we look it up in our bundle you will find it more quickly.

      MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, in the form I have it there is
also a letter.  In C386 it begins with a minute and then
at the back of it I have stapled to mine a letter of the
14th September 1981 which tends to confirm I think the
minute.

      THE CORONER:   Yes.  I wonder whether we ought to
give that letter a separate number because I think that
is going to confuse us. Let's give this letter of the
14th September 1981 which I think is to Dr. Eastwood from
the Chief Executive of South Yorkshire County Council ....

      MR. BEECHEY:   389 sir.

       THE CORONER:   I think it will be easier. All I
am trying to establish is whether your answer is based
on documentation or personal conversational information?
- A . I have endeavoured to base my answers on documentation
sir.

Have you found? - A. I have a copy of the minutes of the
11th of September.




                        Q. If you look
                                                        A. BUTLER


Q. If you look at the bottom of the first page of it
   under little iii? - A. Little iii there.

Q. If you look at the letter which found as well? - A.
   The letter of 14th September 1981.

Q. Under 1(c)? - A. Yes, that is quite true, sir.

Q. That repeats it in fact* does it not? - A. It does
   indeed.

Q. That is the basis t>f your reply? - A. That was the
   basis.

       THE CORONER:      Nothing else, Mr. Maxwell?

       MR. MAXWELL:     No, thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Butler, you have had a jolly hard
time and I am sorry but it is just one of those things.   We
have finished and I am exceedingly grateful to you for your
attendance and for the effort you have put into answering
the questions.  Thank you very much indeed.  We will take
five minutes and then we will start with Mr. Bownes. We
are going to finish as near to four o'clock as I can make
it whether or not we have concluded or not.

                         /Short Adjournment)

                      DAVID MALCOLM BOWNES Sworn

                           Bv THE CORONER:

Q.   Are you     David Malcolm Bownes? - A. Yes.

Q.   You are a member of the Admin and Legal Department
     here at the Town Hall? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you are the Chief Licensing Officer? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Although you are not the Head of the Department      and
   so technically matters which go to the Council,      by
   which I mean elected members, go in the name of      the
   Head of the Department you would, where it is a
   licensing matter, actually prepare the document      which
   went out? - A. That is quite right, yes.

Q.    Just so that we get this right, you are not the
     Licensing Officer whose sole and only job is to deal
     with licensing of sports grounds under the Safety at
     Sports Grounds Act? - A. That is correct.

Q.   You do loads of other licensing as well? -A.     Yes.
                                             D. M. BOWNES



Presumably taxi drivers to I do not know what, sports
grounds? - A. Yes.

You can confirm, can you not, that on 1st April 1986
Sheffield City Council became the Licensing or
Enforcing Authority under the Safety Certificate in
relation to the Hillsborough Stadium which was a
designated ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Prior to that, that responsibility had been the
responsibility of South* Yorkshire County Council? -
A. That is right.

Because this was a licensing aspect it fell on your
desk? - A. Yes.

You I think had a meeting with Mr. Vaughan of the
County Council some time in February/March of 1986? -
A. That is correct.

At that meeting you were briefed regarding this
particular Certificate and the licensing aspects of
it? - A. Yes.

Was that in fact the first time you ever came across
the Safety Certificate in relation to Hillsborough
Stadium? - A. Yes.

So you had never seen it before? - A. No.

In a nutshell, were you given any information at that
meeting or indeed at any meeting subsequent to that
prior to 1st April 1986 which made you think that
instant action was required to amend the Certificate?
- A. No.

Were you, for instance, told anything at all about
it? Were you told when the Certificate was issued?
Can you remember that? - A. I can't recall, sir, no.

Were you told anything so far as you can remember
regarding the state of the terraces when the
Certificate was issued and the state of the terraces
in March 1986? - A. No, there was no comment on the
actual specifics of each ground involved.

There was not? - A. No.

You, of course, are not a specialist in the same way
as Mr. Butler is.  I think you would describe
yourself as an administrator? - A. Yes.
                                               D. M. BOWNES


Your job is to keep things together and organise? -
A. Yes.

Would that be fair? - A. It would.

I suppose while we are on your job it would be your
task, through the lawyers in Admin and Legal, to
initiate proceedings if enforcement had to be taken
against somebody who breached the licensing
conditions? - A. Yes, that is correct.

That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

Would it be right, while I am on that, that you would
expect to be alerted to the need for such action by
somebody or other? - A. Yes, that would be essential
to the process.

Would you expect that you yourself would go out
looking to see whether action should be taken, legal
enforcement action? - A. No.

Is that because you have not got the expertise in
that field? - A. That is right.  This is a very
specialised area requiring professional knowledge.

You then had this document and its ramifications, so
to speak, dropped on your desk and I think the first
thing you did was to prepare a relatively brief
minute - I would call it a minute but I think you
would call it a report - for the Council telling them
that they now had this responsibility? - A. Yes, that
is correct.

This was on 3rd March 1986? - A. Yes.

Before the event? - A.   Yes.

Before the takeover but you were   telling them it was
coming? - A. Yes.

The object of this was really to deal with (a) to
tell them what responsibilities were being
transferred? - A. Yes.

And (b) to arrange for some practical method of
delegation so that the work could actually be done? -
A. Yes.

Would I be right in thinking that although the
Councillors are a constituted Council they themselves
are, to a certain extent, in the hands of their
Officers, would that be right, or is that unfair to
Councillors? - A. In practical terms the Council
                                              D. M. BOWNES


cannot of itself c a r r y out its own functions. It,
therefore, delegates them largely to Officers or to
Committees.

This is in fact what you were trying to arrange that
the delegation should be to a Subcommittee of the
Council and then through that to the Admin and Legal
Department? - A. Yes.

That went forward and am I right in thinking that the
Council agreed to those proposals without real demur?
- A. Yes, the appropriate resolutions were passed.

The time went on and the 1st April came and went and
the Council were now responsible? - A. Yes.

You then produced a further report which was in
slightly more detail? - A. Yes, that is correct.

In substance it was exactly the same. What you were
saying was, and I am putting this to you but disagree
if I am wrong, that the functions having now been
taken over it was recommended that the system
employed by South Yorkshire should continue for the
time being? - A. Yes.

No proposals were made in that report for any changes
in the Safety Certificate as such? - A. That is
correct.

Was it at this time it was also pointed out to the
Council that the obligations which, whether they
liked it or not, had now received carried a
responsibility? - A. Yes, the report made it clear I
believe.

That was made clear to them? - A. Yes.

You understood there was, therefore, an obligation on
the Council to apply its duties and powers to the
Safety Certificate at Hillsborough? - A. Yes.

The system which you inherited and which you had
agreed for the time being to maintain - and I am not
criticising you because I think that was a very
sensible thing to do, after all you were just coming
into it - was that South Yorkshire County Council had
establish what they called an Officers' Working
Party? - A. Yes, that is correct.

We have already heard that this consisted of various
bodies including Police, Fire, representatives from
Sheffield City Council quite apart from its news
powers as structural engineers and, of course, now
A                                                                87

                                                      D. M. BOWNES


         you in lieu of the South Yorkshire County Council's
         admin man? - A. Yes, that is correct.

B   Q. Your understanding was that this Working Party did
       biannual inspections? - A. Yes.

    Q. Generally speaking, it supervised the workings of the
       Safety Certificate? - A. Yes.

    Q. Would I be right in thinking that it was your
       understanding of the function of the Officers'
       Working Party that it performed two tasks.  One was
       to inspect and look? - A. Yes.

    Q. And the second was to reach decisions,    I think you
       have called them agreements? - A. Yes.

    Q. What do you mean by that? Tell me what you actually
       mean by that? - A. An agreement in these
       circumstances is the result of a discussion between
       the various professional Officers on a particular
D      issue which they were considering at the time.

    Q. In other words, that whilst they were going round if
       they saw something which they thought needed to be
       done they might talk amongst themselves and say, "We
       think this is how it should be" and then say, "That
       is what we are going to require"? - A. Yes, they
       agreed a course of action.

    Q. They did not in fact do anything.  They just might
       inform the Club or whoever was responsible that this
       is what was required? - A. Yes.

    Q.   That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

    Q. In addition to that I presume that if the Club put
       something to the Officers' Working Party they would
       consider that and having reached an agreement or a
       consensus they might respond and say, "We agree with
       your proposal" or "We don't"? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Or, "Wewant it modified in some way"? - A. Yes.

    Q.   That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

    Q.    So what you are then saying is that the Officers'
         Working Party had at least a dual role and the second
         role, namely the agreements role, the consensus role,
         had two aspects (1) it might initiate action, is that
         right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Or (2) it might consider requests? - A. Yes.




H
                                                   D. M. BOWNES


That is correct, is it? - A. Quite right, sir.

Was it your understanding that this had been the
practice of the Officers' Working Party for some
time? - A. Yes, it had.

You, of course, by this time would have received the
Safety Certificate, would you not? - A. Yes.

I take it that you at     least glanced at it? -   A. Yes.

I am not asking whether you     read it in great detail
but you had glanced at it?      - A.  Yes, that is correct.

Would I be right in saying  - so  that we can get this
out of the way - that there were no addenda to the
Safety Certificate? - A. Not as far as I can recall,
no, sir.

By that I mean formal addenda, formal amendments to
it? - A. No, there were none.

Do I then understand that you understood the position
to be that if amendments to anything within the
ground was required, provided the Officers' Working
Party were happy and that it had been implemented in
accordance with the Officers' Working Party's views,
that that was a satisfactory position? - A. Yes.

I have moved    a little bit off m y tracks and I am
retracing m y   steps for the moment.   I want to get
back to your    communications with the Council
itself? - A.    Yes.

We have the preliminary report and then we have the
fuller report, yes? - A. Yes.

The next thing that happened was that after a passage
of time you decided that it would be a good idea to
(a) revise the Officers' Working Party, is that
right? - A. I took the view that a review ought to be
conducted.

In addition to that it would be a sensible thing to
have a look at the Safety Certificate itself? - A.
Yes.

Did you put these two points up to the Council or was
this all done internally departmentally? - A. It was
done internally, yes.

Perhaps I can short-circuit this; apart from these
two reports up to the Council which I have already
mentioned were any other reports put to the Council
                                                                 89

                                                       D. M. BOWNES


       itself in relation to the Safety Certificate at
       Hillsborough? - A. Yes, the General Purposes Panel,
       as it then was, received I think two reports.   One
B      was in relation to the South Stand roof.

    Q. I am not interested in the South Stand.  Anything to
       do with the West Stand? - A. Nothing at all to do
       with the West Stand.

    Q. So far as the Councillors are concerned, apart from
       these two reports which were for general application
       and would include the West Stand and West Terrace and
       the Leppings Lane end, they had no further input or
       output in relation to the Safety Certificate? - A.
       That is correct.

    Q. You, as I say, felt that the Officers' Working Party
       should be renamed in effect, is that right or did you
       see it in some different way? - A. There were some
       changes proposed certainly that were detailed in a
       report to the General Purposes Panel in 1987 towards
       the end of that year.

    Q. What were those? - A. They consisted of, for example,
       bringing in the Health and Consumer Services
       Department which had not previously had an input into
       the procedure and a number of other fairly minor
       changes.

    Q. A number of other? - A. Fairly minor changes.

    Q. The other constituent parts of the Officers' Working
       Party remained? - A. That is correct.

    Q. So you broadened it a bit? - A. Yes.

    Q. You also I think renamed it? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you in its renaming see any really significant
       change in its activity as I put to you and as you
       have agreed, namely inspection and the reaching of
       agreements to use your words? - A. They were
       fundamentally the same.

    Q. Would it also be right that you, once you took over,
       went on these inspections, did you not? - A. Yes,
       that is correct.

    Q. You were attending in your administrative role? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. You were not expecting to input on professional
       matters? - A. That is right.




H
                                               D. M. BOWNES


In fact, your first inspection after you   took over
was in August 1986? - A. Yes.

In fact, we have already heard    thatthat was not
minuted, would you agree with that? - A. That is
correct.

That is a pity but that is how it is? - A. Yes.

Do you recollect the issue of the removal of part of
barrier 144 being raised and discussed at that
meeting? - A. Yes, I recall there was a discussion on
that point.




                   /Q. Do you remember the sort of.
                                           D. M. BOWNES


Do you remember the sort of considerations which were
raised in connection with that matter? - A. I regret
not in any specific detail.

You can't help me with any detail? - A. I regret not,
no, sir.

Do you remember anything at all apart from the fact
that it was discussed? - A. Not in any detail, sir, no.

You do remember that it was agreed that the barrier
could be removed? - A. Yes.

And would it be right tftat insofar as Legal and Admin,
were the enforcing authority, you would have been the
person who technically would have given that consent,
after the agreement had been raised? - A. Effectively I
believe that is right, sir.

In relation to the barrier's removal, just dealing with
that for one moment, and excluding anything which may
have happened after 15th April 1989, did you at any
point receive from anybody, be they a member of the
Advisory Group, Officers' Working Party or anybody
else, any comment, favourable or otherwise, with regard
to the removal of that barrier? - A. No, I did not.

When was it that you decided that you wanted to revise
the Safety Certificate? - A. That was about the same
sort of time that I was thinking about reviewing the
working party structure.

I think there were various aspects of the Safety
Certificate which I think in one of your memos you
mentioned gave cause for concern, or words to that
effect you used? Can you remember that? - A. Yes.

What was it - I don't mean at this stage in detail -
but what class of matter was it that was giving you
cause for concern, because you raised the issue, didn't
you? - A. Yes, really the drafting of certain of the
conditions.  I didn't see there was anything fatal or
any fatal flaws in the Certificate itself, but some of
the conditions could have been clearer.

In other words, are you saying that it was a redrafting
exercise and that it was the technical language which
you were not happy with? - A. Yes.

Are you saying that when you said that you were not
making a comment on the substance of the certificate,
the capacities, the distributions or matters of
spectators and so on? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.
                                           D. M. BOWNES


Nor were you making a comment with regard to the
physical condition in which the Stadium was? - A. No,
sir, that I could not do, not being a professional.

Was it that you felt that enforcement action ought or
should be taken against, for instance, the Club, who
were the holders, and that you could not do it because
the Certificate was so badly drafted that one could not
actually enforce it? - A. No, not at all, sir.

I think one of your first actions then was actually to
write around to other local authorities to find out
what sort of terms they used in their Safety
Certificates? - A." Yes',T that is correct.

And wnat you were doing is you were collecting ideas? -
A. Yes.

And tne object was in the end to marry them all up? -
A. Ves.

If possible? - A. Yes.

You also circulated after considerable - there was a
long time passed, because in fact it is fair to say
that the revised certificate was not ready for issue on
lf>th April 1989? - A. That is correct, yes.

But even at that time - you had got, I think, to a
stage were you in a position to actually circulate the
revised certificate? - A. Yes, I think it was at the
second draft stage.

The second draft stage.  Would I be right in thinking
that the heart of the matter, namely the Schedule 3, I
think, which is where you get capacities and the number
of stewards and so on, that substantially had not been
revised? - A. That had not been revised at all in the
draft certificate.

It would therefore be right to say that as far as you
yourself were concerned, you had no knowledge that the
revision - did you know that the terracing was divided
by radial barriers? - A. If I recall, the discussion
about the removal of 144 took place actually at that
location so yes, I was aware.

You were aware of it? - A. Albeit peripherally.

Are you a football supporter, as a matter of interest?
- A. No, I am not.

You were there in 1986 and you could see the radial
barriers? - A. Yes.
                                           D. M. BOWNES


Either from your knowledge then or any time subsequent,
were you aware that the terracing had been in any other
condition other than that at the time when the
Certificate was issued - up to the 15th April, 1989,
that is all I am interested in? - A. No, I was not
aware.

So as far as you were concerned the terracing looked as
it had been in 1979? - A. As far as I was aware at the
time, yes, that is right.

Is it right that if anybody had wanted to take
enforcement proceedings against the Club, who are the
holders of the Certificate, that would have been
initiated, the proceedings would have been initiated by .
you? - A. Yes, that is correct.

And you did not do that? - A. I did not.

Why not? - A. Because there was no information ever
received by me to the effect that such proceedings
ought to be even contemplated.

So then is it correct that although you represented the
enforcing side of the Council, the only way you could
act was if somebody inputted information to you which
would indicate that a breach had occurred? - A. That is
entirely correct, yes.

Just two other aspects which I want to raise.  I think
the initial inspection was biannual? - A. Yes.

You for whatever reason decided that an annual
inspection would be better? - A. Following discussion
with the appropriate professionals, yes.

And in addition to that you also decided that rather
than do a joint inspection, as had been the practice,
the professionals would do individual inspections? - A.
That is what happened in practice, yes.

Did that not diminish the ability to communicate,
because it meant that the people were split and
therefore were not in a position to talk to each other
across a table, or indeed across a terrace? - A. There
were always plenty of arrangements for communication
between the different authorities.  For example, if an
inspection was carried out by the authorities on the
same day they could find their individual
representatives somewhere in the Stadium on that day
and communication could take place straightaway.

But how were you going to ensure that if, for example,
I represented function (a) and I felt that something
                                                                 94

                                                       D. M. BOWNES


         ought to be done, how was I going to convey that (a) to
         you and (b) to the others? - A. There are two methods
         that could be used and that were, in fact, used and
         still are*  The first is that there could be direct
         communication at the time with the other in-terested
— i      party or parties, and that included the-Club,'and that
         could be backed up by comments in writing to myself,
         the other interested parties or whoever was involved.

      Q. The second point I want to raise is am I right in
         thinking that the Club rand the Engineers were not part
         and parcel of the Advisory Group? - A.   That is quite
         right, yes.

      Q. The third point I want to raise with you is I think you
         prepared a schedule which defined primary
         responsibilities? - A. Yes.

      Q. For various aspects? - A. Yes.

      Q. One of the dangers that I see in that is that it is
         possible for matters to fall between two stools? - A.
         Yes, that is indeed a risk.

D|    Q. What steps if any did you take to try and avoid that?
         We have already had an example of this in the last day
         and a half of this problem arising.  How did you try
         and overcome that? - A. The schedule of responsibility
         was drawn up after much discussion on this issue, and I
         made it plain and the report to the committee in, I
         think it was September 1987 made it plain that these
         were really for guidance essentially, as there was such
         a great overlap between different professions in all
         sorts of different areas.

      Q. So are you saying then that you would have expected,
         although there might be, for instance, primary
         responsibility for structure and function on Mr. Butler
         and his team, that others might well wish to contribute
         to that? - A. Not only did I expect that but that did
         and does happen.

      Q. Or vice versa, means of egress, for instance? - A. Yes.

      Q. Insofar as that is relevant? - A. Yes.

      Q. Were you aware of the Green Guide?- A. Yes.

      Q. What role did you see for yourself in relation to that
         Guide, and when I say yourself I mean. Admin, and Legal
         Department? - A. Really the Guide is, as I see it, a
         matter largely for professionals and various interested
         parties to take note of when formulating advice for the
         Council, so therefore the role of the Administration
                                             D. M. BOWNES


and Legal Department is quite limited in that, unless
somebody made specific reference to a particular issue
which they wanted raising in some fashion or another.

One final question arid then we are going to stop - you
will be back tomorrow, I am afraid - bearing in mind
the provisions of the various Acts, because I think
there was a 1987 Act, as well as the 1975 Act? - A.
Yes.

How would you define the role of the Council in
relation to safety at Hillsborough, in particular with
relation to the terrace?  Do you want to think about it
and tell me tomorrow? - A. I suspect the answer might
be quite long so yes, I would like to think about that
one.

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, impeccable
timing if nothing else.  Now tomorrow is Friday, so is
everybody fit for half-past-9?

Can you make it for half-past-9? - A. Yes.

You are on oath and you have got to remember that
technically you have not left.  You have got to treat
yourself as if you are still stuck here in the witness
box until tomorrow morning, you understand that? - A.
Yes.

    (In the absence of the Jury and the Witness)

     THE CORONER:     Is there anything that we need to
raise?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   The only question, sir, is it
your hope to have another witness or witnesses after
Mr. Bownes tomorrow?

     THE CORONER:   The answer to that is yes, if we
finish.  We have got a Police Officer lined up on very
short notice.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     Is that Inspector Bullas?

     THE CORONER:    No, it is Sergeant Morgan.
Sergeant Morgan is going to tell us something about the
ticket tout who was arrested.   The Jury raised this
question so I have got to call him, and he also, I
think, entered the Stadium via the tunnel, as far as I
remember.  I do intend, in fact, we must finish with
Mr. Bownes tomorrow.   We are going to do it, however
long it takes.  I hope it won t be as bad as that, but
we are not overspilling into Monday with Mr. Bownes.   I
don't want you to take that as a threat or anything
                                              D. M. BOWNES


like that, but we have heard quite a lot from Mr.
Butler.

    Gentlemen, ladies, goodnight.

              Inquests were adjourned until
                  the following morning
