                                                                                                                   66
    INQUISITION
    An inquisition taken for our Sovereign Lady the Queen

    At        C oroners      C ourt               in the W e s t       District                         of S o u t h        Y o r k s h ir e

    On the                         18th           day of                 A p r il                       19 89
    [And by adjournment       on       v a r io u s   d a te s    up    to    and      in c lu d in g       th e
    fonrthy                        1              day of                                                19 9 1          ]
    [Before and by] [*] me                                             STEFAN LEOPOLD POPPER

    One of Her Majesty's coroners for                              S o u th       Y o r k s h ir e     (West)         D istrict

    [and the undermentioned jurors] touching on the death of
                                                                                    THOMAS STEVEN                FOX

    The following matters are found                                                 THOMAS STEVEN                FOX
1 Name of deceased



4
    Injury or disease causing death: [2]
                                                                 1(a)         T r a u m a tic        A s p h y x ia


3 Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury was sustained: [3]

 'U ia A OA i W              15 A p r i l                CIS a fO-Solk ojj              CrOsW
    SOsfe,\AQ-£^       at    W cLlsbo^oo^U               F o o tb a ll       cjroond

4 Conclusion o f the jury/coroner as to the death: [4]

                    A\dcJ
                     < cdU2-*UbcBJ -CDezsrHn
5 Particulars for the time being required by the Registration Acts to be registered concerning the death

     a Date and place of birth                                           e Date and place of death          1 5 . 4 . 8 9 S he f f i e lc
     14.6.1967                     B ir k e n h e a d                      H i lls b o r o u g h F o o t b a l l G rou nd

     b Name and surname of deceased                                      f Occupation and usual address
                T hom as     S te v e n     Fox                              Production              W orker.

    c Sex         M a le
    d Maiden surname of a woman who has married


                                                                         Signature QJUj;

    Signature o f jurors:
                                                                             1/




                                                                                                                                     Please turn over
   NOTES
1 Modify this as necessary according to whether the
  inquest is held with or without a jury or partly
  with and partly without a jury.
2 In the case of a death from natural causes or from
  industrial disease, want of attention at birth, chronic
  alcoholism or addiction to drugs insert the immediate
  cause of death and morbid conditions (if any) giving                   Date             19
  rise to the immediate cause of death.

3 Omit this if the cause of death is one to which
  Note 2 applies.

4 a Where the cause of death is one to which Note 2
    applies, it is suggested that one of the following
    forms be adopted:
     C.D. died from natural causes.
                                                                         Re
     C.D. died from the industrial disease of

     C.D. died from dependence on drugs/non-dependable
     on drugs.

     C.D. died from want of attention at birth.

     (In any of the above cases, but in no other, it is
     suggested that the following words may, where
     appropriate, be added:
     "and the cause of death was aggravated by lack of                   Cause of death
     care/self-neglect').

  b In any other case except murder, manslaughter,
    infanticide or stillbirth, it is suggested that one
    of the following forms be adopted:

     C.D. killed himself/herself (whilst the balance of
     his/her mind was disturbed).

     C.D. died as the result of an attempted/self­
     induced abortion.                                                   Verdict
     C.D. died as the result of an accident/misadventure.

     C.D. was killed lawfully.

     Open verdict, namely, the evidence did not fully or
     further disclose the means whereby the cause of death
     arose.

  c In the case of murder, manslaughter or infanticide
    it is suggested that the following form be adopted.

     C.D. was killed unlawfully.

  d In the case of a stillbirth insert 'stillbirth' and do not
    complete the remainder of the form.




  Price £4.00 for 25 copies or£14.00 for 100 copies (exclusive of tax)

  ISBN 0 11 340764 5
  Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty's Stationery Office
  Dd 291453 C130 11/88
                                       OFFICE O F H.M. CO RO NER FOR          MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                              WATERY STREET
                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE               SHEFFIELD
                                                     (West District)
                                                                              S3 7ET

    S T E F A N L. P O P P E R , LL.B.. B.MED.Sci.. B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                            CORONER


                                  Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                             19




Your Ref: A C S /J B /FOX

Christopher Thomas & Co.,
Solicitors,
4 Bank Buildings,
Charing Cross,
Birkenhead,
Wirral. L41 6EH

Our Ref: Hills/Sol/4/SLP/JT                                                  17th September 1990



Dear Sirs,

Re: RESUMED INQUESTS 19th NOVEMBER 1990.


If you are not already aware, I intend to resume the Inquests into the deaths
of the 95 people who died at Hillsborough, one or more of whom you represent,
on the 19th of November 1990 at 10.a.m.  Details of venue will be notified in
due course.

I do not have to remind you of the fact that a considerable amount of
evidence has already been taken, nor of the nature and limitations of a
coronal investigation which you will recollect is not adversarial but
inquisitorial in nature, and which of course has only limited objectives.

Subject to the Coroners’ Act 1988 and the Coroners’ Rules, the Inquest is
under my control, and in particular, it is my responsibility to select the
witnesses who wish to give evidence.  I am at present engaged in considering
this and in determining who I wish to invite to attend.

Without prejudice in any way to my rights in the matter, I am writing to you
to give you an opportunity to draw to my attention the names and other
appropriate details of any witness or witnesses whom you would like me to
consider calling to give evidence at the resumed Inquests.

May I please ask you in considering whether you wish to draw any names to my
attention, to bear in mind the scope and limitations of an Inquest.

I also want to make it absolutely clear that the submission of a name or
names for consideration is nothing more than that, and that the decision as
to who to call to give evidence is and remains a matter for me.

I would be grateful if you could respond as soon as possible. If I have not
heard from you by the end of September I will assume you have no names to
 submit.

 Your.s faithfully,
xJOltClfoM
                                                                                               u       c

"(SimstyAe*$.-&2%&meu
0U e*t S&ina/utm

'ShUbny -(p.

                   H.M.Coroner.,
                   South Yorkshire ( West District )
                   Medico-Legal Centre
                   Watery Street
                   SHEFFIELD
                   S3 7ET




                   ACS/JB/FOX                H/sol/3/list/8                                     19.4-90




                   Dear Sirs.,

                   re:                                   uests - Hillsborough




                   Thank you for your letter dated 6th instant which has now materialised
                   on our file.

                   Neither we nor our clients the Fox family shall be attending
                   the inquests and we have instructions to say that they have
                   no specific questions which they which to raise in relation
                   to the recent statement of facts served upon us.

                   The family will, however, be represented by Counsel under the
                   block representation scheme.

                   Yours faithfully.,




                          4 Bank Buildings, Charing Cross, Birkenhead, Wirrai L41 6EJ.
                      telephone: 051-647 4991 Fax: 051-666 1769 Dx: 24251 Birkenhead 2.
                                        and at 236 Hoylake Road, Moreton.
                                 Regulated by the Law Society In the conduct of Investment business.
                                                                                                   S)

                                                                                               §

 H . M . C or on e r.,
 Medico-Legal Centre
 Watery Street
 Sheffield
 S3 7ET




 ACS/JB/FOX                       SLP/JT                                              5.3.90




 Dear Sirs.,

 re: Hillsborough Disaster / Our c l i e n t : Thomas David Fox
                                               Brenda Fox


Thank you for your letter of 2 6th ultimo.

THe main concern of our clients at this stage
is quite simply the events leading up to the
death of their son, the precise location of his
death, and the cause of death.

As far as cause of death is concerned we have had
a copy of the Post mortum report and this speaks
f°r itself. The events leading upto and the place
of death are therefore the outstanding issues.

The insurers for the Police Authority have indicated
that they are prepared to settle the claims of the
parents. However, we also represent other members of
the family who, at this stage, fall outside the scope
of the settlement proposals.

We do not know whether our clients would wish to
attend the Inquest at this time.

Jf^urs faithfully.,




          4 Bank Buildings, Charing Cross, Birkenhead, Wirrai L41 6EJ.
      Telephone: 051-647 4991 Fax: 051-666 1769 Dx: 24251 Birkenhead 2.
                        and at 236 Hoylake Road, Moreton.
                Regulated by the Law Society In the conduct of Investment business.
                                               26th January

SLP/JT.

Ohristoplwr Tboaas & Co.,                 Your R.fs AOS/PB/IOX.
Solicitors,
4 Bank Buildings,
Charing Cross,
Birkenhead,
Wirral L41 6EJ.

Dear Sirs,
Re: THOMAS STEVW FOX (deceased).

Thank you for your letter of the 22nd of January. I regret
that I am not in a position at the present time to answer
the query which you have raised.

I am sorry that I am unable to help you further at present.

Yours faithfully,



S.L.Popper,
ELM. Coroner.
                                                                                                         Ifliiiiu




         H.M. Coroner,
         Watery Street,
         Sheffield S3 7ET




°urRef   ACS/PD/FOX               YourRef            SLP/JT                                  °ate22nd January 1990




         Dear Sir,

                                         re: Thomas Steven Fox deceased

                 Further to your letter of 9th August 1989 we wonder if you would
         kindly confirm to us from your records which particular pen the late Mr
         Fox was in at the time of his death.   The evidence suggests that it was
         pen number 3 but no doubt your records will clarify the position for us.




                                                      Yetffs faithful l,y.




                 4 Bank Buildings, Charing Cross, Birkenhead, Wlrral L41 6EJ.
             Telephone: 051-647 4991 Fax: 051-666 1769 Dx: 24251 Birkenhead 2.
                               and at 236 Hoylake Road, Moreton.
                       Regulated by the Law Society In the conduct of Investment business.
                                              1st September
SEP/JT.
ACS/AMJ/Pbx.             /

Oirristopher Thomas & Co.,
Solicitors,
4 Bank Buil&ingB,
Charing Cross,
Birkenhead,     ,
W to a lL & l W .    <
                i' ' I
Bear Sirs,       j -j\

a ..   m ms   stc tb i roc

Thank you for your letter of the 24 th of August. On the
basis of your undertaking, I enclose a cosy of the post
s«rtea report as requested. The charge to respect of
this is £2 .2 0 . Please sake the cheque najBble to the
City of Sheffield.

With rigard to your final paragraph, there are various
people who represent the Hillsborough Steering C&nittee.
Ton could eittar address yourself to Me, Fraser of Silverman
Livermore, 11/13 Victoria Street, Liverpool L2 5 QQ. Another
ad&ess I haws is a Hiss. E.M. Steele of 0 /0 Castle Chambers,
Cook Street, Idverpool L2 9SH.

I hope that this As of assistance to you.
Yours faithfully,




SiLiBopper,
H*M*Coroneri
                                                             o.



                            *2i)!3A ' W i l l i a m s )
^Em^Un> S.&'ST&omai
0U~t9Bi«ftam




              H.M.Coroner for South Yorkshire
              Medico-Legal Centre,
              Watery Street,
              SHEFFIELD
              S3 7ET



Our Ref       ACS/AMG/Fox deed.           Your      Ref         SLP/JT                                24th August 1989


   Dear Sir

  Re: Thomas Steven Fox(deceased)


  Thank you for your letter of the 9th instant with enclosure and are prepared
  to give the Undertaking as required by you.

  We now look forward to receiving a copy of the Post Mortem relating to Thomas
  Steven Fox.

  We appear to have mislaid the address of the Hillsborough Steering Committee
  and wonder if you would kindly provide us with us, whereupon we shall shortly
                                   final paragraph of your letter.




                          4 Bank Buildings, Charing Cross, Birkenhead, Wirral L44 3DJ.
                      Telephone: 051-647 4991 Fax: 051-666 1769 Dx: 24251 Birkenhead 2.
                                        and at 236 Hoylake Road, Moreton.
                                Regulated by the law Society (n the conduct of investment business.
                                      0*6)
          B&B OFFICE MACHINES LTD
          TYPEWRITER SALES & SERVICE
               OFFICE SUPPLIES
              Sheffield 668251




                     Uc      0>0-<2



VkKQ,                  4L/v ^ G \ j

\%C              'So-tU c,
U ovX i            ck&ciSL'C
                                                                          { y .

                                                              O’.
                                                                                                                     m
                                        'TifiUiaml)


 0loimt &&maA*m

 Jtbtfimy & %/erni ,
                                                                                                                on
               H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire
               Medico-Legal Centre
               Watery Street
               SHEFFIELD
               S3 :7ET



 Our Ref   ACS/AMG/Fox deceased            Your Ref                                                    Date   31st August 1989



^bear Sir,

 Re: Thomas Steven Fox(deceased)


 We thank you for your letter of the 21st instant.

 We note what you say and will convey your comments to our Clients. In the meantime, \ { ^1*^
 we wonder if you would be so kind as to let us have a reply to our letter of the    j > *i
 14th instant.                                                                      / ts>.




 Yours faithfull




                           4 Bank Buildings, Charing Cross, Birkenhead, Wirrai L44 3DJ.
                       Telephone: 051-647 4991 Fax: 051-666 1769 Dx: 24251 Birkenhead 2.
                                         and at 236 Hoylaka Road, Moreton.
                                 Regulated by the Law Society In the conduct of Investment business.
                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                              WATERY STREET
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                              SHEFFIELD
                                          (West District)
                                                              S3 7ET
STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                              CORONER


                         Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721       21st..Augoftt...1g

SLP/JT/H/006.

Christopher Thomaa & CoM
4 Bank Buildings,
Charing Cross,
3irkenhead,
Wirral.L41 6EJ.




^            Sirs9

Re:      THOMAS S. FOX (deceased) No.65
As you are aware, the Inquest(s) arising out of the Hillsborough
Disaster stand adjourned to a date to be fixed. You may also
be aware that it had been in my mind to resume these Inquests
on the 15th of January 1990.

I have now been informed that the Director of Public Prosecutions
has decided to have a criminal investigation undertaken on his
behalf. In these circumstances, I have decided not~to resume the
Inquest(s) on the date mentioned.

I will review the matter further after the Director of Public
Prosecutions has announced his decision as to what action (if any)
he may wish to undertake.

I am not in a position to say how long the Police Inquiry
or the Director of Public Prosecutions consideration of the
matter will take. I anticipate however that there will be
a substantial period of time before I am in a position to communicate
on this matter further.

I would be grateful if you could please ensure that this information
is conveyed to members of the bereaved family so that they may be
fully informed of the position regarding the Inquest(s).

Yours faithfully,



S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
                                                      9th August


SLP/JT.
ACS/TD/FOS.


Christopher Thomas & Co.,
Solicitors,
A Bank Buildings,
Sharing Cross,
Birkenhead,
WIBRAL M l 6EJ.

Dear Sirs,

He: THOMAS STEVEN FOX (deceased).

Thank you for your letter of the 28th of July. I note what
you say, I enclose a copy of a letter Reference SLP/JT/H/PM/
002 which I have addressed to you, and which deals with the
question of the release of the post mortem report.

I am not clear whether you want to     become involved with this,
but if you feel that it is in your     client*s interest to see
the post mortem report and you are     able to give the appropriate
undertakings then of course I ’•■ill   be pleased to arrange for
this to be sent to you.

Vihilst writing to you I would be grateful if you could please
let me know whether you intend to be associated with the
group of solicitors who are covered under the umbrella of
the Hillsborough Steering Committee.

You will appreciate that this   is a matter entirely for you.
The only reason why I inquire   is so that I might try and
keep a record of which firm I   need to write to separately,
or who would be covered by a    communication with the
Steering Committee.

Yours faithfully,



S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
   &

                                                             o.

                                                                                                                     M         a



^touUkan9£. ST"WiUiami
 •SltUeny ■(§.J inni                                                                                             I
               Office of H.M. Coroner for South
               Yorkshire,
               Medico Legal Centre,
               Watery street,
                SHEFFIELD SE 7ET



Our Ref        ACS/YD/FOS                 YourRef         SLP/JT                                       Date   28th july 1989



                Dear Sir,


                re THomas Steven Fox (deceased)


               Will you kindly note that we act for Mr & Mrs Fox in connection with
                the above matter and have in fact already had correspondence with the
                Trustees of the Disaster Appeal and the Solicitor acting fot
                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

                In view of the fact that we represent only one disaster victim case
                and in view of the comprehensive coverage that this matter is receiving
                in the press and elsewhere we have not considered it necessary to
                actually appear at the Inquest on behalf of our client quite apart from
                from financial considerations.

                We note the first paragraph of your letter to our client and would,
                of course, be pleased to keep in touch with your office as you suggest.


                We, therefore,       look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible
                and would be grateful to learn the date of the resumed inquest.


                YOurs faithfully,




                             4    Bank Buildings, Charing Cross, Birkenhead, Wlrral L41 6EJ.
                         telephone: 051-647 4991 Fax:051-666 1769 Dx: 24251 Birkenhead 2.
                                           and at 236 Hoylake Road, Moreton.
                                   fisgulated by thrUwSoctaty In Hie conflict of Investment butlnan.
TELEPHONE:                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                      POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                  SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                              SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE


Dr S L Popper                                18 April 1989
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET




]j^fcfer to your recent conversation with Superintendent
Sreath concerning the release of the deceased persons from
the Hillsborough incident to their respective next of kin,
following the adjournment of the inquest.

After consultation with Professor Usher, I have no objection
to this course of action.
