HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

 VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

        ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

S.L. TOPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

            The Town Hall,
              Sheffield.

                  On

          30th January, 1991




       TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
      Official Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                                                              Page

        J .E . S H R E W S B U R Y Sworn

               By The C o r o n e r                                             1
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mr. P a y n e                    11
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mr. Isaacs                       13
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mr. K i n g                      13
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mrs. M c B r i e n               15
               F urt h e r C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mr. P a y n e        17
               F urt h e r by The C o r o n e r                                18

        J.W.   MQ T S O N Sworn

               By The C o r o n e r                                           18
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mr. P ayne                      28
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mr. M a n n i n g               30
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mr. Kin g                       31
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mrs. M c B r i e n              35
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mr. Russell                     42
               F u r t h e r by The C o r o n e r                             44
               Furt h e r C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mrs. M c B r i e n   46

S U B M I S S I O N BY MR.   PAYNE                                            47

S U B M I S S I O N BY MR.   KIN G                                            48.

ARGUMENT                                                                      49

RU L I N G BY THE C O R O N E R                                               53

       R.E.    S E P H T O N Recalled

               By The C o r o n e r                                           56
               Cross-Examined           by   Mr. P ayne                       62
               Cross-Examined           by   Mr. K i n g                      64
               Cross-Examined           by   M r s . McBrien                  65
               Cross-Examined           by   Miss A d d l e m a n             66

       J.L.    C ASE S worn

               By The C o r o n e r                                           67
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by M r . Payne                     73
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by M r . Isaacs                    74
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by M r . King                      74
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mrs . M c B r i e n             74
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Miss A d d l e m a n            75

       A.M.    BROWN Sworn

               By The C o r o n e r                                           76
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mr.   P ayne                    82
               C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by Mr.   King                      83
                       INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT           (Cont)
                                                              Page

M.   R O B E R T S O N S worn

        By The C o r o n e r                                   84
        Cross-Examined           by Mr. Isaacs                 94
        Cross-Examined           by Mr. K i n g                95
        Cross-Examined           by Mrs. M c B r i e n         96
        F u r t h e r by The     Coroner                       97

R .C . BALL S worn

       By The C o r o n e r                                    98
       C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by   Mrs.   McBrien        ill
                 FORTY FIRST DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                  WEDNESDAY. 30th JANUARY 1991

     THE CORONER:   I will explain to you what we are going
to do this morning just so that you know what is going to
happen. We are going to call Mr. Shrewsbury, who is the
BBC producer. He does lots of matches but he happened to
produce this match. I will ask him a few questions and
then at some point we will put on a video which is I think
one of the main BBC recordings. It starts I think about
twenty to or thereabouts and we will play it until six
minutes past approximately. In other words, when the match
stops. There is more on this particular tape but we will
stop it at that point and that is what we are going to see.
Then, if need be, I will ask him additional questions.
After that we are going to hear Mr. Motson, who was the
commentator. Is Mr. Motson in Court? Yes. One of the
advantages is that you will be able to hear the video which
will refresh your memory, if that is necessary, as to the
conversations and so on. Then we will listen to him and
after that we will go back to some supporters.

                 JOHN EDMUND SHREWSBURY Sworn

                        Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You are John Edmund Shrewsbury, are you not? - A.
   That is right.

Q. The address is BBC, Kingston House, Richmond Way,
   London. That is your official address I think? - A.
   That is my base, yes.

Q. You are a television producer? - A. Yes.

Q. You may well be doing other things as well but your
   main agenda is in fact sport, in particular golf and
   football I believe? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. I take it that you have produced this Semi Final, and
   this Semi Final was not the first Semi Final that you
   had had anything to do with? - A. No.

Q. It was one of a series? - A. That is right.

Q. If we at this stage think about the 1989 Semi Final,
   am I right in thinking you came up to Hillsborough
   and either you or your staff had had discussions with
   the Club? - A. Yes, we did, four or five weeks in
   advance.

Q. In order to decide how many cameras and where you
   were going to put them and so on? - A. Yes, that is
   right.

Q.   In fact, you had a team of about eight cameras if I
     can put it like that? - A. Yes, we had eight on the
     day.
                                           J ♦ E. SHREWSBURY



These were positioned at what you considered to be
strategic positions around the ground? - A. Yes, that
is right.

These were operated by various people, whose names I
think we do not need to know at this stage but we
will have them if we have to have them? - A. Yes.

In addition to   that,you had what I think you call a
Mobile Control Room? - A. That is right.

I take it that that is one of those big BBC vans, is
it, that one sees from time to time? - A. Yes.

You had parked this in the car park of the Football
Club? - A. That is right. It was between the South
and the West Stands.

Within it you had a staff, which would   include
yourself, and monitors. Am I right in    thinking that
there was a monitor for each camera? -   A. That is
right, yes. I had amonitor for seven     of the eight
cameras, yes.

The eighth one was an independent BBC camera? - A. It
was a Betacam, a separate recorder on the camera,
yes.

Your task, correct me if I get this wrong, is to (a)
view what is going on on these screens, give
instructions to cameramen if you want them to alter
the image or to focus on something and then (b)
compile, I suppose would be the right word, from
these individual shots a master tape. Is that right?
- A . My job is to select one of those seven cameras
to be transmitted or recorded.

That is what I wanted to just understand because I
was not quite clear. Having selected say Camera 1
and you think, "That is an interesting shot, we'll
have that", how does it work? - A. We have one vision
circuit back to a central recorder or back to London
and that circuit is linked to my desk. Whichever
button I select of those seven cameras goes down that
circuit back to London. We do have a supplementary
recording system which means that I can isolate three
or four of those cameras depending on the system we
are using to be recorded separately and for a camera
behind a goal, for instance, we would want that
recorded all through the match so that camera would
be recording separately all the time. So there are
two kinds of recording. There is the master
recording which is the whole of the desk, all eight
                                            J. E. SHREWSBURY


cameras, whichever one of those eight cameras I
select, and a separate facility for recording a
specific camera which I nominate.

In fact, the last recording is the selected
recording? - A. That is the one that is generally
seen on television screens at home.

Just so that we can complete the picture, it (a) is
recorded and (b) gets transmitted down to London? -
A. Yes.

There you have an editor or somebody? - A. That is
right.

Who decides, "This is the bit we are going to
actually show in the home"? - A. Absolutely.

That is what I see in my home when I switch my
television on? - A. Yes, for recorded highlights.

The master recording is what, in fact, you at the
time viewing your screens think is the most
interesting bit from your particular objective point
of view, that is right, is it not? - A. Absolutely.

Perhaps you can also help me on two other matters.
We know, because we are going to see it in a moment,
that the recording has a time base on it? - A. Yes, a
time code.

How is that set? - A. That is generated by the
recording machinery and it is a switch operation.
You can switch it on so that at any time you know the
time of the day but it can be eliminated from the
picture that goes out on transmission at home.

That would be done where? - A. At Television Centre.
It is merely to help the editor when he is editing
the tapes.

Not only do you have a time but you also I think have
frame counters and things like that? - A. Absolutely.

In order to be able to home in? - A. Yes.

On the recording which we are going to see in a
moment which I would ask you to confirm was the
master recording, or one of them I think; there were
two master recordings because it was a rather long
period, that is right, is it not? - A. Yes, there was
more than one tape used, is that what you mean?
                                         J. E. SHREWSBURY


Yes. There are two things on it which perhaps you
could just clarify for us. At one point there is a
freezing of one of the players? - A. Yes.

The shot is frozen but the time clock carries on? -
A. Yes.

Is that a facility which the equipment has which you
can actually do that or what actually happens? - A.
That would occur in the copying of that material.
That is not actually relevant to what happened in
actuality. You can freeze the picture and the time
clock remains or vice versa purely as a device
afterwards for copying the tape. I understand that
the copy was made. A composite copy of all the
recording we had was made for the Inquiry and this is
merely just a recording device actually.

What I am interested in is whether it affects the
validity of the time clock? - A. No, when the action
and the time clock are both running together then the
time code is accurate.

If the time code is running and the action is
stationed as we will see... - A. That is a recording
device and it is not relevant to it.

The time clock will still be accurate? - A. Yes.

Then there is the converse. It just happens that it
would appear the action is continuing as far as I can
see but the time clock pauses and then after about 58
seconds? - A. It returns.

It returns to its sequence? - A. To the actual time,
yes.

What happened there? Perhaps you had better explain?
- A. That was done in the transfer of the material.
It wasn't actually happening at the time on the day
in question. That was something that was done
subsequently in the copying and it is just a
technical thing that has, in my view, no real
relevance to that.

The only point I want to check with you is whether
when the time clock begins to run again is it picking
up the time? Has it allowed for the gap? - A. I
don't know. I haven't seen the time but it should
do, yes.

It looked to me, as a rough estimate, as if it did? -
A. Yes. It would normally do that because the time
                                         J. E. SHREWSBURY


code, all it knows is the time of the day and it has
no way of sifting that.

The final thing so that we can understand this, Mr.
Shrewsbury, in addition to the sound which is
broadcast you have a facility that you can converse
with Mr. Motson and others which can be recorded but
which can be edited out before it is transmitted. Is
that right? - A. Yes. There are two sound systems.
One is called the main microphone where the
commentator speaks on tape. The second system is
what is known as a lazy microphone where it is a
private circuit between the commentator and the
producer and very often when we are doing recorded
matches the commentator will speak to the producer on
the main microphone knowing that it will be edited
out later.

But there is a private facility as well if he wishes
to use it? - A. That is right, yes.

We do hear conversations between you and Mr.
Motson? - A. Yes.

For all I know there are others as well but those may
well have been on the private circuit or may well
have been intended to be edited out? - A. I think
what will happen is that some of them will be on the
main recording but if they do not make complete sense
it is because sometimes they are also going on on the
private circuit.

If I can just come back to, because I wanted to
understand what we were seeing, so to speak, yourself
and the match for a moment or two, is it right that
when you are in your Mobile Control Room you can
actually see nothing of the match apart from what you
can see on the screens? - A. That is right, yes.

I cannot quite remember but I think you entered the
Mobile Control Room at about 2.30 or so? - A. Yes,
roughly.

In fact, you never came out again until when? - A.
Midnight.

Until the job was done, so to speak? - A. Yes.

You did not see what was going on on the field apart
from what your cameramen were sending in to you? - A.
Yes.

I think perhaps the best thing we can do now is look
at the video? - A. Yes.
                                            J. E. SHREWSBURY



     THE CORONER:   Then we can discuss it as appropriate.
Before we do that, I understood Mr. Shrewsbury. Is there
anything we need to do to clarify the technicalities?




                          /MR. ISAACS.
                                                                 7

                                                  J. E. SHREWSBURY


              MR. ISAACS:  There is one matter which might be
         of some assistance.
B             THE CORONER: Yes.

              MR. ISAACS:  I understand that we are going to
         hear some commentary on the video.  It may be helpful
         to know what the commentator can see.  It may not be
         apparent to everybody.  Where is the commentator?
         Does he have boxes? How many monitors does he have?

              THE CORONER: The commentator is Mr. Motson and he
         is going to give evidence immediately afterwards.

              MR. ISAACS:  I appreciate that, but of course he
         is going to give evidence after we have seen the
         video.  It might be nice if Mr. Shrewsbury could help
         us with this so that we know before we see the video.

              THE CORONER: Very well.
         Can you tell me where Mr. Motson would have been
         positioned? - A. He would have been positioned on the
         main television rostrum, which is in the roof of the
         South Stand, and he would have complete visual access
         of the playing area and the stands around the ground,
         and he would also have two monitors which would show
         him the pictures that were being radiated by mobile
         control room from my scanner.  So he would have his
         own visual viewpoint and my pictures too.

    Q.   In other words, he sees the pictures you are sending
         down to London? - A. Yes.

    Q.   In addition to his visual? — A. Yes.  He is positioned
         in the open outside on the main television gantry.

    Q.   But he does not see all the eight camera shots? - A.
         No, he just sees the one output, yes that is right.

              THE CORONER: Is that clear, Mr. Isaacs?

              MR. ISAACS:   Yes, thank you very much.

              MR. JONES:  Sir, the video tape carries a
         reference MAPI, which was taken possession by West
         Midlands Police, and we would give that CAll for the
         record.

              THE CORONER: Thank you.

                     (The video CAll was shown)

              THE CORONER: Can you just turn the video off for
         a moment?  Can we pull the curtains?
                                         J. E. SHREWS BURY


     MR. KILLOCH:  That curtain is broken, sir.  We
might be able to turn the lights out at the top.

     THE CORONER: I think that might be an idea.

     THE WITNESS:  I hope everybody understands that
this is a rehearsal at the moment.  This is why it
seems so disjointed and scratchy.  We are rehearsing.

    THE CORONER: Yes.

            (The video C411 continued)
                                         J. E. SHREWSBURY


     THE CORONER:   Can I just ask you something? Did you
watch the match or did you watch the touchline? It takes a
lot of practise actually to concentrate on what is going on
round the edges. If need be we will look at the last few
minutes again so that you can do it. I have tried and
one's eye is taken by the play.

Q. Mr. Shrewsbury, would I be right in thinking that is
   part of the master tape? - A. Yes, that is the main
   recording and the time code, I can clear up that
   matter now. The time when the clock moved on and the
   play froze, or the picture froze, was me checking the
   synchronisation of the machine with my mixer. That
   was perfectly accurate in time.

Q. You noticed the time clock stopped as well? - A. Yes,
   that was purely understandable. That would have been
   part of my checks as well.

Q. I did ask you right at the beginning of your
   experience but how many years have you been producing
   major matches? - A. I have been doing football
   matches since 1971 which is coming up for 20 years.

Q. That would include not necessarily all but a lot of
   the big occasions? - A. Yes.

Q. At about quarter to three or thereabouts when Mr.
   Motson was practising with you his talkover, so to
   speak, at one point he made a comment about what he
   could see on the terracing? - A. That is right.

Q. He will tell us about that in a moment but what he
   wanted you to do was to point the camera and indeed
   you did do that? - A. Yes.

Q. Subsequently did you give instructions to record the
   centre pens? Is that the reason why we had quite a
   bit of coverage on your main recording? - A. Yes,
   they weren't recorded separately. They were recorded
   as part of the output from my Mobile Control Room.

Q. What I want to ask you is this; you were watching
   your monitors and you were watching the recording.
   At that point, at around quarter to, what was your
   assessment of the situation at the Liverpool end? -
   A. I was surprised, like John, that the wings were
   fairly empty. I knew there was a large Liverpool
   contingent. The centre sections of the crowd at that
   time looked good natured and they were sort of
   getting ready for the match. There didn't seem to be
   any kind of major distress in that area that I saw
   subsequently but at that time at quarter to three, it
                                      J. E. SHREWSBURY


just looked like a large crowd that was in good
humour.

It would be fair to say at that point, obviously you
were not controlling the match, it looked to you like
a big crowd at an important occasion? - A. That is
right, yes.

When did you first notice people beginning to climb
over fences? - A. I noticed that fairly soon after
the game started but my impression at that time was
that it was a large crowd that were being
redistributed at that time. I didn't realise
immediately that there was any problem in there. It
wasn't until one of my stage managers said to me,
"There is mass movement at that end. If many more
people come over they will have to stop the match”,
that that was the first time I realised there was a
chance then that the game would be stopped.

This was definitely after the match was already in
play, would that be right? - A. Yes, that is true.

Stopping a match, of course, is very inconvenient, is
it not, from a BBC point of view? - A. My concern at
the time, yes, that the match will have to be
stopped, "I wonder how long for?", because we had
live reports to do into the afternoon sports
programme.

I know that that is not an overriding consideration
but from your point of view... - A. At that time,
yes.

You would prefer things to go off on time? - A.
Absolutely, yes.

When the Officer ran on to the pitch just before six
minutes had elapsed, did that at the time - forget
everything you know since - surprise you at that
point? Did the situation look to you such that that
was to be expected? - A. Yes, within a minute or so
before that I got the impression that they would have
to do that, to take that action.
You did? - A. Yes.

You realise that we have stopped the recording at
this point. You, in fact, continued to film for a
couple of hours perhaps, I do not know? - A. Yes.

For quite a long time. Some of it has been
transmitted and some has not? - A. That is right.
                                      J. E. SHREWSBURY


Of course, you had a very difficult task because you
had to convey a proper picture and yet not be too
intrusive, that is right, is it not? - A. Yes, that
is right.

             Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE?

Mr. Shrewsbury, in your working position have I
understood correctly that you have got seven
television screens in front of you? - A. That is
right, yes.

Each of which is showing the picture which is being
captured by one of seven different cameras round the
ground? - A. That is right.

As you look ahead you have got a row of seven
television screens with different pictures of the
ground? - A. That is right.

You can choose which one of those at any time is the
most interesting to be recorded? - A. That is right.
What we have seen, what would you describe that as? -
A. We would describe that as the main output. That
is the selection that I make from the seven different
sources.

During the period of the run up to the game, what are
you interested in to make this main tape? - A. Before
the match takes place the pictures are not really
relevant to anything we are doing apart from the odd
rehearsal I do with the commentator. We cannot
rehearse specifically because the players are not on
the pitch and the circumstances are different. So
the rehearsal is very much for commentary rather than
pictures and we only really marry the two together
when the circumstances are right.

We can see that the picture does, in fact, keep
changing? - A. Yes, that is just me punching up
different shots which may or may not be of interest
later on. Crowd shots are always useful before a
match starts because during the editing process they
could be used. If we haven't got a particularly
appropriate crowd shot at the time then you can
select those from different times. So that is why
crowd shots are relevant beforehand.

Is that the reason you were collecting crowd shots
during the period of preparation to be used as film
material, if necessary, when you were making it? — A.
Possibly. On a big match like a Semi Final you would
expect to get the relevant crowd shots at the time
                                      J. E. SHREWSBURY


anyway but it just force of habit really that you are
looking round the ground for various shots that may
be of interest.

Have we understood from your evidence, Mr.
Shrewsbury, that the first time that you appreciated
that there was a crowd problem was some time after
kick-off? - A. That is right, yes, that there was a
problem.

During a period at 2.49, it starts partway through
2.49, which goes on to 2.51, for a period of about
two minutes, the camera is recording the Leppings
Lane end? - A. Yes.

Does that mean that it goes off and for the next ten
minutes or so before kick-off it is looking at all
sorts of different things and then it starts
following the match? - A. Yes.

During that period of two minutes, clearly in front
of you there was on one of your screens, that picture
which we can now see in the master recording? - A.
Yes, that is right.

Does that mean that there was a camera pointing at
the Leppings Lane end all the time? - A. Most of the
time, yes. The cameras would have been doing
different things. They are also finishing off their
own line ups, their own technical things, and so it
would not be all the time but a lot of the time the
camera positioned at that end of the ground would be
looking at that end, yes.

During the period which we have seen, which starts at
twenty minutes to three and goes on until the game
stops - I do not know whether I am right about that.
Let us go up to kick-off anyway. From twenty minutes
to three until kick-off one of the cameras would
mainly be looking at the Leppings Lane end, would it?
- A. Yes, it would but it would not be recorded
separately.

No, quite. It would only be recorded if you changed
it to be recorded? - A. Yes, that is right.
In fact, we can see in that two minutes of recording
the camera does a close up and we can see the crowd
surging about? - A. That is right.

Does that mean for a good part of that twenty minutes
you would have been able to see that on a television
screen in front of you? - A. Yes.
                                        J. E. SHREWSBURY


But you did not think it was anything particularly
special to be recorded? - A. No, I didn't think it
was anything that I hadn't seen at lots of other
football grounds at that time.

That is what    I wanted you to help us about. You did
not think it    was anything out of the ordinary? - A.
No.

               Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:

Mr. Shrewsbury, had you thought that what you were
seeing from the Leppings Lane end was not something
you had seen at another big game, being I expect
interested in the news, you would have recorded it
and probably shown it? - A. Yes.

The cameramen, do they have any link with you? - A.
They do, yes. They have a talkback circuit to me.

If they had seen something of interest to them they
could tell you? - A. That is right.

But you received nothing about Leppings Lane at that
time? - A. No.

               Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

Mr. Shrewsbury, it is an obvious question but you on
behalf of the BBC did not regard yourself as having
the responsibility for monitoring the terraces for
signs of crushing or overcrowding. That was not part
of your job, was it? - A. No, it wasn't.

You are merely giving your impression on the glances
you had into the crowd at whatever time you might
have looked into it? - A. Yes.

Furthermore from looking at the camera shots you were
not concentrating, for example, on the very front of
the terrace right down by the fencing. I suppose you
could not, could you? - A. We had the facility to do
that but it didn't seem necessary at the time.

Again obviously you were only in the position of
somebody looking at those particular screens and your
view was as good or as bad as the shots on the
screens? - A. Absolutely, yes.

You would agree with me, since you have been asked
your view of what you did see, that, shall we say, at
14.49 to 14.51 when one could see the pens in the
                                     J. E. SHREWSBURY


centre, that on any view the two centre pens were
clearly full and the side pens were half empty. That
would be fair, would it not? - A. Absolutely, yes.
That is true.




                    /Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN.
                                       J. E. SHREWSBURY


          Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Shrewsbury, we saw close-up shots of the centre
pens for quite a long time, particularly the shots
showing the beach ball being passed about, as though
that was a very important feature? - A. Yes.  Well, it
was just really an indication that the crowd were, you
know, enjoying themselves almost.  They were in good
humour and they were playing with the ball.  The
cameraman followed the ball and the shot was up on the
mixer.  I just punched to it.  It was not of any real
significance.  It was a nice day, everybody seemed to
be in good humour.

It just seemed to linger quite a long time on that
incident, the beach ball? - A. It did not really have
any major significance as far as the recording was
concerned.  We could have been on any particular
section of the crowd at that time.    At least one
camera has to be on air at any one time and it could
have been one of the seven.   There was nothing
significant in that one.
But you said, and Mr. Motson had commented as well,
that the centre pens, at that time when the beach ball
was being passed about, were quite full? - A. I think
the point he was making was that the wing pens were
empty, which is something slightly different, and I
think the point he was making there was that we could
not call it a capacity crowd because the wing pens
were empty.

But surely on the camera it would appear very
interesting that those centre pens were particularly
full in comparison to the outer pens, would it not?
It would be something to observe? - A. I do not know
that they were at that time particularly full.  I
think the comparison with the wing pens was quite
marked, but they were moving, they were surging in the
centre pens, so at that time there was a bit more
space than there was later on.  At quarter-to 3 there
was more space.

When I watched the film, I thought, 'What a lot of
people are being packed into that area*.  This is the
impression that I got personally.

     THE CORONER: You must turn that into a question,
Mrs. McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I am sorry.   It struck me as very
interesting actually.

     THE CORONER: I know I keep on interrupting you,
but you must ask questions because what you are really
                                       J. E. SHREWSBURY


doing is telling the Jury what they should decide.
That is not right.

     MR. ISAACS:  Of course, it always depends on your
perspective.  It may be that Mrs. McBrien does not go
to many football matches, or did not do at this time.
I think that is something she does not appreciate.

     THE CORONER: Yes, I am sure you are right there.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  Should I just come in on that
point, that I always watch football.

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, we are not getting
into an argument.  You must try and ask a question.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I do watch football, and I
certainly have watched it since the disaster.

     THE CORONER: Please, Mrs. McBrien, questions.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Once the camera left the centre
pens it seemed as though there was nothing interesting
to watch thereafter, whereas surely there was a lot
going on after that, was there not? - A. My job then
was to prepare for a football match and those last 10
minutes before the kick-off are very crucial and they
are times when you concentrate solely on the things we
have to do then.   The crowd are, as far as we know, in
the ground, the match is due to start soon and our
efforts then are on the match and on the television
broadcast of that match.

But with all the cameras that you have, if something
of another type is interesting, that surely does
attract your attention, does it not? - A. Yes, it
would but at that time it didn't.

Are you saying then that once you had televised the
passing of the beach ball the centre pens became of no
interest to you? - A. There was no reason at that time
for me to think there was any problem at all in that
end of the ground, and I had no reason to think about
it again until the match started.

So are you saying that from about, I think it was
quarter-to was it when the beach ball was being shown,
that no television camera recorded that part of the
ground? - A. Yes.  The recordings that were made which
you have seen already were made at various times
between quarter-to 3 and 3 o'clock, but there was no
specific recording made from one camera of the
Leppings Lane end.
                                        J. E. SHREWSBURY


      THE CORONER: If I may just interrupt you, Mrs.
McBrien, because I think you are not quite right, in
fact.   There were shots later on because there were
shots when the teams were announced, for example, at
15.54.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, that is right.

     THE CORONER: Of the Leppings Lane end.
I think what you are saying is there is no continuous
coverage?  - A. That is right, no continuous coverage.

     MRS.   McBRIEN: I was just wondering if there were
any shots up to 6 minutes past 3 when the match was
stopped of the Leppings Lane end of the centre pens? -
A.    After the match was stopped?

No,   up to the time the match was stopped? - A. Only
the pictures that you have seen already.

Because although that was interesting to watch, my
concentration unfortunately did go onto the players
and the kicking of the ball.  I know I desperately
wanted to watch the other parts.

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, that is not a
question, but I will let you see this scene again
because I know from experience it is difficult, so
that you can concentrate on the back and see for
yourself.

      MRS. McBRIEN: I did not see enough of the things
I wanted to really see.  I think it was concentrated
o n ---

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, you may ask a
question.  Mr. Shrewsbury cannot possibly answer
whether you saw enough or not, and I have tried to
reassure you that I will let you see it again.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  And there are no other shots that
we are allowed to see, only this one, is that right? -
A. That is the only one that I have been asked to
comment on.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you very much, Mr.
Shrewsbury.

     MR. PAYNE:   May I just ask a question arising
from those which Mrs. McBrien has asked and perhaps
just to help her?
     THE CORONER: Yes.

       Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:
                                                     J. E. SHREWSBURY


Q.    Mr. Shrewsbury, is this the position, that there was,
      in fact, a camera trained on the Leppings Lane end
      producing a picture on one of the television screens
      in front of you, but we have not seen it because,
      apart from the bits which we have seen on the film,
      you did not choose to record it? - A. That is right,
      yes, but I couldn't be specific about the timings that
      that camera was trained on Leppings Lane.

           MR. PAYNE:   Quite.

                   Further by THE CORONER:

Q.   Mr. Shrewsbury, so that we do not mislead anybody, in
     fact in my box out there we have got about nine
     different recordings, or seven - I can't remember how
     many but quite a few - of BBC recordings, master
     recordings as well as individual recordings,  but the
     only one I have asked you to look at is this master
     recording? - A. That is right.

Q.   There is just one other question about the recordings.
     We know that there were also shots taken by a BBC
     cameraman of scenes outside the stadium and, in fact,
     he later on, I think, did come in because it is on the
     compilation tape.  Was he one of the people who you
     would have seen, or was he the extra chap? - A. He was
     the extra man, sent along by News.  He wasn't part of
     my team that day.

Q.   That is why his camera does not have the data base on
     it, the time base on it? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q.   So there would not be any point in showing you those
     films because you could not comment on them because
     they were not part of your production? - A. That is
     right, yes.

          THE CORONER: Mr. Shrewsbury,          thank you very much
indeed.

                  JOHN WALKER MOTSON Sworn

                        By THE CORONER:

Q.   You are John Walker Motson, I believe, is that right?
      - A. That is correct, yes.

Q.   Your address is
     Hertfordshire? -   a   . That   is so,   yes.
                                            J. W. MOTSON


You are a broadcaster and a journalist,   that is right,
is it not? - A. Yes.

Is it right that you, in fact, comment on numerous
football matches? — A. Yes.  I am one of the regular
BBC football commentators.

How   many years have you been doing major matches, I do
not   mean minor? — A. I have been the commentator for
the   BBC about 20 years, the same length of time that
Mr.   Shrewsbury has been the producer.

I see.  Do you tend to work together then? - A. A
great deal, yes.

So communications become easier, do they not, if you
know each other? - A. Absolutely right, yes.

You were in Court when we showed the video so we do
not need to re-show it. - A. No.

Mr. Shrewsbury has already explained to us where you
were but I think, in fact, you can show us where you
were on the model, if you look at the model. - A.
Shall I go over and point it out?

Yes, point it out. - A. Okay.  The main television
camera position is on the top of the South Stand
actually on the roof, as opposed to underneath the
roof as it is at some grounds.  So I would have been
sitting in a very elevated position roughly where my
finger is now with the main cameras, and I would have
been outside, not in a box.

Thank you.  The reason, of course, why you are there
is that gives you a bird's eye view of the pitch and
the ground within the ground? - A. Absolutely, that is
the idea, yes.

You from there cannot see what is going on outside for
practical purposes? - A. Not at all, no.  I had no
vision outside the actual playing area and the stands
inside the ground.

We have already had explained that you have got a
couple of monitors which are designed to show what is
actually being transmitted, or at least being relayed
down to London, that is correct, is it not? - A.
Absolutely, yes.

Did you do the commentary on the 1988 match as well? -
A. Absolutely yes, I did.
                                            J. W. MOTSON


 From the same position? - A. From the same position,
 same teams, same occasion.

So, as far as you were concerned, it was a re-run
apart from the fact that you did not know the outcome
of course? - A. It was an absolute repeat of the year
before.

At this stage let us just concentrate for a moment or
two on the 1989 match and maybe we will just talk
about the 1988 one at the end? - A. Yes.

You got to the ground   quite early and, in fact, I
think went around and   talked to the referee and
various other people,   that is right, is it not,
generally speaking? -   A. My normal routine, yes.

You re-acclimatised yourself? - A. Yes.

I think you saw the referee, you saw some senior
Police Officer, they were chatting in some Board Room
at about 2 o'clock or thereabouts? - A. Do you want to
know about that?

I do not think we need to know that. - A. I happened
to be in the referee's room, which was probably a
slightly unofficial thing.  I was checking the team
sheets with the referee and I happened to be in there
when the senior Police Officer came in and they had a
discussion about emergency procedure which I should
not really have heard, but I was only half-listening,
to be honest.

We will not take it any further than that.   You then
left and I think you saw some of the players and you
chatted to them at about 20-past 2? - A. Yes.   The
normal routine for me as the commentator is to be in
the dressing room corridor at that time to ascertain
what the exact team line-ups are going to be and to
talk to anybody who may be relevant who may have some
last-minute information that I can use in my
commentary, so that would be where I would normally
have been standing.

Then what time did you sort of position yourself up in
your commentary box? - A. I would say at approximately
h^lf—past 2, 25—to 3, once the team line-ups were
firmly established, I then made my way up the stairs
to my position which would take me probably a good"!
five minutes, if not a little bit more.

We know what time the teams came out officially
because we could see very clearly on that video, but
Pr i°r   that, at about 14.42 or so, there were what
                                          J. W. MOTSON


looked to me like players running around on the pitch?
- A. Yes.  What happens there, sir, is certain players
come out on their own early on to warm up and get an
idea of the atmosphere in their tracksuits and just
kick a ball around, and then they go back to the
dressing room for the actual proper running out of the
teams a bit later.




                        /Q. Subsequent to that
                                              J. W. MOTSON


Subsequent to that there were some shots of the field
which looked completely deserted about 14.46.    Can you
remember whether in fact all these players had gone in by
then? -A. I would imagine they perhaps had.    Normally
they come out for that private warm-up, if you like,
between about 35 and 45 and then they would go back in
ready to come out with the rest of the players at
whatever time they came out - 53, or whatever.

Do you know whether they come out earlier than that as
well? - A. Do you mean before the warm-up?

Before that warm-up at 14.40 or thereabouts? - A. Well,
when the teams arrive at the stadium at about two
o'clock, before they get changed at all a lot of the
players wander on to the pitch in their normal suits,
just to look at the surface and decide what studs to wear
and savour the atmosphere, but that would have been some
time before.

You were up in your commentary box at about twenty-five
to or thereabouts.    We then heard what sounded like the
commentary which I understand was your practising the
text? - A. Yes.    What happens is that Mr. Shrewsbury and
I have to prepare what we call an opening, which are my
introductory remarks over certain players and there are
team captions that go up on the screen which you wouldn't
see there, but they would have done in the evening.
That introduction of about a minute or a minute and a
quarter has to be rehearsed because my words have got to
match Mr. Shrewsbury's shots and vice versa.    What we
were doing there in that period was we were rehearsing
the opening so when it was done properly for recording,
hopefully we would do it in one take and it wouldn't
cause recording problems.

What it sounded like was that you were anticipating a
capacity crowd - you were giving the numbers, you were
talking about the objectives of the teams and generally
making general comments really? - A. There were one or
two relevant points to be made.   As you probably know,
it may not be relevant, but there was a lot of discussion
before that semi-final about the allocation of tickets
and it transpired there were going to be more Nottingham
Forest supporters there than Liverpool supporters and I
used the figures in the introduction you heard.   I had
written my introduction and I think somewhere in my
original script I had the words "capacity all-ticket
crowd", and that was...   I think you are going to ask me
next about what I saw which made me take those words out.

Yes, that is in fact what I want you to tell me.   Having
done your rehearsals it sounded like as if you suddenly
commented to Mr. Shrewsbury, "Hang on, I won't be able to
                                             J. W. HOTSON


use...1* - A. Absolutely.   That is why we have a
rehearsal because sometimes something happens and you
want to make a change.    Do you want me to tell you
about that now?

Yes, please. - A. What happened was I was half way
through going over my words and I looked at the Leppings
Lane end and this is about 14.47 as I recall.    The two
wing sections of the terrace at either end were half
empty, so markedly so that I stopped and said to
Mr. Shrewsbury, "We can't use the phrase, 'capacity
crowd', because look at those gaps on the terraces."
The gaps were so big there were actually steps with
nobody standing on them.   That is how much room there
was.   It was as if half the people who should have been
in those two sections hadn't come into the ground.    You
heard me say to Mr. Shrewsbury, mistakenly as it has
turned out, that I thought maybe it was a section that
had been reserved for neutral supporters.   Sometimes the
host team, in this case Sheffield Wednesday, who are
staging the match are allowed a small portion of tickets
for themselves that don't go to the two competing teams.
I thought maybe there was a section there that had been
reserved for people like that.   That is why I remarked
on it.

It was 14.46 actually, rather than 14.47. - A. Sorry.

We are very particular about the times, but it is quite
all right.   The point I want to ask you is: were you
commenting on the fact that the pens appeared empty or
were you commenting on the fact that the centre pens
appeared full? - A. No, I was commenting very definitely
on the fact that the wings seemed empty.   It was a most
unusual thing to see at that stage before a big match, so
much space.

If the wing pens had been as full as the centre pens were
at the point when you saw this, would you have thought to
yourself there was something wrong with that or would
have have said that was a capacity crowd? - A. No, I
would have pursued my original thought and used the
words, "All ticket capacity crowd", because with a semi­
final I would have expected the ground to be full at that
time.

It was the timing that concerned you really? - A. I
thought it was very odd that we were so close to kick-off
and there were so many people, I thought, who hadn't got
into the ground.   I also thought at the time that maybe
as often happens with big matches that people were
arriving late and couldn t get in, because I have been at
matches before where the kick-off has been delayed to get
people into the ground.
                                             J. W. MOTSON


It certainly struck me as being odd.    It was something I
wouldn't have remarked on to Mr. Shrewsbury on the lazy
microphone unless it had caused me some interest.

How common is it for kick-off to be delayed - I don't
want to go into this in great detail - because the crowd
isn't in? - A. Well, it is difficult to answer that
question because it has probably happened more since this
incident than it did before.   I have been at big matches
where the Police have asked the referee to delay the
match because either they couldn't get everybody into the
ground or away supporters were still arrive late.    I
don't know, whatever reason it may be outside the actual
stadium.   I would not say it is a common occurrence but
it is certainly one I have experienced on a number of
occasions.

Obviously things have changed a bit since? - A.
Consequently we get it more, yes.

When you were looking - I want to come back to the match
itself - when you were looking at these centre pens at
14.46 what was your impression of the crowd? - A. Well, I
have to be honest and say it was just as I would normally
have expected it to be.    It appeared that people were
closely packed but you would get that on a terrace
anyway.   They appeared to be in quite an exuberant mood,
hence Mr. Shrewsbury reference to the balloon and the
lady's question about that.     It struck me as being a
good natured atmosphere, as one would have expected.
The weather was particularly kind that day so it appeared
that everybody was enjoying themselves.     Nothing
untoward at that time struck me about the central pens.

You, of course, had the responsibility to comment on the
whole of the stadium? - A. Yes.

We are looking at one tiny bit.   Would I be right in
saying that once the teams were announced and came out,
your concentration was focused on that aspect of the
matter? - A. Yes.   My main responsibility when I went to
the ground that day, obviously, beforehand, was to
commentate on the match.  At that time when the players
began to come out of the tunnel, my concentration was
totally taken up with recording the proper introduction
that we had rehearsed previously and preparing myself for
the kick-off and ready to do a normal match commentary.

I presume you left out the comment about the capacity
crowd? - A. Yes.

Did you by chance glance across at that point?   Can you
remember? - A. I can remember, funnily enough, thinking
there was still a lot of space, particularly at the very
                                              J. W. MOTSON


extreme ends of the terrace.   It was interesting that
after the match was over, and of course it's history now,
but one of the BBC radio commentators who was also live
at the time, made the same remark.   So it wasn't just
myself.

The match then played and we heard your commentary.   We
could also see what was going on and we know when you
first made a comment which was about three or four
minutes after three o'clock - I don't remember the exact
seconds to it. - A. 15.04, I think,

What alerted you to making that comment? - A.
Mr. Shrewsburyh has direct talk-back to me in my
headphones, as he has with his camera men.     I   remember
the ball being in play and I was commenting on     who had
the ball.    I remember hearing Mr. Shrewsbury say words
to the effect, "There seems to be a crowd problem at the
left hand end.    I will have to come to it in a minute."
Sometimes in the past if it is something which is
exceedingly minor, the producer would decide not to put
the cameras on it.    However, when Mr. Shrewsbury said,
"I will have to come to it in a minute", that was to warn
me he was going to leave the game as my main coverage and
on my monitor I was going to see some sort of crowd
disturbance.

In other words, he didn't want you to continue commenting
on the match when the picture was on something totally
different? - A. Partly that and partly he wanted to warn
me to prepare myself because a split second advance can
help you to formulate your words.

You then looked across.   What I want to know now is how
you assessed it at that time, trying to exclude
everything you learned within the next two and a half
hours? - A. I can be very straightforward about that.    I
thought it was an overspill of people who were perhaps in
an over-crowded section and were trying either of their
own accord or because they had been asked to, to re­
locate themselves elsewhere.    I have been at many, many
big matches where this has happened, where after a few
minutes play you see spectators escorted from one pen or
one section and they may be walking in a very orderly
fashion round the track so that either the Police or the
stewards can put them somewhere where there is more room.
That was no uncommon at big matches, even prior to 1989.

Your initial impression was this was something which
would get sorted out in a few minutes? - A. I have to
say, sir, it was.

Did you think that it could have been due to some form of
misbehaviour within the terracing? - A. Well, it could
A                                                             26

                                                     J. W. MOTSON


       have been because at that time unfortunately there had
       been in the preceding three or four years a number of
       incidents involving crowd disturbance and misbehaviour.
       That again was not uncommon at that time in the eighties,
B      so clearly I couldn't rule that out.

       Initially I didn't see any fighting or anything like that
       which would have made me think that.    As I say, my view
       initially was that clearly too many people had got into
       one part of the ground and were trying to find a route
       into a less crowded part of the ground.    Bearing in mind
       what I had already witnessed at either end of the
       terrace, sub-consciously I probably thought, "Well, they
C      are going to put those people into one of the sections
       where there is so much space."

    Q. Were you surprised when and Officer ran on to the field
       and stopped the match? - A. When the play went up to the
       Leppings Lane end at about five minutes past three, by
       now you hear me saying on the commentary, "There are some
       people on the pitch."   I clearly say that.   Now
       obviously when spectators actually encroach on the
D      playing areas, in other words, when the come over the
       goal line on to the actual field of play, the game cannot
       continue because clearly they would get in the way of the
       players.   At that point when I saw the people standing
       in the penalty area at the goal where Liverpool were
       defending, I wasn't in the least surprised at that point
       to see the referee stop the game.   Of course, he did so
       when the Police Officer actually ran on to the field.    I
       saw that happen and I saw the Police Officer run up to
E      the referee and it was clear from that moment onwards
       that the game was going to be stopped.

    Q. At that point did you still feel that this was - I'll
       call it a conventional overspill? - A. Well, I did, sir,
       because there was no evidence to tell me anything else.
       There weren't people rushing from all sides towards that
       terrace as if there was a crisis.   It was just a mass of
       people coming out of the crowd and milling about by the
F      goal and from my position which, as you have already
       seen, although it was high it was quite a long way away.
       In terms of that I just assumed there was an over­
       crowding problem and it had involved people coming out
       and getting on to the pitch and that presumably the game
       would have to be delayed while it was rectified.

    Q. I realise there is quite a long way.   It looks quite
       close...   We have all been round.   We haven't been up
G      to your gantry but we have been to the ground.   Would I
       be right in thinking that you were unable to see people
       sufficiently clearly within the pens to distinguish
       whether they were distressed or not? - A. Yes, sir, I was
       too far away to see that.   I have thought about that
                                             J. W. MOTSON


many times because as the afternoon wore on, and I have
listened back to the broadcast that I had to do in
somewhat unfortunate circumstances after that tape - you
ended the tape at six minutes past three - but I
obviously had to continue.   I have often asked myself
the question whether I was slow in appreciating the size
of the tragedy, but I came to the conclusion that from
where I was sitting I wasn't near enough to the people
concerned to appreciate what had happened.   I could see
confusion and chaos and over-crowding but I wasn't close
enough to understand the enormity of the disaster.




            Q. I epi almost finished
                                              J. MOTSON


I am almost finished with my questioning, but my
impression is that until you saw the overspill you had
not formulated the view that those two pens were
overcrowded.  Would that be right or not? - A. Well,
from where I was sitting again they looked packed, but
then they would look packed on a semi-final, so there
was no reason for me to suppose, from where I was
sitting, tnat that was anything out of the ordinary.
Obviously subsequently when I have seen the video in
hindsight, like today for example when I watched it on
your screen, it did seem to me that at about 14.50 or
51 the situation changed, but that was with the
nindsight and also watching the pictures today knowing
what I know now.  At the time, from where I was
sitting, even with my monitor, I did not at 14.50 or 51
realise what was going on, no.

It is very easy, as you say, if we sit here studying
it, one tning, but what I want to know is what you felt
or saw at the time? - A. You see at the big matches I
cover there tends to be a packed crowd and you do tend
to see people pushing and waving their arms, and kind
of being packed in very close together, so it the scene
did not strike me as being any different to one I had
seen at many previous semi-finals, except for what I
have told you about the two wing sections.

That brings me now to 1988.  This is difficult because
it is a year further back, but are you in any way able
to visualise the Leppings Lane Terrace in that year? -
A. In 1988?

Yes. “ A. Well I can't think of anything in 1988 that
comes back to me as being anything other than what I
would nave expected, sir, no.

What I am driving at is this, excluding the sparsity of
people on the wing pens, did the Leppings Lane end look
to you any different in '89 as compared with '88? - A.
No, sir, not really, and it had the same supporters at
that end as well, so it looked very much the same.

            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Mr. Motson, can you help please from your experience of
attending big matches on other occasions?  The Coroner
used the expression to you a "conventional overspill",
which is quite a useful shorthand expression of
describing what you were talking about on other
matches, when you have seen people being redeployed.
Now, on those other occasions, and I appreciate you are
only giving a general impression and not referring to
any particular case, but on those other occasions the
people have come out of a particular section and been
                                              J. MOTSON


directed to a less crowded area of the ground? - A.
That is right.

And that has taken place without attracting particular
attention? - A. Yes, it has taken place while the match
has been in progress quite often.

And it is something which you would not particularly
pay a lot of attention to as a big event? - A. No,
because I had seen it happen on a number of occasions
at grounds and at matches where people needed to find a
bit more space.

Right, so is it fair to say, and I am only asking you
as a matter of general impression from your wide
experience, that on none of those occasions has it been
obvious to you that any of the people who were being
redeployed were being moved because there was an
obvious risk of danger of injury to them?  It has not
been obvious to you that that was an obvious risk of
danger? - A. Well obviously if they are being
redeployed because the section that they are in is
overcrowded, then clearly I suppose safety would be one
reason why they would be moved.

Quite. - A. I mean, at some matches I have been to
previously it was obvious that they were being escorted
into other sections by Police Officers or stewards.

Quite. - A. On this occasion that was not apparent.

No, but I am talking about your general experience.
Have you ever had an experience where you have seen
people being redeployed because in your view, your own
personal view, from what you saw there was an obvious
risk of danger? - A. Yes, I would have to say that
there have been times when it has been quite obvious
that one section of the ground was so overcrowded that
in order to make things safer, and to give, presumably,
people a better opportunity to watch the match
somebody, whether it has been the Police or the
stewards, have decided that they will take people out
of a certain section and put them somewhere else.

Right.  Now, this appears to be something which has
come to be accepted as, to use the Coroner's
expression, a "conventional incident", or it was
accepted up until this disaster, at big matches.  Is
that fair to say? - A. Well, it would come as no
surprise at a big match.  I mean, you must remember we
were going through a period at that time of intense
crowd observation anyway for other reasons.  Things
happened in football crowds that you came to accept as
                                                    J. MOTSON


commonplace because they happened quite often at big
matches.

Yes, you mean crowd behaviour which you certainly would
not expect to happen elsewhere? - A. In some cases.

What kind of grounds are you talking about where you
have seen these overspill situations before? - A. I am
talking about league club grounds basically, like
Hillsborough if you like.  I have not seen it happen at
Wembley, for example, because obviously that is a much
bi§Ser arena, but certainly on club grounds on big
matches, I mean I could not actually give you times and
dates here and now ....

No, I am not asking you for details. - A. But I have
seen a number of supporters moved from one part of the
ground to another, yes.

And this is in other grounds, other than Hillsborough?
- A. Oh yes, definitely.

That is because, for whatever reason, too many people
have got into one section of the ground? - A. I would
say so, yes.

             Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

The incident that you have half told us about at 2
o'clock of being half in the referee's room and half
listening to the conversation, I wonder if you can
c o n f i r m t o me that it was Superintendent Murray who was
the senior Officer who was briefing the referee as to
emergency procedures? Are you able to do that? - A.
No, sir.         He was never introduced to me because I was
not supposed to be there really.         I did not know his
name.        I was actually, as I said to you, only half
listening.

So far as the general impression is concerned, because
you have told us a lot about what you saw, in
impression terms it was only the lack of people, the
relative lack of people, as to the sides, that caused
the comment to be made? - A. My comment to Mr.
Shrewsbury?

Yes. - A. Yes, absolutely.     Oh yes, definitely.

And that you were absolutely happy about the centre
situation - that did not draw a comment as such? - A.
It did not draw a comment as such.

You have described, and indeed we have seen today, what
appeared to be a very good natured crowd.  They were
                                                                 31
A
                                                        J. MOTSON


         able to ping a beach ball around in that centre area,
         you saw that? - A. Yes, I saw that.

    0. They were able to greet the teams coming out by the
       cheering and saluting, raising of arms, that sort of
B      thing, all things which are perfectly normal which you
       have come to expect on a big occasion? - A. All those
       things did seem perfectly normal to me from where I was
       sitting at the time.

    Q. I appreciate that, and from the pictures which were
       being put on the monitors in front of you? - A. Yes.   I
       think, again I would have to be specific about the
       time, there were one or two people I remember on that
C      terrace who were trying to get into the stand above.
       People in the seats were pulling them up by their arms.

    Q. Yes, indeed. - A. Obviously I have since discovered
       there may have been a very serious reason for that,
       although obviously at the time again I thought it was
       people who perhaps were trying to get a seat, so yes, I
       am afraid I adopted a kind of innocent attitude to what
D      I saw at that ....

    Q. I wonder if you can help me even further, Mr. Motson,
       because you were there the year before and we have
       heard witnesses who said that the year before, but
       probably not until half-time, quite a number of people
       came out from those terraces and were pulled up into
       the stand above to try and gain a seat up there.   Do
       you remember that? - A. I can't remember actually in
E      1988 seeing that happen personally but it would not
       surprise me.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. KING

    Q. Mr. Motson, on any view can I summarise what you
       observed as follows, and tell me if I am right or
       wrong?  At 14.46 or so when you made your comment about
       the side pens, on any view the crowd was not evenly
F      distributed across the terrace, that is correct, isn't
       it? - A. That is correct.

    Q.    It was patently obvious, I have to put it as strongly
         as that, it was  patently obvious wasn't it? - A. It was
         peculiar that there was so much space in those two
         sections.

    Q.    Next, at 14.46, which is when you make the comment, you
G        told the learned Coroner that the crowd was as you
         expected it, it seemed to be closely packed?   Maybe
         that is how you expected it but at 14.46 on any view
         you had two centre pens which were full of people and
         closely packed? - A. Yes.
                                              J. MOTSON


You have been asked your opinion about what you thought
so I am going to ask you your opinion about this
matter.  If I had tapped you on the shoulder at 14.46
and said, 'Mr. Motson, there in front of you, you see
the two centre pens, which are closely packed, full of
people.  I believe that another thousand or so people,
perhaps more, are likely to enter those centre pens".
Would you have said that was a sensible thing, a crazy
thing, or would you have had no view on it? - A. I
would have said, "Why on earth don't the thousand
people go into the two end sections where there is
space? .

Would you have thought those two centre pens could
possibly have taken another thousand or so people, just
looking at them? - A. Well, I am not an expert in the
number of people who can go into one pen, but it would
have seemed to me logical that if any more people had
to come in they should go where there was room.

Yes, but they are closely packed.  You could not see
any space where more people could go, could you? - A. I
couldn't actually see a lot of space there, no.

Clearly also when you saw there was an overspill of
people, your view was, and it is a natural view, that
this was a problem of overcrowding.  That was your
immediate impression? - A. Yes.

Clearly it was not your immediate impression that you
were dealing with a law and order situation such as a
pitch invasion? That clearly was not your impression,
was it? - A. No, it was not my impression initially,
no.

Let me ask you about another matter, if I may.   I was
interested in your answer where you said, "As often
happens at big matches, and people arrive late".   I
take it from that, that the phenomenon of spectators
arriving late for a big match is not unknown to you? -
A. Well, when I say arrive late I combine that with
arrive perhaps at a time when it is not necessarily
easy to get into the ground straightaway.  I have been
at a lot of matches where people have still been coming
into the ground at kick-off time, if you like.

Mr. Motson, I did not actually mean after 3 o'clock.   I
assume by that you mean arriving, shall we say, in the
last half hour or something like that? - A. Certainly,
yes.

So the phenomenon of people, spectators, arriving in
the last half hour for a big match, and difficulty of
                                                               33

                                                     J. MOTSON


       getting in because of that, is not an unknown
       occurrence? - A. No, it is not an unknown occurrence.

    Q. And it was not unknown to you in 1989, obviously? - A.
       No, because especially with an all ticket match, where
"      the people who have got tickets know that they are
       going to get in anyway, there is no reason for them to
       arrive that early.

    Q. Yes, exactly.  There is no particular incentive for
       them to come early? - A. No, indeed.

    Q. I was also interested in your observation that when you
       looked at the video again today, and perhaps on other
       occasions since the disaster, the situation did seem to
       change at about 14.50, 51.  Can you tell us what it was
       that you have noticed now which gives you that
       impression? - A. I have to stress that was today that I
       noticed that, not at the time I was sitting in the
       ground on the day.




E




F




                Q. I appreciate that entirely ....




H
A
                                                                     34

                                                      J. W. MOTSON



        Q. I appreciate that entirely. - A. It just struck me,
    •      looking at it closely today, that at about 14.50 or
B          51 there did seem to be some discomfort in the crowd
           in those two sections.

        Q. You yourself were not looking closely at the crowd on
           the occasion of the Semi Final in 1989, that is
           obvious? - A. No.

        Q. Because it was not part of your function so to do? -
           A. Not my immediate priority, no.

        Q. It is no criticism of you at all. Your observation
           is that if one were looking closely at the crowd in
           the way one could on that video, someone who was
           taking close observation, then that distress you
           could see was there to be seen? - A. I didn't say
           distress. I said discomfort.

        Q. I beg your pardon, that is my fault. - A. Yes, it was
           on that video to be seen in my opinion today, yes.

        Q. It is the difference, is it not, between somebody in
           your position who was not paying particular attention
           to signs of distress or overcrowding because that was
           not part of your responsibility and perhaps somebody
           who had that responsibility who might be looking out
           for it. There are two different people there, are
           there not? - A. Yes, they need to be closer to the
           Leppings Lane end than Iwas to be fair.

        Q. Of course, and they need to have a particular task   of
           looking for it? - A. Absolutely.

        Q. I have been asked to investigate another matter which
           you may not be able to help with. You spoke about
           being in the referee's room when a senior Officer
           came. I am sorry if this is embarrassing but did you
           ever go into the boardroom? - A. Not before the game.

        Q. Not before the game? - A. No.

        Q. Is the boardroom different from the referee's room? -
           A. They are both sort of out of bounds to people who
           are not supposed to be in there. The situation in my
           case is that I have a reason to go into the referee's
           room with his permission as part of my job because he
           has an official list of the players with their
           numbers and I tend to go in there just to make sure
           that they are what I expect.

        Q. Is the boardroom adjacent to the referee's room? - A.
           Not really, sir. The boardroom is the other side of


H
A
                                                                  35

                                                   J. W. MOTSON



         the main foyer at Hillsborough and that would be
         strictly for Directors and Football Association
B        officials before the game and unless I had something
         to ask one of them there would be no reason for me to
         go there.

    Q. Before the game you never got anywhere near the
       boardroom? - A. No, sir.

                    Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

         MRS. McBRIEN:   Could you show us a map please of the
    route that Mr. Motson took when he said he took five
    minutes or thereabouts to take up his position?

           THE CORONER:   I do not think we have got one.

         THE WITNESS: I can explain to you what I did, if it
    makes it easier for you. You don't need a map for me to
    tell you that. I mean, basically I had to go up some
    stairs into the main stand and then from the back of the
    main stand where the seats are there is a ladder and a
    walkway, underneath and then over the roof which takes me
    to the elevated position that I pointed out on the scale
    model.  In other words, I am walking through the inside of
    the ground for about five minutes upstairs.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   I was wondering where in the
         ground you were walking from. What particular spot
         was that? - A. Where I walked from?

    Q. For it to take five or six minutes? - A. Simply
       because I have got to go from the dressing rooms
       which are right in the bowels of the main stand on
       the lowest possible level to the elevated position
       which I have shown you which involves going up
       various staircases inside the ground.

    Q. The dressing room, is it anywhere the players'
       tunnel? - A. That is where I started. I just said.

    Q. I am just trying to get my bearings? - A. No, you are
       quite right. I started out from the players' tunnel
       and the referee's room which is right at the bottom
       of the ground and I went through some doors and up
       some stairs and up some more stairs and eventually I
       finished up on the same side of the ground obviously
       but now I am on the roof of the main stand. It is a
       fairly well practised route.

    Q. All the time you were on the same side of the ground?
       - A. Absolutely.




H
A
                                                                  36

                                                   J. W. MOTSON



    Q. You did not have to walk around the ground? - A. At
       no stage.
B
    Q. Did you say that you thought part of the Leppings
       Lane terrace had been reserved for Sheffield
       Wednesday supporters? I have made a little note here
       and I didn't get all the information down? - A. It is
       a fair point. What I said was that mistakenly I
       thought one of the reasons why those wing sections
       were so empty might possibly be because the host club
       who are staging the match, who are obviously neutral,
       which in this case is Sheffield Wednesday, do get
       given so many tickets by the Football Association for
       their own neutral supporters, if you like, and I
       wondered whether one section might have been reserved
       for that reason which would explain why there were
       hardly any Liverpool supporters in there. As it
       turned out, I was wrong but for reasons which became
       clear later. That wasn't the reason that the wing
       terrace was half empty.

    Q. Were you aware of the allocation of tickets for
       Nottingham Forest and Liverpool? - A. Yes, I was
       aware of the total number because I had put it in my
       broadcast which you may have heard. I knew that
       Nottingham Forest had 26,000 and Liverpool had
       24,000. I also knew that the entire Leppings Lane
       end had been allocated to the Liverpool supporters.

    Q. Did you say that earlier? Did you commentate on
       that, that those were the numbers, before you thought
       that area could have been reserved for Sheffield
       Wednesday supporters? - A. Yes, I did. I mean, for
       example, 26,000 Nottingham Forest tickets and 24,000
       Liverpool tickets makes 50,000. If the capacity of
       the ground is 51,500 then the other 1,500 might well
       have gone to Sheffield Wednesday for neutral
       supporters or Football Association allocation.

    Q. I have been led to believe that the Nottingham Forest
       supporters were allocated over 29,000 tickets? - A.
       You may know more than me.

    Q. Not 26,000.

           THE CORONER:   I do not think it matters very much.

         THE WITNESS: I have no evidence of that and certainly
    I did not know that on the day.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   You did think that Liverpool had
         been allocated round about 24,000? - A. That was the



H
                                                J. W. MOTSON



     official figure that was put out by the Football
     Association and by the Clubs themselves.

Q. They obviously had the smaller end of the ground,
   didn't they? - A. They had the same end of the ground
   as they had the year before.

Q. Smaller than the Nottingham Forest end? - A. In terms
   of the number of people who were standing, yes.

Q. Did you think with Liverpool doing so well that year,
   I remember on the commentary it was said that
   Liverpool had not lost a game since New Year's Day,
   would you expect the Liverpool supporters not to
   attend that sort of match? Would it just be an empty
   space on the Leppings Lane terrace for Sheffield
   Wednesday supporters that day? - A. No, it wouldn't.
   I assumed, as I said to you earlier on, that if it
   wasn't because of a neutral section it would be
   because there were people who had not yet either
   arrived or not yet got into the ground as I actually
   did say on the broadcast.

Q. Can you remember about what time that was please? -
   A. Yes, I think we have established my comment about
   the gaps on the terraces was at 14.46.

Q. So you obviously noticed that a lot of Liverpool
   supporters were still to come in? - A. That would the
   conclusion from what I say, yes.

Q. Quite substantial numbers? - A. Obviously.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Motson has said it a dozen times,
perhaps not quite as often as that.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   So did you think that the game
     would be delayed with that picture before you? - A.
     No, I didn't necessarily at that moment expect the
     game to be delayed because at 14.46 there are still
     14 minutes to go to the kick-off. Obviously I have
     been at football grounds before that tend to look
     half empty, you know, well after half past two, but
     suddenly everybody comes in and by three o 'clock they
     are all there. So I wasn't actually waiting for an
     announcement that there would be a delay in the kick-
     off but, on the other hand as I have said earlier on
     in my evidence, from time to time that does happen.

Q. Did you say you were at the 1988 Semi Final? - A. I
   was, yes.
                                             J. W. MOTSON



Q. Did you notice the Leppings Lane terrace that year at
   that time of the day? - A. I don't recall anything
   untoward in that way striking me the year before, no.
   In fact, as I recall the year before the wing
   sections were not half empty at 14.46.

Q. You did not particularly notice that the centre pens
   were much more crowded than the other parts? - A. I
   can't recall anything making that sort of impression
   on me in 1988, no.

Q. It seemed as though it was a very even distribution,
   would you say, up to the kick-off? - A. In 1988?

Q. Yes? - A. As I say, if anything came back to me about
   that which was unusual I would tell you but it
   doesn't.

Q. As you noticed that these centre pens were quite full
   and the outer parts were almost empty, did you think
   it would be interesting to keep the cameras on those
   terraces to see what would develop?

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Motson is not the producer. He is
the commentator. He does not direct the cameras. So we
cannot make him responsible for that.

     THE WITNESS: I think I ought to say at this point,
just to help you, that by the time it got to ten to three,
and as I have already explained to you, I didn't at that
time see any source of great distress or discomfort at
15.50, or before 15.50 sorry. You have to understand that
my concentration and that of the BBC outside broadcast team
quite understandably at that point was starting towards the
game. We had things to do when the players came out and I
had a commentary to do - or I thought I would have - for
the next 90 minutes and so obviously, with no disrespect,
my attention which had been on the crowd was then diverted
elsewhere.

Q. So you didn't see large numbers coming after that? -
   A. I had no way of seeing anything outside the ground
   and obviously people coming in while I was watching
   the match I wouldn't have witnessed, no.

Q. You said you have often seen people moving from part
   of the terrace to another part and using the track to
   do so. Is that at a match where there is no high
   spiked perimeter fence or is it that they are
   climbing that fence to do it? - A. In some perimeter
   fences there are gates and I have known people come
   out of the gate at the front of a perimeter fence and
   walk round the track to another part of the ground.
                                               J. W. MOTSON




Q. Do you know that the gates lock on the outside? The
   fans are mainly kept inside? - A. I have no reason to
   dispute that but I have not been made a study of the
   gates in perimeter fences myself.

Q. So you are saying they are just allowed to come
   through that and walk along the pitch, that that
   often happens? - A. No, I didn't say that. I said in
   my evidence earlier on that quite often they were
   escorted by Police or stewards to do that.

Q. I can understand that happening if there is not a
   perimeter fence. I suppose it is one way of doing it
   but would you expect it to happen at the Hillsborough
   Stadium where there was this high perimeter fence in
   front? Wouldn't you have expected the fans to have
   used the tunnel or the radial gates to move?

     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien, no. He is a very
experienced man and so we are allowed to ask him a great
deal but he has told you he has seen people do it. He has
said he has seen it through gates. You can ask him whether
he has ever seen it happen at Hillsborough but you cannot
ask him what other methods should have been used. It is
not his field.

Q. I will ask you that. Have you ever seen the crowds
   come out and by escorted at Hillsborough so far as
   you remember? - A. I have a friend of mine who was
   attending a Semi Final at Hillsborough in 1981
   between Tottenham Hotspur and Wolverhampton Wanderers
   and there was overcrowding at the Leppings Lane end
   and he finished up on the pitch side of the fence.
   That is assuming there was a fence. He finished up
   on the perimeter of the ground anyway.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes, I know there was no perimeter
fence there then.


       THE CORONER:   Yes, there was.

Q.        MRS. McBRlEN:   Yes. - A. He had to come out of
     the crowd and stand on the perimeter of the pitch,
     yes.

Q. Did you wonder why there was an overspill there at
   all when there was so much room at the sides? Did
   that strike you as interesting? - A. I would have
                                          J. W. MOTSON



thought that one of those facts answered the other,
to be honest, didn't it? I mean, there is probably
an overspill because there were too many people in
one section and not enough in another.




                        /Q. I do not think this
                                              J. W. MOTSON


 I do not think this question is relevant, but you
 would know that people normally come in through
 turnstiles? - A. I have been a terrace supporter
 myself and I have been through turnstiles, yes.

So naturally they would be distributed by using that
method, they would be dispersed if they came in
through turnstiles automatically on those terraces,
would they not? - A. You would have to tell me whether
or not their tickets put them into one particular
section or not.  I was not a ticket-bolder on that day
so I can't tell you what the ticket said for people
who were moving into the Leppings Lane end.  It is not
probably in my brief to ask.  That is probably
somebody else's job.

They would all have tickets for the terrace?

     THE CORONER: I do not think that is for him.
Move to something different.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Yes.
You mentioned that you thought people were
experiencing discomfort at 2.50 to 2.51 which seeras a
little earlier than a lot of the fans who have given
evidence here.

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, he did not say that.
What he said was that he did not notice any
discomfort, but when he was looking today he thought
on the video he could detect people who appeared to be
in discomfort.  That is not the same thing at all and,
indeed, he may be wrong in that, but that is what he
thinks he saw today.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I am very sorry about that.

     THE CORONER:  I have got you right, have I not? -
A. Yes, you have got me right, and I may be wrong.
That is a fair point.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I do not think I have anything
else at the moment because, as you said earlier, you
did not notice anything happening from about 2.50 on
that terrace in the centre.  My questions were
relating to that. - A. No, what I said was that after
about 2.50 obviously my responsibilities in terms of
the job I was doing for the BBC meant that I had to
concentrate on what was happening on the pitch and
with the game starting.

    MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you, Mr. Motson.
                                            J. W. MOTSON


           Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

 Mr. Motson, you added a remark about the Manager of
 Nottingham Forest, Brian Clough, to your openin'*7 - A.
 Yes.

I think you made a remark after one of the rehearsals
to the effect that you had to get Cloughie in, do you
remember saying that? - A. I do, yes.

At the time was there any attention in the press, or
in the footballing world, about Mr. Clough in
particular? - A. Yes.

Rather than me tell you what I believe it was, could
you please tell me? - A. As I recall it --

     THE CORONER: Hang on a minute.  It may be I am
being a bit dim, but what is it you are driving at?

     THE WITNESS:  It is slightly relevant, sir,
because I think I know what the gentleman is referring
to.

     THE CORONER: In that case perhaps answer it then.

      THE WITNESS:  Brian Clough is the Manager of
Nottingham Forest, and I think I have got my facts
right here.   There had been an incident on his ground
at Nottingham a few weeks before the semi-final, where
some supporters had gone onto the pitch at the end of
the match and Mr. Clough had remonstrated with those
supporters and been seen to give one of them a gentle
clip round the ear, for which he was taken up to the
Football Association on a charge of bringing the game
into disrepute, I think it was.   As a result of that
Mr. Clough was banned from sitting on the touch-line
bench for a given period of time and this semi-final
fell into that period.   The point was that rather than
force him to sit up in the stand a long way away from
the action, because it was a match of some importance
and he had to be near his team, the FA allocated him a
seat two rows back, which meant that they were, if you
like, continuing the ban but giving him a chance to
see the game from where he wanted to see it.   So it
was a newsworthy point and I thought that Mr.
Shrewsbury would be able to get one of his cameras to
follow Mr. Clough to this seat, which would just give
an added element to our introduction.

     MR. RUSSELL:  A newsworthy point not only to the
BBC camera, but also, you would expect, to a lot of
journalists and press photographers who wanted to
record the event? - A. They would have done it anyway,
                                               J. W. MOTSON


 whether the BBC would have done it or not.  Mr. Clough
 is news.  He tends to be news if he walks down the
 street.

But he was particularly news at that point for this
reason? - A. He was very much in the public eye, sir
yes.                                                 ’

There was a considerable degree of media interest in
this particular incident, was there not? - A. Yes sir.

His arrival to take his place in the stand would have
been a honey-pot for press photographers? - A.
Depending whether the press photographers had access
to the tunnel at that time of the game.  I am not sure
quite what passes they were given.

If they were given access, it would have been a
natural --- A. I would imagine that a picture of him
sitting in this seat would have attracted their
attention at some time during the course of the semi­
final, yes.  He was the Manager of Nottingham Forest
after all.

Yes, indeed.  Can I please turn to one other point
about the redeployment, as I think it has been called,
of supporters that you saw and thought was happening
shortly after the kick-off.  You said that it is   °
normal for there to be Police to guide or shepherd - I
cannot remember your precise words but guide or
shepherd I hope summarises them - the supporters from
the crowded area to the less crowded area? - A. I said
I had seen that happen, yes.

But you said you did not see it happen on this
occasion? - A. That is correct.

I think you have got a large lever-arch file in front
of you which has a number of photographs in it.  Could
I ask you to turn to one numbered C360? - A. Yes, I
have got it.

That is   a shot just to the left of the   goal and what
you can   see there are Pens 2 and 3 and   the gate that
is open   in the bottom left-hand corner   of the picture
is Gate   2. Do you see that? - A. Yes,    I do.

There are a number of fans there, are there not,
making their way from right to left towards that open
gate? - A. Yes.

Can you see three Police officers, one at the gate
facing the fans as they walk towards him, one in the
middle with a cap on facing that procession, and then
                                           J. W. MOTSON


 one a little to the right, a Constable with a
 Constable's helmet on? - A. Yes.

Is that the sort of escort or guidance or shepherding
that you would expect in such a situation? - A. I
would not have thought so because they are walking
towards the gate here, they are not coming out.

No, but that is the entrance to Gate 2, Mr. Motson. -
A. I see.  I do not know what time this photograph was
taken.

This photograph was taken at 2 minutes past 3, shortly
before you, according to your commentary, 10 seconds
after 4 minutes past 3, first made an observation
about the overspill? - A. If that is the case, then at
4 minutes past 3 I would have been commentating on the
game.   I wouldn't have seen that from where I was
sitting.

I appreciate that, but what I am seeking to find out
is whether the shepherding that you have referred to
is the sort of thing that you can see in that
photograph where it appears that three Policemen are
with or adjacent to a line of supporters who are
making their way towards the open gate to Pen 2? - A.
It is difficult to say because the Policemen are not
walking with them.  They are standing facing the
fence.  The fans are the ones who are walking.   It is
difficult to tell from the photographs if they have
actually escorted them from a previous position.

     MR. RUSSELL: All right, I will not take it any
further, thank you.

             Further by THE CORONER:

I just want to ask you one more question and then I am
through.  When Mr. King asked you about a pitch
invasion - can you remember that, can you think back?
- A. Yes.

He said when you looked at it did you think it was a
pitch invasion, or words to that effect? - A. Yes.

You said, "I did not think so initially".  Did you
mean the word "initially", and if you did what did you
mean and in what way did your judgment change and
when, if you can follow the question? - A. I know what
you are asking me.  You have to appreciate that
obviously I have been a commentator at matches where
not only has there been an overspill in the crowd, but
there also has been an invasion owing to bad
behaviour, an example of which would be the Luton and
                                           J. W. MOTSON


Millwall match in 1985, which preceded the Heysel
 isaster by a few weeks.  So consequently, as a
commentator, I knew that there was more than one
reason why people had in the past gone onto the pitch.
But in the case of Hillsborough it was not as if a lot
of people suddenly came running across the pitch in
the form of disturbance.  It was more, as I said
before, it appeared that they had overspilled from a
particularly heavily crowded section of the ground and
were either looking for somewhere to go or maybe iust
getting out of a crush.

In other words, what you are saying is just as you
were trying to find the rationale for the empty space
- could it be Sheffield allocation? - A. Yes.

So going through your mind were other possibilities
which it might be? - A. Yes.  As a commentator you
have got to be prepared for anything that you might
have experienced in the past.

I did say one question and I have got a second one,  I
am sorry.  From your experience, have you any
knowledge of any other games where gates were opened
to allow people in, as opposed to allowing them out
and as opposed to using a turnstile? - A. We are
talking about outside the ground now?

Yes, outside the ground.   I do not expect for a minute
that you would have seen it, but I am just wondering
whether you can think of any instances? - A. I mean I
can remember in the past myself at various grounds
getting involved in heavily crowded concourses while
people tried to find their way in through turnstiles
and being made to feel very uncomfortable.   I don't
specifically recall ever being in a crowd where the
Police opened an extra gate and I went in, but I have
no reason to suppose that that has not happened,
because some of the approaches to turnstiles at
football grounds are very, very narrow and often a lot
of people are there at the same time.

Yes, but you have no personal experience? - A. I
couldn't say that I have been witness to an occasion
which would be a direct parallel to the one you are
referring to, sir, no.

     THE CORONER: Anything else?

     MR. PAYNE:  Sir, if you were thinking of
adjourning now, as you usually are, I would be
grateful of an opportunity just to raise a point when
the Jury have retired and before Mr. Motson completes
his evidence.
                                                   J. W. MOTSON


         THE CORONER: Yes.    Yes, Mrs. McBrien.

         MRS. McBRIEN:    I just have one point, please.

         THE CORONER: Yes, go on.

         Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

This is relating to the point Mr. Russell brought up
about the photograph showing fans moving from Pen 3
along the track. - A. Yes.

Mr. Motson, when you said you have seen fans being
moved to other areas that are less crowded being
escorted by the Police, is it usually an earlier time?
- A. No, I have seen it happen before the game and I
have seen it happen while the match is actually going
on.  I have seen it happen at both those times.  I
would only want to add one thing to that.  It seems to
me, having stood on football terraces many years ago
before there were fences, that if there were gates in
what I can only describe, for want of a better
expression, as the side fences, the ones that go down
the terrace, I would have thought that it would have
been possible to have moved supporters, or for
supporters to have moved sideways perhaps to avoid a
crush rather than having to come out of the front at
all.

        THE CORONER:  I think we should not get into
that.     We know about the side fences, I accept that.

     MRS. McBRIEN: So the Police Officers are usually
aiding people? - A. Yes, I have seen that happen a
great deal, yes.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    All right, thank you very much.

     THE CORONER: Ladies and gentlemen, off you go and
have a cup of tea.  I have gone on a little bit longer
than usual.  We will say quarter-of-an-hour.

     Mr. Payne, do you want Mr. Motson in or out?          I
do not know what you are going to say.

     MR. PAYNE:  Yes, quite.  For my part I think he
could stay, but I can see there might be some point
taken about it elsewhere along the bench.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Motson, would you mind going
outside the Court room for a few minutes so that you
cannot hear what is going on.

        (In the absence of the Jury and the witness)
     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I rise to enquire what direction
you have in mind to give to the jury about the repeated
invitation by Mr. King to witnesses to express an opinion
on the tap on the should point.   He quite correctly
introduced that question by saying he was asking
Mr. Motson to express an opinion, giving as an excuse
that Mr. Motson had already been asked for some opinion,
although I couldn't immediately bring to mind what it
was, but I was assuming he had been.

     Sir, this is an undisguised invitation to the jury
to conclude that if a witness being presented with one
particular selected fact, namely, that the terrace was
over-crowded at the time, if that witness then comes to a
particular conclusion and expresses an opinion, then the
jury ought to come to the same conclusion and the same
opinion.   It is an undisguised invitation to the jury to
make a finding of fact based upon an opinion from a
witness, itself based on one selected piece of evidence.

      Sir, I am slightly concerned as to what direction
you have in mind ultimately to give to the jury about
this and the reason I am asking this now is as follows.
It is quite unfair for the witness to be presented with
one particular aspect, namely, the crowded state of the
terrace and then be asked to give his opinion, without at
the same time giving him all the other factors which
would have to be taken into account in deciding whether
and what the effect of more people going into the terrace
would be.    The kind of things the witness would have to
have fed into him before he can express any sort of
useful opinion if, as I deny, he is in a position to
express an opinion at all, then he would have to build
into his knowledge all the knowledge which is
undisguisedly being attributed to the Police, if I have
expressed that clearly, as the basis of what Mr. King is
trying to do.    For example, that this was a re-run of
the 1988 match which had gone off perfectly successfully,
that in 1988 the crowd had distributed itself across the
terrace, that the ground had been certified safe by the
engineer appointed under the Safety Certificate, that it
had a Safety Certificate and accordingly the ground was
to be treated as being safe, that a huge unprecedented
number of people had suddenly arrived outside the ground
in the last twenty or twenty-five minutes before kick-
off...

     THE CORONER:   I think you have given me enough
examples.   I can understand the point.

     MR. PAYNE:   What I am aiming at is this, that, sir,
if you have in mind to direct, as I submit you should,
the appropriate direction would be to direct the jury
that the opinion expressed by Mr. Motson, and other
witnesses on the same point, is to be disregarded by the
jury, then I will sit down, expect I would respectfully
add that it would be helpful if you were to say that now
because it is a striking point that Mr. King is making by
selecting this example and giving it to these witnesses
and it may be having an unfair effect on the jury.

     Sir, I would respectfully submit it would be
appropriate that an indication should be given, at least,
at this stage, that the jury should disregard opinion
evidence of that sort.

      Sir, may I just conclude by saying - and I
appreciate, sir, that you do have that in mind that you
will give such a direction whether now or later - but if
that were not to be so then it would be necessary for me
to embark on filling the witness with information and
then asking him to express an opinion or, indeed,whether
he was capable of expressing an opinion.    I haven't done
that.    I deliberately have not launched into that
exercise in front of the jury because in my submission it
would be completely unhelpful and misleading to the jury.

         MR. KING:      Sir, two points are basically raised by
my learned friend.          First of all, he takes exception to
my asking the witness an expression of opinion.          Sir,
with respect to my learned friend, the witness was asked
his opinion of what the terrace appeared to him to be
like in terms of whether he thought it was over-crowded,
whether it looked as if it was expected, whether he
thought it looked full and so forth, well before I
a r r i v e d t o ask a question, sir.   Indeed, it is
misleading, if my learned friend is right, to ask a
witness, 'Well, in your view did it seem full?          In your
v i e w d i d it seem over-crowded", as, if my learned friend
is right, is misleading for the question which I
directed.

         If opinion of the witness as to what he believed the
s t a t e o f the terrace is admissible from what he observed,
then it is certainly admissible for me to ask - and this
is all I did ask, sir - first, whether or not to his eyes
it seemed closely packed and he said yes, and that was
his evidence.        I was entitled to investigate that
because we do know that one of the issues in this case
arises out of the fact that a large number of peoples -
we have the figures which have been estimated but at
least 1,000 or so - were introduced, for whatever reason,
on to the central pens after 14.46.

     Sir, I prefaced my question by the observation, "If
someone said to you, 'It is likely that so many people
are going to be introduced', would you from what you
observed have thought there was room for them?"   That is
what the question, "Do you think it was over-crowded?
Do you think it is full?" is directed at before I even
ask my question, sir.   That is a legitimate question
because it is prefaced by the premise if it was likely.
Now obviously one of the issues which is going to be
investigated by the jury is whether or not it was likely
to those who were in charge at the time that the numbers
of people who were being allowed in through Gate C were
likely to get on to the terraces.

     Now that isn't, of course, a question which
Mr. Motson can answer and I didn't invite him to answer.
That is for other evidence and other witnesses, but it is
not an improper question to ask him whether there was
room on those terraces, from his observation, for another
1,000 people.   All the factors my learned friend speaks
of are quite irrelevant to that question because they go
to the issue of whether or not it was foreseeable to
those in charge that those people would go on the
terrace.

     Now that is a different issue.   One has to take it
in two stage.   First of all, what were the state of the
pens before Gate C was opened?   How many people were
then likely to come through Gate C and the likelihood of
those people getting on to the terrace.

     Now those matters as to likelihood isn't for
Mr. Motson and I didn't seek to put it in that way.  I
did preface it very carefully by that fact and, sir, it
is a legitimate approach in my submission because if
questions are simply being directed on did it look
crowded, did it look over-crowded, it misses the issue
because the issue is whether or not at 14.52 the state of
the pens were such to those observing them who were in
charge, that if there was a likely that the people who
came through Gate C would go on to the pens, was there
room for them.   That is the issue, sir, in part.

     MR. PAYNE:   Everything that Mr. King has said
demonstrates that he is not eliciting evidence from the
witness but he is arguing the case and he is arguing the
case by getting the witness to express an opinion about
something without taking into account those factors I
mentioned.   That is what is happening.   He is arguing
the case rather than eliciting the evidence.   If it is
permissible then it is permissible for me now to embark
on an examination with the witness along the lines of,
"Seeing the condition of the pens as it was, if someone
had tapped you on the shoulder and said, 'Another 1,000
people are coming in', what would you have thought?    Now
before you answer that question I want you to take into
account the following matters."   There are about twelve
                                                      50




matters which would have to be taken into account before
his opinion would be useful.

     In my submission the proper course, and to direct
the jury, is to say that his opinion is not relevant, it
is not of assistance to them and it is not a way of
eliciting evidence of fact from the witness, but it is a
way of arguing the case and putting forward a point of
view which is a matter for them.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I do find this line of approach
quite startling because it is counter to what my learned
friend's questions, indeed, several other people's
questions have been directed at which is a similar point
which is trying to extract from the witness his opinion
of the state of the pens as he observed it.   My
question...

     MR. PAYNE:   Sorry to interrupt, but we can get at
it like this.   That is not an opinion, that is a
statement of fact as to what he saw.   What Mr. King is
trying to do is to go further and say "What if?"

     MR. KING:   With respect, it is an opinion, because
if you say to a witness, 'Was the terrace closely
packed?" that isn't an opinion, that is a fact.    If you
say to the witness, "Did it seem over-crowded to you?
Did it seem different from what you expected?" that is an
opinion as to the state of the terrace.  Sir, I am
entitled to counter the dispute as to what is meant by
over-crowded or what is meant by the state of the
premises, simply to ask him the question whether, from
his observations, he could see space which would, from
his observations, be sufficient to take another 1,000
people.   Asking the question, "If I tapped you on the
shoulder and asked you, 'I am going to introduce 2,000
people or so on to the terrace, would you think there was
enough space for them?"' is only a graphic way of asking
the question, but it is the root of this case and I don t
make any excuse for it.

     I narrow the issues here and I say openly to now,
sir, the essential issue in this case, despite all the
evidence we go into, comes down to what did or did not
happen at the crucial time when Gate C was opened and all
those many people were allowed in on to the terrace, and
the crucial issue as to the state of knowledge of those
in charge, what they could foresee, what they could see
and what they ignored, if they did ignore anything, as to
obvious risks.

     One of those questions, and it is a central
question, is from their observation of the terrace, and
if it were likely to them, that the people they were
letting in would go on the terrace, was there obvious
room for them or was it obvious there was no room for
them.

     Sir, I am entitled to ask this witness if he is
being asked his opinion as to the state of the terrace by
others, what his opinion of the state of the terrace in
that context is.

     All my learned friend's points go only to the issue
of likelihood of the people entering the terrace.   They
don't go to the issue which I was directing the witness
to which is, "Assume likelihood for the moment, was there
room for them?" He is entitled to give his observation
that, sir.

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes, I quite agree that state of
knowledge is relevant and therefore for this witness or
for any other witness to be able to express a useful
opinion he has to be put in the same state of knowledge
as the people who are being criticised.   That is my
point.

     MR. KING:   My learned friend hasn't heard what I
said which was the state of knowledge goes to the issue
of likelihood of the people entering the terrace which
isn't what I was directing this witness to.   I wasn't
asking him whether he thought it was likely that the
2,000 or so who entered Gate C, whatever the numbers
were, were likely to go on to the terrace.   I didn't ask
him that question.   I couldn't have done.   I am
entitled to ask him, given he is giving evidence to the
jury as to his observations as to what the terrace was
like, and the point is being hammered the whole time that
it was normal, that it didn t seem over-crowded.

        However, that is not an answer to the issue I am
investigating which is regardless of whether you put the
label "normal" on, regardless of how you would describe
it, "From your observation was there obviously room for
so many more people or was it obvious thee was no room
f o r s o many more people if they were introduced?"   Sir,
it is as simple as that.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, may I say this:  my learned
friend asked these questions of a man who before he gives
any answer says in terms, "I am not an expert on crowds."
This is what goes really to the root of the objection in
this case.   I adopt what is said by my learned friend
Mr. Payne, but in addition it was quite clear Mr. Motson
is a football commentator, he was entitled to say when
asked by you, sir - and it was you who asked the question
- whether what he saw made him think there was anything
unusual, because that was what the examination-in-chief
by you, sir, was directed to, if you remember.   Those
remarks he made as to the space that was apparent to him
on both sides.

     So far as my learned friend Mr. King's question is
concerned it goes leaps and bounds past whetner to
Mr. Motson there was anything unusual in what he could
see that day when Mr. Motson said that so far as the
centre pens were concerned it appeared to him like any
other big game, tightly packed but nothing to get alarmed
about.   That was the effect of what he was saying.
Then my learned friend Mr. King asked the "tapping on the
shoulder" question which in my submission should not be
asked of any witness in this case, particularly one who
then says, 'I am not an expert on crowds."   I know you
saw me waiting to get up and I thought I would wait and
see if you intervened.   You didn't and by that time it
was too late and we had the answers that were given.

     I would, as forcefully as I can, support the
submissions made by my learned friend Mr. Payne and also
add the further point that here we have a witness who is
not even an expert in those matters about which Mr. King
was asking him about - "Was there room, in your view, for
another 1,000 people?"   Mr. Motson, "I am not an expert
on crowds but..." and he goes on to give the evidence he
gives.   How can he say?   To use an expression I have
used before, of what probative value is what he says?




        MR. KING:   I am rising to my feet
     MR. KING:   I am rising to my feet because it is
getting perhaps slightly farcical.  Sir, the logic of
what my learned friends are saying is that no witness
should be entitled to express an opinion on a relevant
issue, which is whether from his observations there was
or was not a situation in the terrace that it looked
crowded, over-crowded or what have you.  All you would
be able to ask a witness was, never mind about
expressing an opinion whether it would seem normal or
as you expected, but just give us your factual
observation as to how people were standing, how people
were packed or otherwise.  Sir, if it had been limited
to that for all the questions we have had through this
Inquest I would not object, but there has been a
currency of questions directed simply to the issue, "To
your eyes did it appear normal?".

     Sir, one has to ask the relevance of that
question.  The relevance of the question may be because
it appeared normal, therefore what happened thereafter
was totally unforeseeable.  One does not know, but sir,
I am entitled to ask the question and to direct the
issue to it, which is what was the state of the pen in
terms of observation, and it is not really a matter of
expertise, it is a matter of what you can see given the
numbers we are talking about in this case.  We are not
talking about whether you can introduce another five
people, we are talking about whether you can introduce
another thousand or so people, and on observation alone
I am entitled to ask him, if he has been asked other
questions on his observation of the state of the crowd,
whether or not from his observation there was any
conceivable room for that many people, but it is a
different issue which my learned friend is complaining
about, which I have not raised, I repeat, with this
witness, which is the likelihood to those observing the
pens of these people coming in, which is a quite
separate issue and it is a two stage argument.

     THE CORONER:   I think one of the problems is, of
course, as you very rightly say, the way you have put
the question is in a dramatic form, and it may well be
if the question were put in a different mode we would
not be having this discussion.

     I am not going to allow you, Mr. Payne, to reopen
this issue with this witness in the form which you have
suggested, nor am I going to give any directions to the
Jury at this stage as to the value or otherwise of that
opinion.  The way I look at the evidence, and we have
not got the Jury here - and I have not yet sorted out
my summing-up.  It is a difficult task, I hope you will
accept, but certainly my preliminary view will be to
direct the Jury in general terms as to the value or
otherwise of opinion evidence, and to make it crystal
clear that it does not make tuppence difference what
 x" or "y" or "z" think, it is a matter for them. They
have got the video and, in fact, they will probably
take it in with them to the room.  They can look at it,
they have heard what the witnesses have said, and if we
use Mr. Motson purely as an example, I look at the
evidence in a totality I hope, and the fact that he
answers a question in one way which favours, shall we
say, your point (a), does not alter the fact that he
has also answered the same issue in a different way,
because he made it quite clear, to me anyway, that
whatever he might have thought about getting more
people in, and the capacity of that pen to take 1,000
or 500 or 10,000, it is neither here nor there, it was
not until he was alerted by Mr. Shrewsbury at 4-
minutes-past-3 that he noticed anything about the pen.
That is point one.

     The second thing is, of course, as I say, you have
got to take the totality of the evidence into account,
and hopefully the Jury will be directed that when they
assess opinion evidence, of whatever nature it may be,
they have to take into account the fact that if you
pour people in at the back that may have an effect, but
against that you have to balance your experience as to
what had happened the previous year, you have got to
balance the gates at the back, you have got to balance
all the other points which you have raised, and I hope
some of which I may remember or not, and it is up to
them then to balance.  In other words, they have got to
do the filling in which you have been putting to me.
If at the end of the day they say well all that is all
very fine, but we think this - well, we won't know what
they think because they will just come back and give us
a verdict - but they will evaluate it hopefully, and I
think we are actually exceedingly lucky with this Jury
because judging by the questions which they keep on
sending up, they are listening quite intently, but at
the end of the day they will have had to do a balancing
act, and assess the pros and cons of the evidence,
weigh the opinions, discount those which they consider
to be either useless or irrelevant, and there may be
some opinions which I will make clear to them are
hopelessly irrelevant, and that is the way I intend to
direct them, but I would not be at all happy to give
them a direction on that issue now, and I don't think I
want to explore the matter further with this witness.

     Having said that, Mr. King, I can also see, with
great respect, that there is actually a difference when
I asked the witness, because Mr. Isaacs is quite right,
I asked the witness, "What did you see? How did it
appear to you?", or words to that effect, because I
cannot see how you can get an intelligent answer
otherwise than asking that.  If you ask me, "Am I
hungry?" and I reply, "Yes", are you asking for an
opinion or a statement of fact? That is, in a sense,
the way I look at that question.

     I think there is some justice, if you like, in
what Mr. Payne is saying, that you are taking the issue
a j          further, but I have said what I am going
to do and that is it.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I know we all want a break and I
         instructions to raise a quite separate matter,
which is directed to trying to persuade you to snow a
bit more of the video.  Sir, I was not here yesterday -
that is not the fault of anybody - and I know you
explained yesterday, because I have seen the
transcript, why you were stopping the video at 6-
minutes-past-3, but I have instructions to seek to
persuade you to show more of it.

     THE CORONER:      Up to what time?

     MR. KING:      Up to 3.15, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I might as well tell you
now, and I did try and make it clear, I would be
prepared to show the rest of the video up to 3.15 with
sound deleted.

     MR. KING:      Can that not be done, sir?   That is
what I ask.

     THE CORONER:    That may be a possibility.  If we
delete the sound then I have no objection to showing
it.   I had better just have another look at it, but my
recollection is I have no objection to showing the
video.   What I am not happy about, particularly after
our two and a half days of legal argument over the PACE
statements, I am not going to fall into that situation
again.

      MR. KING:   Sir, my submission is a very short
one.   Those I represent would like the whole of the
video shown up to 3.15 but the sound could be turned
down.

     .THE CORONER:   I don't think that will present any
particular problems but we don't need the BBC people
here for that.   Could I release Mr. Motson, Mr. Payne.
I tnink, Mr. Shrewsbury, you have got a football match
today, haven t you?   I hope it will be a successful
one.   Could you ask Mr. Motson to come in so that I can
do it properly.
           (The Witness returned to Court)

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Motson, just to say that we are
not going to need you any further, and thank you very
much indeed for your help.  I hope you have a good
commentary on your match today.  What time is the kick-
off?- A. Half-past-7, sir.

So you have sufficient time to get there.      Good.

     THE CORONER:     I    think we need a break.  Mr.
Griffiths, I think    we   will stop until 2.  Could you
tell the Jury that    it   is 2 o'clock, but be prepared to
go on until 4.30.     We   may not have tobut - Mr. Isaacs
is wincing.

     MR. ISAACS:   Only wincing, sir, because I have
made arrangements,  professional arrangements, based on
the likelihood of our finishing at nearer 4 rather than
half-past.

     THE CORONER:   We have got Mr. Sephton here.    We
are half-way through with him, if you remember.   We
might finish him before lunch which would take the
pressure off us in the afternoon.  We will get the Jury
back, because they have had their quarter of an hour,
and can I have the Monday transcript, please?   If we do
that we have a pretty good chance of finishing.   Mr.
Ball, I know you are one of the witnesses today.   We
are going to have you last.  We will do our best to
finish with you but be prepared possibly for an
overrun.

            (The Jury returned to Court)

      THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, I have
allowed Mr. Motson to go because he is going off to a
match.   Probably you know that and it may well be that
you will be watching him tonight, I don't know.
Anyway, be that as it may, we have now got Mr. Sephton
here.   Mr. Sephton was the young man we interrupted in
mid-stream.

           ROBERT EDWARD SEPHTON Recalled

                     By THE CORONER

I understand you have passed your test.  Well done.
You will be pleased to hear that the emergency which
occurred is resolved. - A. Yes.

I will very briefly remind you of what had happened.   I
had got your name - you are still on oath by the way -
and I had asked you questions about how you had got
here and how you had got onto the terrace, and you had
got on early.  You were telling me that you were
standing right against the gate, immediately behind
your friend Mr. Singleton, Jonathan, and your other
friend.  They were in front of you and you were in
between them like a triangle looking between their
heads, right?- A. Yes.




    /0. Pick it up
A
                                                                58

                                                     R. E. SEPHTQN


    Q. Pick it up then from that point and just remind us
       what happened? Can you remember the teams being
       announced? - A. Yes.
B
    Q. Can you remember the teams coming out on to the pitch
       pre kick-off? - A. Yes.

    Q. You can remember that? - A. Yes.

    Q. Take that point in time. What was it like where you
       were at that point in time? - A. I think it was okay.
       There wasn't too much crush. It was just normal for
       that time.

    Q. So far as you remember it was still normal? - A. Yes.

    Q. So far as you personally were concerned? - A. Yes.

    Q. At that point in time could you see any Police
       Officers on the track? - A. Yes, there was one in
       front of me.
D
    Q. In front of you? - A. Yes.

    Q . Was he looking away or looking in, can you
        remember? - A. He was looking in.

    Q. Was that the same Officer who was   there for mostof
       the time? - A. Yes.

    Q. I do not know whether you could see people around you
       because you may not have looked at them. Did you
       look at people around you at that  point in time? - A.
       I can't remember. There didn't seem to be any
       problem then.

    Q. Did you see the kick-off? - A. I can't remember.

    Q. You do definitely remember the players coming on to
       the pitch? - A. Yes.

    Q. At that point you have told me it was all right.
       What happened after that then? - A. Shortly after
       that there was a few waves of people pushing forward
       and then they just fell back naturally. Once there
       was another wave of people going forward and they
       didn't go back. They just stayed there and we were
       pressed up.

    Q. Can you remember how many waves there were? Can you
       recollect that by chance? - A. Two or three. I am
       not really sure.




H
                                             R. E. SEPHTQN


Was it the last one which came forward and then just
did not go back? - A. Yes.

What was it like when that happened? - A. It was
really quite difficult to breathe.

Tell me at that point what was going on around you? -
A. You could hear people complaining about everyone
being crushed together and there were a few people
saying they were hurting, they were in pain.

Saying what? - A. That they were in pain.

Did you turn to your friend and say, "Oh goodness me,
I am not very well. I have got a bit of pain" or was
it much more active and aggressively said? - A. They
didn't really, it wasn't really sort of go and tell
your friends that you weren't feeling very
comfortable. Everyone around you was going "Aagh".

There was quite a bit of noise then? - A. Yes.

What happened next? - A. After a while people started
shouting for the gate to be opened.

Was the Officer still there at that point? - A. Yes.

Was he alone at that point or were there others with
him? - A. I think he was alone.

Did he appear to hear? - A. I think he heard.

You cannot actually say whether he heard or perhaps
you can. Tell me what makes you think he heard? - A.
He started speaking into his radio.

So you saw him do something? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. After a while the gate
sprung open and I sort of lurched forward and then
the Policeman ran over and shut the gate.

With you outside or inside? - A. I think I was just
on the edge of the gate leaning.   My feet were still
inside but my body was leaning over.

Was it the same Policeman who had the radio who ran
over? - A. Yes.

Did he push you back or not? - A. Not me personally.

Did he manage to shut the gate? - A. Yes.

You were on the inside then? - A. I was on the side.
                                               R. E. SEPHTQN



So you were there? - A. Jonathan and Jaimie were
pushed back and I was pushed back as well.

Have you any idea what was happening on the pitch at
that time? - A. No, I can't remember. I think it may
have been just before kick-off.

Just before kick-off you think? - A. Yes.

When that happened was that the first time that the
gate was opened that afternoon? - A. Yes.

Nobody had opened it before? - A. No.

You are definite?   You are sure I mean? - A. I am
pretty certain.

What happened after that? The gate had burst open.
The Police had not opened it but it had just opened,
you say? - A. Yes.

You had half spilled out? - A. Yes.

I take it Jonathan and your other friend had actually
got out? - A. Yes, taken a step forward.

Then they were pushed back, is that right? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. I think the Policeman did
something to the lock to keep the door closed and
then he took a step back and went to the same
position he was in before and he was speaking into
his radio.

Could you hear what he said? - A. No.   He looked
quite worried.

He looked worried, did he? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. After a short while the gate
burst open again.

What was the time interval would you say? - A.
Between 30 seconds and a minute.

Short in other words? - A. Yes, quite short.

This time I take it that your two friends fell out
again? - A. Yes.

And you? - A. I followed them.

Were you put back this time? - A. No.
                                             R. E. SEPHTQN



What happened to you? - A. For a few seconds we just
stayed round the entrance to the gate wondering what
to do and then I think we must have been directed
down to the edge, to the corner of the pitch, where
we sat on a St. John's Ambulance bench.

When you say directed, are you saying that the Police
Officer said, "Go that way" or what? - A. I can't
remember. I can't really remember what happened.
You just cannot remember that? - A. No.

Did you look back at the gate at all after you had
come out the second time? - A. Yes,I remembered
after a while I had been sitting on the bench that I
had left my coat put over the wall. So I had to run
back behind the goal on to the other side of the
gate. It was still on the pitchbut on the opposite
side of the gate to where I was.    Ihad to lift my
coat up from the wall.

The coat was on the wall on the inside or the
outside? - A. There was a small gap between the fence
and the wall. My coat, part of it was inside and
part of it was outside.

So you were able to pull it out? - A. Yes.
From the outside? - A. Yes.

You did not have to go back in? - A. No.

Were people coming out of the gate at that point? -
A. Yes.

So it was open still? - A. Yes.

Did you see it closed at all again after you came out
the second time? - A. No.

Did you see it remaining open - it is not the same
question and so think about the answer - after you
came out? - A. No, I didn't really look at the back
of the gate again.

So you do not know what happened to it? - A. No.

But you never saw it closed? - A. No.

It was definitely open when you ran back for your
coat? - A. Yes.
                                             R. E. SEPHTQN


How long was that? What time interval was that would
you say approximately? - A. The football match was
still going on.

It was still going on? - A. Yes.

By this time were there other Police Officers there?
Can you remember that? - A. Yes, there were other
Police Officers there.

When you came out of the gate you say you were
escorted but you cannot remember exactly how towards
the right, would that be correct? - A. Yes.

So that meant that you had to walk passed your pen,
did you not? - A. Yes.

The pen that you had been in? - A. Yes.

You had also meant that when you ran back you ran
passed again in the opposite direction? - A. Yes.
Did you look in? - A. Yes.

What did you see the first time? - A. Frightened
people up against the fence.

This is a painful question but I have got to ask you.
Did you see anybody who appeared at that point to be
unconscious, blue or anything like that? - A. No.

When you ran back to get your coat did you look in
again? - A. Yes.

Was there any change in the appearance of the people?
- A . No.

You were very fortunate because you were not hurt.
In fact, you were lucky. You were not injured? - A.
Yes.

Can you go over and show us where you were on the
plan? - A. Yes.

 MR. JONES:    C.398.

              Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

On the question of timing your evidence could be
quite helpful and I would like to just be sure that
we have got it right. Can you open the black folder
in front of you and find No. 277? - A. Yes.
                                                   R. E. SEPHTQN


Q. Just look at that. It is headed "Some main event
   timing, Hillsborough". You will see the columns of
   times? - A. Yes.

Q. Just look down the column and you will come to the
   internal column 1454.08, the Liverpool team come on
   to the pitch. Can you find it? - A. Yes.

Q. Then just one below that 1455.22 Nottingham Forest
   team on to the pitch? - A.    Yes.

Q. You saw   the teams come out you have told   the Court,
   is that   right? - A. Yes.

Q. At that time the situation by thegate where  you were
   was normal, not too much, and was a normal crowded
   terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. If you just go down the column of internal numbers
   you come to 1459.30, kick-off, half a minute before
   three? - A. Yes.

Q. You have actually mentioned that Jonathan and Jaimie
   were pushed back. You cannot remember what was
   happening on the pitch but you think it was just
   before kick-off? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you happy with that evidence? Do not commit
   yourself to something you are not sure about? - A.
   That is how I remember it.

Q. Can we get from that then that by the gate where you
   were, the crush happened some time between 14.55 and
   14.59? So it is between five to three and three
   o'clock? - A. Yes.

      THE CORONER:  Mr. King, it is near lunchtime. We
have made a start. Is there anybody with commitments
today? Ladies and gentlemen, can you bear having a
slightly shorter lunch hour? Can we start at ten to two
which gives us three quarters of an hour rather than an
hour?

                     LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
                                              R. E. SEPHTON


     THE CORONER: I understand you found it quite hard
going this morning after 12.  You do not want me to
call him back, do you, Mr. Motson to do the last half-
hour again, or are you satisfied with what you heard?
.... No.  Right, Mr. King.

            Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Can I investigate first the factual state of the pen
in the position you were in at the time the teams were
coming out, and your evidence this morning was, as I
understand it, you thought at that time it was okay,
it was still normal, not too much crush then.  That
was the expression which you said this morning. - A.
Yes.

I just want to investigate what factually therefore it
was like.  What do you mean by the expression "not too
much crush then"? - A. Well, as I expect it to be at a
normal football match.

Do I gather from that though there was some crushing,
albeit you expected it? - A. There were people close
together but there wasn't a crush.

But they were closely packed together, is that what
you are trying to express? - A. Yes.

Do I understand from that you are talking about
shoulder to shoulder? - A. Yes.

And back to front? - A. Yes.

Then you described the development which my learned
friend Mr. Payne put to you took place over the next
four minutes or so, and you reached the point where
you were describing it got really difficult to
breathe, and this is around the time that people were
starting to shout for the gate to be opened, all
right?  I want to take you to that time now.   You
obviously were having difficulty breathing? - A. Yes.

And the people around you, you gained the impression,
were having that difficulty.  I know it is difficult
and I know it is distressing but it may be important
for us to assess what was happening.   What sort of
noise was being made by the people around you at that
time when they were in that condition?   This is before
the gate was opened at all. — A. I would say they were
groaning.

So it was not the normal sort of noise of somebody in
ecstasy at a football match? - A. No.
                                           R. E. SEPHTON


Then you say after a while people shouted for the gate
to be opened.  You could hear that, could you? - A.
Yes, people around me.

And the gate which then sprang open apparently was the
impression you got, that it sprang open not because
someone had opened it from outside, but from some sort
of pressure from within the pen? - A. Yes, no one
opened it.

At the time that you and your friends were, in effect,
pushed back into the crowd were the people around
still groaning in the way you have described? - A.
Yes.

Were people around still shouting for the gate to be
opened? - A. Yes.

But you say it was then shut again.  Now clearly this
continued until it was opened the second time which
you have described.  I want to take you again now to
when you got out of the pen and you were making your
way to the corner, and the learned Coroner asked you
to describe what you could see inside the pen.  My
note was that you said that you saw frightened people
up against the fence? - A. Yes.

Could you tell that they were frightened? - A. Yes.

In what way did it look as if they were frightened,
can you help? - A. The expressions on their faces.

Were they right up against the fence? - A. Yes.

That condition which you described of what you could
see on their faces and being up against the fence, it
was still like that when you came back for your coat?
- A. Yes.

     MR. KING:   I have no further questions.   Thank
you, sir.

         Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Sephton, when you went into Pen 3 did you see any
Police Officers at the rear of the pen? - A. No.

Did you see any Police Officers at the entrance of the
tunnel? - A. No, I don't think, I can't remember
seeing any there.
                                         R. E. SEPHTON


         Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN:

Going back to the evidence you gave to the Inquest on
the first occasion that you were here, do you recall
describing yourself as being quite comfortable until a
few minutes before the match started? - A. Yes.

Does that accurately describe how you felt until a few
minutes before the match started? - A. Yes.

From what you could see, were other people in the same
state as yourself until a few minutes before? - A.
Yes, they were okay.

You have described to us the gates opening a little
later and people groaning and later shouting for the
gates to be opened? - A. Yes.

It is an obvious point, but do I take it that that was
against the background of lots of other noises that
are normally being heard at a football match? - A.
Yes.

Now you told us that after the first occasion when the
gate opened the Police Officer spoke into his radio.
You may have answered this - forgive me if you did -
but could you hear anything of what he was saying into
his radio? - A. No.  He was speaking into it and then
listening for a reply.

So you cannot help us as to the loudness or otherwise
of his voice at the time when he was speaking into his
radio? - A. No, he wasn't speaking loudly.  He had it
up by the side of his face.

I see, but could you hear anything of his voice? - A.
No, not above the noise.

So really you cannot help there? - A. No, I am sorry.

You described that the gate opened again and have I
got this right, that it was a very short space of time
between the two openings? - A. Yes.

Thirty seconds I think you said? - A. Yes, between
thirty seconds and a minute.

Obviously you cannot be more accurate than that? - A.
No, I am sorry.

From what you have told us, have I got this right,
that you personally never saw the gate close after
that? - A. No, I did not see that.
                                             R. E. SEPHTON


     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER: Thank you very much indeed.  As I
say, I am sorry we have had to bring you back twice,
but it is just one of those things.

               JAMIE LEE CASE Sworn

                  By THE CORONER:

You have also had to come back twice and you did not
even get a hearing the first time, so I am sorry about
that, but you are Jamie Lee Case, are you not? - A.
Yes.

Is it still                         , in Liverpool? - A.
Yes.

You are probably still at school or have you left now?
- A. No, I am still at school.

You came with your dad? - A. Yes.

And Robert and Jonathan, is that right? - A. Yes.

Whom we have already heard.  You set off and you
arrived, I think, in Sheffield at about half-past 1,
or something like that? - A. Yes.

You got into the ground, I think, fairly early, is
that right?  Did you get in with them? - A. Yes.

When you got there the turnstile area was fairly
empty, was it not, about 1.30/1.45? - A. Yes, we just
walked straight in.

But there were some Police Officers outside the
turnstiles, were there not? - A. Yes.

Did they search you? - A. Yes.  I had a can ofCoke
and they wouldn't let me in with it. They made  me
drink it outside.

I see, they made you drink it up? - A. Yes.

Then you went through? - A. Yes.

On the other side you saw the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Were there any Police Officers searching on the inside
as well that you can remember? - A. No, I don't think
                                              J. L. CASE


 You were not searched anyway? - A. No, not on the
 inside.

 On the inside I mean? - A. No, I wasn't searched.

You went into Pen 3, is that right, the one on the
right-hand side? - A. Yes.

Having got there, where did you go? - A. We just
walked straight down the front by the platform leading
onto the pitch.                                      °

By the gate was it? - A. By the gate, yes.

We have heard from your friend that you were standing
next to Jonathan, is that right? - A. Yes.

Was there anybody between you and the gate? - A. No.

So you were right up against it? - A. Yes.

Jonathan was on one side of you? - A. Yes.

Was there anybody else standing on that platform with
you, can you remember? - A. Yes, I think therewas a
little boy there about 10.

Robert was behind you? - A. Yes.

Presumably in the beginning   you were justtalking and
passing the time of day and   enjoying yourselves - yes?
- A. Yes.

I think you saw the players come out and warm up on
the pitch, did you not? - A. Yes.

Did you see a beach ball being thrown about? - A. Yes,
I did.  The lads behind us were messing with the beach
ball.

At that point what was it like, were you okay? - A.
Yes, it was pretty busy but it was not uncomfortable
or anything.

Then the players came onto the pitch.  Did they leave
after they had warmed up? - A. Yes, I think so.

Were you okay still at that point, or not? - A. Yes, I
was okay.

Not uncomfortable? - A. No.
                                                 J. L. CASE


Did you remember the players coming onto the pitch
just before kick-off when they ran on? - A. No, I
didn't see them coming on the pitch.

You did   not see them   come on? - A. No.

Did you see themon the pitch at all before kick-off,
apart from the kick-around which you have mentioned? -
A. All I saw was the kick-around and that was it.

So what distracted your attention? You were right at
the front.  Why is it that you did not see them come
onto the pitch? - A. Because the pressure was getting
too much.

So at what point did you begin to experience strong
pressure? - A. It would have been about 3 o'clock.

Was the game in play by then? - A. Yes, just kicked
off, I think, but I didn't see the kick-off, so round
the kick-off time.

Yes, but how did you know that that had happened if
you had not seen the players on the pitch and you had
not seen the kick-off? You were right in the front.
What was it that made you think that it was round
about kick-off time? Do you see what I am asking?
Can you understand? - A. Not really, no.




                              /Q. Well, if you
                                                  J. L. CASE


Well, if you didn't see anything happening on the pitch.
You didn't seen the players.   You didn't see the kick-
off.   How do you know that it was roundabout kick-off
time? - A. The players had warmed up about ten minutes
earlier and I presume it was around kick-off time that
the trouble started.

So what you are saying is that you had the impression
that a period of time passed between the players warming
up? - A. Yes.

Were the players when they were warming up, were they
wearing track suits, or were they in their playing gear?
- A. I think they were in their playing gear, just their
track suit tops on maybe.

Pardon? - A. I think they were in their playing gear.

     MR. KING:      Sir, I think he said with track suit
tops on.

     THE CORONER:     Did he?    I thought he said the
opposite:

What were they? - A. They didn't have full track suits
on.   They had track suit tops on.

Was that at the same time as the beach ball was being
knocked about? - A. I think so.    When they were warming
up, that is when the beach ball...

At that point you were still feeling...   Well, what were
you feeling at that point? - A. Just feeling reasonable.
You know, what I would expect at a semi-final.   Not
uncomfortable.

From then onwards things began to get worse as far as you
were concerned? - A. Yes.

It was so bad in fact you don't remember what was going
on on the pitch? -A. I didn't see any of the match, no.

But you have the impression there was a passage of time?
- A. Yes.

Did you feel any surges or sways or whatever? - A. Yes,
there were a few surges and then one main surge.
Instead of the pressure releasing it was constant.

The earlier surges, did they come and go? - A. Yes.

Was that after these players had warmed up? - A. I think
it was during.
                                                 J. L. CASE


Did you see a Policeman at the gate? - A. Yes.     There
was one directly in front of us.

You could see him clearly? - A. Yes.

Any other Officers or just the one? - A. All I could see
was the one.

Tell me what he was doing between the time when you said
the players were warming up and the time when you got out
the first time? - A. He was just standing in front of the
gate and then the pressure started to get worse.    I
remember saying to my dad that I couldn't stand it and
the pressure got too bad and the gate opened.    I got out
on to the gravel, me and Jonathon, and then they pushed
us back in and shut the gate again because tney thought
it was an overspill.   I think he thought it was just an
overspill.

Was the match in progress at that time, can you remember?
Or do you not know? - A. I can't remember.

Did^you hear any people shouting? - A. Yes.   My dad was
saying, "Open the gate", and loads of people around were
saying that as well.

Was that before you got out the first time? - A. Yes.

How long?   Can you say? - A. About thirty seconds.

The Police Officer pushed you back in? - A. Yes.

Did you protest?   Did you say anything to him? - A. Not
really, it just happened so fast.

You just got out, he pushed you straight back and the
gate shut? - A. Yes.

So you hadn't got very far in fact? - A. Just on the
gravel.

Did the gate open again? - A. Yes, I would say about 45
seconds later.    The pressure was continuing and the gate
burst open again.    I just wanted to get out and I just
turned and walked to the right without looking back.     I
wasn't escorted or anything.

You got out this time and you turned right? - A. Yes.

But you don't remember being escorted along? - A. No.

Do you remember seeing any Police Officers around at that
point? - A. No.
                                               J. L. CASE


Apart from this one whom you have mentioned.   Was he
still there? - A. Yes.

What was he doing at that point? - A. He was just letting
people out of the gate.

He wasn't trying to catch you and put you back? - A. No.

When you say he was letting people out of the gate, can
you just describe that a little bit more clearly? - A.
People were just walking out of the gate and  he was just
stood there.   I was walking to the right so he obviously
couldn't see.

Does that mean you sort of darted along near the fencing,
but on the pitch side? - A. Yes.

I said "darted", you may not have been running, but you
wanted to get away from him basically, that is what you
are saying? - A. Yes.

You didn't want to get back in and you were aiming for
the corner? - A. Yes.

Did you look at the pen at all? - A. I can't really
remember, not until I sat in the corner on the St. John's
Ambulance bench and I was looking at the pen then.

What did you see then? - A. I saw more people getting out
of the gate and it just happened so fast really.

Did you notice whether the game was in play at that point
or had it stopped? - A. The game was still in play.

Did you see the Officer run on to the field to stop the
game? - A. No.

Did you notice the players go off at all? - A. No, I was
looking at what was happening.

By this time your attention had been drawn to the back.
Did you see the Officer use his radio? - A. No.

Did you hear him say anything to you at all, or to
anybody for that matter? - A. I think he said before the
gate opened the first time that it would sort itself out.

I'm sorry? - A. I think he said all the crushing and
everything would sort itself out because the crowd would
just sway back, but it didn't, the gate opened.

So you have a recollection of him saying something like
it would all sort itself out? - A. Yes.
                                                                  73

                                                          J. L. CASE


         Did you actually hear that with your own ears? - A. Not
         with my own ears, but my dad said that.

    Q.   You dad has told you that? - A. Yes.
B
    Q. He was standing next to you? - A. Yes.

    Q.   He wasn't on the platform? - A. No, he was standing bv
         Robert.

         Dad hasn't brought you today, has he? - A. No.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

    0. I know that timing is difficult for you, so if you are
       not clear and don t know, then just say so.   I just want
       to see if you can be clearer.   If you can't then don't
       worry. - A. OK.

         The first time you were asked about the timing you said
         that the pressure was getting too much at about three
         o'clock? - A. Yes.
D
    Q.   How do you arrive at three o'clock? - A. Well, I presume
         it was three o'clock.

    Q.   Because? - A. The players had just warmed up.   The names
         had been addressed over the speaker system, the PA
         system, so...

    Q . The players had warmed up? - A. Yes.

    Q. The next thing was going to be that the game was going to
         start? - A. Yes.

    Q.   It was at that time, was it? - A. Yes.

    Q . That is when the crush got too bad? - A. Yes.

    Q . Up to that time it had been... - A. Reasonably
         comfortable.   There had been a bit of a crush, but
         nothing unexpected.




              Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS,




H
                                             J. L. CASE


            Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS

And you had been with Jonathan and Robert the whole
time? - A. Yes.

Standing virtually next to you? - A. Yes.

Thanks very much.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Mr. Case, I will just have another go at timings, if we
can.  You say you heard the team being announced? - A.
Yes.

At that time was that when the pressure was getting too
mucn, at that time? - A. Just after that time.

I wonder if we could look at C277? Mr. Case, you told
us that you heard the teams being announced and it was
just after that it started getting bad, and you also
told us, and this is helpful, that you did not see the
players come out on the pitch because of the pressure.
That is what you told us? - A. Yes.

Therefore it is obvious, isn't it, from that, that when
it started to get bad was sometime between the team
being announced and before the players came out,
because you did not see it. Just have a look at this
chart.  You see the internal timings on the right-hand
side of the column on the left? You can probably see,
 Liverpool team announced".  Do you see that? - A. Yes.

That is recorded at 14.51.07, so just after 10-to-3,
about 9-minutes-to-3, and then we see a bit further
down,  14.54.08, Liverpool team onto the pitch".  Now
you did not see that because of the pressure? - A. Yes.

So it is obvious, is it, that it was sometime in those
three minutes between 9-minutes-to and 6-minutes-to-3
tnat things got really bad for you on the terrace? - A.


           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Case, let me first of all say how well you are
giving your evidence, as you have been one of the
youngest people to appear here.  I personally am very
impressed.  Did your dad get out when you got out the
first time? - A. Yes - oh, no, my dad didn t, just me
and Jonathan.

Did he object, did your dad object to the fact that you
were being put back into that pen? - A. Yes.
                                              J. L. CASE


Did he make it know to the Police who was putting you
back in?- A. Yes, there was several people all around
shouting at the Policeman, and he just put us back in.

So when the gate was opened quite quickly after that do
you think it was as a result of your dad speaking to
the Police? - A. No.

No.   All right, thank you very much.

           Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN

When the gate sprung open you have described to us how
you and your friend got out.  Did anyone else come out
of the gate at that time? - A. The firsttime?

Yes. - A. No, just me and Jonathan.

Just the two of you? - A. Yes.

You actually got onto the perimeter track,   am I
correct?- A. Yes.

And you walked some distance from the gate, didyou?   -
A. No, we were just more or less immediately put back
m the pen.

I see.  You yourself said nothing at all to the
Policeman? - A. No, because it happened so fast.

And similarly John said nothing to the Policeman? - A.
No.

Then you have described to us how very shortly after
tne gate opened again? - A. Yes.

And you came out? - A. Yes.

You were allowed to come out? - A. Yes.

Along with a number of others? - A. Yes.

Thereafter, from what you have described to us, so far
as you were aware that gate remained open and people
came out of it? - A. I think so, yes, but I couldn't be
sure on it.

I am just simply asking what you actually saw? - A. I
walked to the right and I just didn't look back,
because I thought the Policeman was going to grab me
and put me back in the pen, so I just carried on
walking as fast as I could and sat on the bench in the
corner.
                                                                       76

                                                            A. M. BROWN


            You have described to us that at some point you did
            look and the Constable was still there, and was iust
            letting people out of the gate? - A. Yes.

            That is what you have told us? - A. Yes.
B
                 THE CORONER:      Nothing else of this young man?

            1 w?n ^ y?u to Put a cross on a plan.    (The Witness
            marked his position on Exhibit C412)                ~

                          ANDREW MARK BROWN Called (Sworn

                                  By THE CORONER

    Q.      Good afternoon.  You are Andrew Mark Brown,     that is
            right, isn't it? - A. That is right.

    Q.      Is it still                               Cheshire? - A.
            Yes.

    Q.      Mr. Brown, you unfortunately lost your brother, didn't
            you, at this match? - A. That is right.
D
    Q.      I am very, very sorry indeed that should have happened
            to you and to the rest of your family.  I am going to
            ask you a few questions about what you remember and
            what happened, okay?  Is it right that you went to the
            semi-final on 15th April, 1989? - A. That is right.

    Q-      I think you went by car? - A. That is right.

    Q.      Your car, or your company car, in fact? - A. Yes.

    Q.      Your brother went with you, did he? - A. Yes.

    Q.      Did both of you have tickets for the terracing? - A.
            Yes*

            You left, I think, at 10.30 or so in the morning? - A.
            That is right.

    0   .   You came via the Snake Pass? - A. Yes.

    Q. What time did you manage to get to Sheffield? - A.
            About 1.30.

    0 . Then I^think you went off and had a beefburger or
        something, and I think you had a can of Heineken or
        something like that? - A. That is right.

            Having done that you made your way to the ground on
            foot, I take it? - A. That is right.




H
                                                A. M. BROWN


What time did you arrive at the ground? - A. Between
quarter-past-2 and 25-past-2.  I couldn't be sure.

Yes, in that sort of time bracket. - A. Yes.

When you got there I think you had pretty easy access
through the   turnstile area, is that right? - A.That is
right.  There were two or three queues but only about
eight or ten people in each queue, so it was only a
matter of two minutes before we went in.

No difficulty at all? - A. Nothing at all.

Gan you recollect whether there were any Police
Officers searching? - A. Outside the ground, yes.

And you   were searched,   were you? - A. I was, yes.

Did you   go through and were you searched again or not.
inside?   - A.   No.                                     ’

You weren't.     Have you been to the ground before? -   A.
No.

So this was new to you? - A. Yes.

So once you   got inside you saw the tunnel, I take it? -
A. That is right.

You went down there? - A. We went to the toilets to the
left of the tunnel first and then went down the tunnel.




               /Q. Were you intending
                                                 A. M. BROWN


Were you intending to be behind the goal? Is that
where you wanting to be if all was well? - A. Yes,
that is where we always go if we go to a football
match.

You are a regular football supporter I take it
then? - A. Yes.

When you entered this would be what? I suppose about
two minutes after the time you have given? - A. Yes,
about 2.25, something like that.

Did you go right or left? - A. Right.

Was it like when you entered? - A. It was reasonably
full but it wasn't packed at that time, at 2.30. You
could move about quite freely.

You may well be right with your answer now but I want
you to just have a look at what you actually said in
your statement and just let us make sure we have got
this right. Can you just look at the first five
lines or so? - A. Yes. It was reasonably - there
wasn't that many people in there and it wasn't
packed.

In fact, you put it the other way round in the
statement, have you not? What you are saying in the
statement is that the pen itself was quite empty? -
A. That is right. What I am saying is that the pen
wasn't packed. There was a reasonable amount of
people in there but it was not what I expected. I
expected the ground to be ...

Fuller? - A. Yes, quite a few people in there.

So what you are saying is that taking the time into
account you would have expected there tobe more
people in the pen at that time? - A.Yes,   I would
expect more people to be in there.

Do you go to Liverpool matches? - A. Yes, I go to
every game, every home game.

Up in Liverpool I suppose? - A. Yes.

Is it because from your experience if you want to get
in you have got to get in considerably earlier? - A.
Three quarters of an hour to an hour before kick-off
to get a reasonable place otherwise you will be stuck
right at the back.

That is what surprised you? - A. Yes.
                                                A. M. BROWN


We are talking about the pen you were in as far as
you are concerned and not other bits of the ground? -
A. The whole ground, there wasn't a great deal of
people in there. The stands do not fill up until
about twenty minutes before the game starts. To my
right there was a lot of space. To my left the next
pen had a few people in again and then right on the
far bank there was no one at all up there.

You and your brother were quite content, in fact,
with that because it meant you could pick the spot
that you wanted? - A. That is right.

I take it you did and I think it was more or less
just behind the goal and about halfway up, would that
be right? - A. Yes.

Then describe to me what happened after that? - A.
The ground gradually filled up. At about quarter to
three it was getting quite hard to move. Where I was
standing the crowd was starting to sway back and to.
You mentioned the beach ball before. That was in the
area where I was. That was getting knocked about a
lot and so there was a lot of swaying back and to.
At five to three approximately it was quite hard and
we got pushed quite a bit further down. I can
remember the players coming on to the pitch. I
couldn't see them but I could hear the crowd cheering
obviously for when they do come out. I am quite
short and so I couldn't see over the people who were
in front of me. It just got tighter and tighter and
it seemed like there was one big push and I seemed to
go down to the left hand side near the fence that
separates Pens 3 and 4. That was it. I got
separated. My brother went the other way, you see,
or I think that is what happened.

This push   which separated you, that sounds as if it
was after   the players had come out judging by the
cheering,   is that right or not? - A. I would say it
was about   when they kicked off.

You could not see the kick-off either I take it? - A.
No. I could see glimpses of players on the pitch
because I was trying to move my head in between other
people's heads but that was about it.

I think you said you were pushed to the fencing
between Pen 3 and Pen 4, is that right? - A. Yes, to
within about four or five feet away from that fence
and pushed, I don't know, about eight feet from the
front I suppose.

So you were not hard up against it? - A. No.
                                                           80
                                                 A. M. BROWN



Q. But you were quite close? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you see it as a matter of interest? Could you
   see that it was there? - A. I could see the fence,
   yes.

Q. Can you remember whether people were crossing the
   fence, climbing in and out? - A. I can remember
   seeing one lad sitting on the fence or trying to get
   over. I am not quite sure if they were jumping from
   pen to pen because it was quite hard for me to see at
   this time because I was squashed with this arm right
   across my face and so I couldn't quite see.

Q. I am interested for a particular reason as to whether
   you saw anybody being transferred across? - A. I
   didn't see anyone myself, no.

Q. When you got to this position you have just
   mentioned, was the pressure there any easier or was
   it more or less the same as it had been when the
   surge started separating you? - A. When I ended up
   down the front it was quite difficult to breathe.
   Basically I tried to hold my head back and just try
   and get as much air as I could, you see.

Q. Yes, that was sensible.Had you heard any cries   for
   help at any point? - A. Yes, I heard people
   screaming.

Q. When was that? Was it when you were in this position
   with your head up or earlier? - A. Yes.

Q. I am sorry? - A. When I was squashed with my hand
   like this. the people around who were directly next
   to me were screaming and what have you.

Q. Could you see the gates at all on the perimeter
   fence? - A. I could see a gate to my right. All I
   could see was a lot of people around the gates and I
   do not know if it was the Police or spectators trying
   to pull people through it. I do not know what time
   this was. It could have been ten past three, quarter
   past three.

Q. In other words, you did see but you have no idea of
   time? - A. I couldn't say exactly what time it was,
   no.

Q. I will not press you on that. Did you see people
   climbing over the front fence at all? - A. Yes, there
   were people climbing across the top of us to get to
                                              A. M. BROWN


the fence and there were a couple of lads on the
other side of the fence trying to pull them over.

Did you see any of these people being pushed back at
all? - A. At first they were pushed back, yes, but I
think the Police realised a few minutes later what
was happening and they started to help to try and get
a few more people over, you see.

The people who were being pushed back, were they were
tending to come from behind you? - A. Yes, because at
the front it was squashed that tight that you just
couldn't move. The people who had a bit of room were
sort of climbing up the backs of people and coming
across the top.

This is a very difficult question and if you cannot
answer it do not attempt to. The people who were
moving forward to the fencing, in what sort of
condition were they as compared with you? If you did
not see anything and you cannot say, I do not want
you to guess? - A. The people who were directly next
to me I would say that two or three of them were
already dead.

Obviously the people above you who were coming across
were not because they were moving? - A. No. They
were some carried across who were just sort of
getting knocked across. They weren't climbing. They
were obviously unconscious.

You saw people actually being passed forward? - A.
Yes.

By people who were below and underneath them? - A.
That is right.

In fact, you were in this position for quite some
time, were you not? - A. Yes. It seemed to ease
quite suddenly, to be honest with you, because I was
in that position, I don't know, for ten or fifteen
minutes and then suddenly there was a gap in the back
and so I crawled out through the back.

Did you come out through the tunnel or how did you go
out? - A. Yes, it took me a couple of minutes to get
my bearings and then I went down the tunnel and there
was a few people lying about, what they had pulled
out obviously from behind me and laid between the
turnstiles and the tunnel.
                                              A. M. BROUN


Can you show us on the plan?  I want you to mark two
positions, the first one where you and Stephen took up
your viewing position, and then if you would just
indicate where you finished up when you were separated
from him.

     MRS. PERKINS:   C413.

     THE CORONER:  Can you put a '1' and a '2' on it?
(Witness marks plan) I will just ask you one other
question before Mr. Payne starts, just to try and get
these timings right.  When you first got in and took
up that viewing position, obviously that was very
early on and it was satisfactory? - A. Yes.

When was it that you were carried away from there?
Was it with the surging? - A. Yes, we gradually got
pushed nearer to the front, but around kick-off time,
that is when I got pushed more to the left.

Was that, in fact, the time when things became
desperate as far as you were concerned or not, or was
it earlier? - A. I didn't realise it was desperate
when I got pushed, because I was expecting it to go
back, but when I got stuck in the same position I
realised that it was desperate then.

So, in fact, your initial impression was that this was
a standard manoeuvre but it did not release? - A. That
is right.

           Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

It is exactly about that that I would like to ask you
as well, please.  As a regular football supporter can
you just give the Jury the benefit of your experience
at big matches behind the goal - right?  It is a big
match, you are behind the goal which is your usual
place, as you have told us.  Is it quite normal for
there to be a crush in the few minutes before kick-
off, and then after the kick-off the crowd finds its
own level and settles down? - A. That is right, yes.
The crowd will move 10 or 15 feet in any direction,
but when it settles you basically end up where you
started off.  Well, that is what happens at Liverpool
anyway on the Kop with 20,000 people behind one goal.

So you, in fact, are quite used to that sort of
experience? - A. That is right.

I am going to ask    you to look at   a table we havegot
of events just to    try and see if   wecan fit your
evidence onto it.     In the folder   itis 277. Just look
                                            A. M. BROWN


down these columns and can you see the internal
column? - A. Yes.

Run your eye down the numbers and you get to "14.54 -
Liverpool team onto the pitch"? - A. That is right.

Then "14.55 - Nottingham Forest team onto the pitch"?
- A. Yes.

Then the next one is "14.55.49 - Strong surge from
tunnel into Enclosure 3", that is where you were? - A.
That is right.

Does that seem to fit with your own memory? - A. I
seem to think that it was a bit later than that, maybe
a couple of minutes nearer to the kick-off time.

You mean a couple of minutes after the teams came onto
the pitch? - A. Yes, nearer to the kick-off.

That the strong surge happened? - A. Yes.

Is it at that time that the crush became greater than
what you are used to at Anfield? - A. That is right,
yes, because if I can just explain, we were pushed
forward but it didn't release.

Quite.  It is up to the Jury, but they may find it
helpful to be able to compare what was happening here
with the kind of experience that you put up with at
ordinary football matches, and what I want to have
clear is is it at that time, a couple of minutes after
the players came onto the field, that the situation
became abnormal? - A. Yes, I would say it was around
that time.      '

           Cross-Examined by MR. KI N G :

Mr. Brown, I am just trying to see if I have the
picture right.  When you were pushed to within 8 feet
from the front, the impression I got was that
everybody from your point in front of you just could
not move? - A. That is right.

You were 8 feet back? - A. Approximately 8 feet.

At that time you could see people being pushed back
who had been trying to climb over the fence at the
front, is that right? - A. That is right.

So at that time when people were being pushed back who
were trying to climb over the front fence, at least
about 8 feet worth of people to the front were so
squashed together they just could not move? - A. That
                                               A. M. BROWN


is right.  I couldn't see the people, but I could just
see how far away the fence was.

At that time the impression you got, sadly, was that
two or three people directly next to you unfortunately
were already dead at that time, that was the
impression you got? - A. Yes, or very near to it.

That time which we are talking about is obviously just
after you had been pushed into this position, because
this is the recollection you are giving? - A. Yes, a
few minutes after I was pushed into that position.

Whenever that was when you were pushed into that
position, it was the big surge which never came back,
whenever that was? - A. That is right.

Your estimate of about kick-off is only an estimate:
it could obviously have been before, it could
obviously have been after? - A. That is right.

You have been shown the plan C277.  You cannot say,
because I do not suppose you were looking at your
watch, that it was not, for example, the strong surge
which was clearly noted on the video at 14.55?  It
could have been that one for all you know? - A. It
could have been.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Brown, I am very much obliged to
you for coming along and telling us and I speak for
everybody, I am very, very sorry that you lost your
brother.  It is sad.  Thank you.

              MICHAEL ROBERTSON Sworn

                  By THE CORONER:

It is Michael Robertson, that is right, is it not? -
A. Yes.

                      is that right? - A. I have moved
since then.

Tell us what it is now. - A . _____________________
Liverpool.  I moved in August 1989.

That is okay.  I think   you are a Post Office worker? -
A. That is right.

You are still with the   Post Office,   are you? - A. Yes.

You came to the match on 15th April     1989, is that
right? - A. Yes.
                                            M. ROBERTSON


 In fact, you came with two friends, was it not, Peter
 Burkett and Jonathan Owens? - A. That is right.

 You came by car, I take it? - A. Yes, John's dad's car
 I think it was.

In fact, just so that we get this right, at the time
you did not know John's surname, you just knew him as
John? - A. That is right, yes.

Because we had a bit of problems with that, but it has.
all been sorted out now, we know what happened and we
do not need to worry about that any further.  - A.
Yes.

Was it John who drove, can you remember? - A. Yes.

Do you know what time you left Liverpool? - A. We left
Birkenhead, Pete's house, at about between 9 and half­
past I think it was.

What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. Between
half-11 and midday, and we had to find somewhere to
park after that.

I think you went to some snooker club, I think? - A.
Hillsborough Snooker Centre it was called.

I take it you had something to eat there, did you, and
a couple of drinks was it? - A. That is right, yes.

We were able to sort that out because Jonathan --- A.
He was just drinking orange there.

That is right, because he was driving, I take it7 - A.
Yes, that is right.

I think you had a couple of pints of lager? - A. Pete
and myself did, yes.

You stayed there for a while and, in fact, what time
did you get to it, about, do you know what time? - A.
The Snooker Centre?

Yes, about 11.45 or thereabouts? - A. It might have
been something like that, yes.   I am not sure whether
I put it in my statement or not.

That is what you said in your statement about that.
You stayed there until about what - 1.30? - A. Towards
that, I think, yes.  We stayed about an hour-and-a-
half or so.
A
                                                                86

                                                     M. ROBERTSON


    Q.   Then you went to the ground? - A. No, we went to
          another pub after that, which was further away from
          the ground again.
B
    Q.   I see.   - A. We had another couple of drinks.

    Q.   So it was another couple of pints of lager, I take it?
          - A. Yes.
    Q.   Then you left that pub and what time did you get to
          the ground? - A. Between 20-to and 10-to 3.

    Q.   When you got to the ground there were the three of
          you, is that right? - A. Yes, that is right, sir.

    Q.   Jonathan, you   and Peter? - A. Yes.

    Q.   What did you do, what happened? What met your eye,
          first of all? What did you see at that time? - A. We
          walked across the bridge down towards the Leppings
          Lane end and we had to wait.   We waited about five
D        minutes or so because Jonathan had a stand ticket and
          he had arranged to swap for a ground with some of his
          friends, but they didn't show.   So I would say about
          10-to 3 we started making our way towards the
          turnstiles.

    Q.   So you got there between 14.40 and 14.50
          approximately? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Waited around for five minutes? - A. Five or ten
         minutes.

    Q.   Then he managed to swap his ticket, I take it? - A. He
         did not, no.  His friends didn't show up.

    Q.   So he was stuck with it? - A. So he went towards the
          turnstiles with his stand ticket.

    Q.   You had terracing tickets, I take it? - A. Pete and
         myself both did, yes.

    Q.   Was there a crowd there which you joined? - A. Yes.

    Q.   What time would you say you joined the crowd? - A.
         About between 10-to and 5-to 3.

    Q.   Did you actually look at your watch, or is this an
          estimate? - A. No, that is just an estimate that.

    Q.   How certain are you about your arrival time? - A. In
          Sheffield, or at the ground?

    Q.   No, at the ground. - A. Fairly certain.   It was
          definitely somewhere between 20-to and 10-to.


H
                                            M. ROBERTSON


So your joining the crowd time depends on a 10-minute
thing which makes you a bit uncertain as to what time
you actually joined the crowd to get in? - A. Yes.

That is right, is it not? - A. Actually we went
towards the turnstiles between about 10-to and 5-to.

What was it like at that point? - A. In terms of the
crowd you mean?

Yes. - A. Full, very densely packed.

Had you been to the ground before? - A. Pete and
myself went to the same fixture the year before, the
semi-final, and also I have been on two or three
occasions to League matches.

So you knew the ground, more or less? - A. Yes.

So you know that there are some outer perimeter gates
that look like park gates? - A. The big blue ones?

Yes. - A. Yes.

With railings, not the solid gate? - A. I know which
ones you mean.

Was it densely packed outside those gates, can you
remember? - A. Not outside of them, no.    I think the
crowd was just sort of spilling outside of those gates
at the   time but at the gates themselves I don't think
it was   actually particularly packed.

Did you manage to get through those gates without any
difficulty? - A. As far as I can remember, yes.

Can you remember whether they were open or shut? They
must have been open to let you through, but can you
recollect whether they opened or what? - A. I don't
remember them moving at all.  They were just open.

Do you   remember any Police horses around there? -   A.
Maybe two, I think, that I can remember.

On the outside or the inside of these gates, as far as
you remember? - A. I think on the inside amongst the
crowd.

Did you notice what, if anything, they were doing? -
A. The Police horses?

Yes.   ? - A. I didn't, no.
                                          M. ROBERTSON


You got through and you got past the horses, I take
it? - A. Yes.

Did you have a job getting past them, or was it
relatively easy as far as you yourself were concerned?
- A. I myself remember sort of avoiding one horse, so
obviously I didn't want to get trod on on my foot, but
you got past them fairly easily.

Having got past them, was there a big crowd still
trying to get into the turnstile area? - A. Yes, there
was.

Did you join it, or did you step to one side? - A. We
joined it, but we found ourselves being gradually sort
of pushed towards the right of the turnstiles as I
presume the crowd came in from behind.

So away from the turnstiles in effect? - A. Yes.

You said to the right of the turnstiles? - A. To the
right of them yes, to the right of the turnstiles
themselves.

Did you know there was a little sort of metal railing?
You can see it on the model if you turn round.
Sergeant Griffiths, just show the railing.  Can you
see that railing? Are you saying that you were being
pushed to the right-hand side of that? - A. No, not to
the right.  We were kept in by that.

You were kept in by that but you were getting --- A.
Towards that.

I understand you now.  How uncomfortable or
comfortable were you in that situation at this time? -
A. Me personally?

Yes. - A. I was fairly comfortable because I have been
to lots of matches myself like that, and so a big
crowd there was no trouble at all to myself.

Did you have the impression that others were a bit
distressed in that crowd? - A. I did not get that
impression myself at the time, no.

Did you see any children or young people being passed
over the heads of people to Officers? - A. I don't
remember any, no.

Did you hear any appeals not to push from anybody? -
A. I think I did, yes.
                                             M. ROBERTSON


Who? - A. Just from people In the fans, telling people
behind to stop pushing.

From within the crowd itself? - A. Yes.

Did you hear any messages over the Tannoy at all? - A.
None at all, no.

Did you hear or see a Land Rover? - A. No.

When you first came and you were up on the bridge when
Jonathan was trying to do his swap, did you see a Land
Rover at all? - A. I don't recall seeing one, no.

You do not remember, and you do not remember any
messages? - A. No.




                         /Q.   How long were you.
                                                M. ROBERTON


How long were you in this crowd would you say? - A.
Outside the turnstiles?

Yes. - A. Between five and ten minutes.

So if you joined it, of course, as you said at 14.55,
say, that you would have already missed the kick-off,
assuming the kick-off had taken place.   Were you aware
of that at the time? - A. I was only aware I had missed
the kick-off when I had gone through the concertina gates
and then I saw the players were playing on the pitch.

That brings me to the concertina gate.   Just describeto
me what happened then - A. Like I said, we were being
pushed towards the right of the turnstiles and then - I
couldn't say the time - but suddenly that gate opened.
It was opened from the inside I think.   We were amongst
the first...   The three of us were amongst the first
dozen or so people through that and then we headed
straight for the central tunnel which leads on to the
Leppings Lane terrace.

Gan you remember whether this gate opened fully or not?
Or was it only partially open? - A. I can't really
recall.   Like I said, we were the first and went
straight through basically.

Were there a lot of people going through at   that time or
not too many when you went through? - A. As   far as I
know, there were a lot, but like I said, we   were right at
the front.   I presume a lot of people came   from behind.

You then entered the concourse area? - A. That is right.

I take it you went to the tunnel? - A. Straight through
the tunnel, yes.

Is your preferred position behind the goal? - A. Yes.

You have mentioned that kick-off had already taken place.
At what point did you realise that had happened? - A.
Like I said before, when we actually got through the
concertina gate and we could see through the tunnel.

Are you quite satisfied in your mind...  You could
clearly see the players on the pitch otherwise you would
not have been able to... - A. That's right.

Are you satisfied they were actually playing as opposed
to just kicking around? - A. That I couldn't really say,
but it looked as though they were by the way they were
running around.

It looked as if the game was in play? - A. Yes.
                                               M. ROBERTON


You were still this side of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

When I say this side of the tunnel, the concourse area? -
A. Yes.

Did you then go down the tunnel? - A. Yes, straight away.

What was the tunnel like? - A. How do you mean?     In
terms of size?

I meant as far as crowds are concerned? - A. The crowd?

Yes. - A. Like I said, we were amongst the first that
went through that gate and so when we were going through
it wasn't particularly crowded at all.

Did anybody attempt to look at your ticket when you went
through that gate? - A. No.

Did you see any stewards or Police Officers as you came
through the gate? - A. I think there might have been one
or two stewards.   I can't remember anybody else.

But they weren't looking at your tickets at that point? -
A. They weren't, no.

So the tunnel was reasonably clear? - A. Fairly clear.
There were a few people going in but it wasn't what you
could call crowded.

You were able to walk quite normally? - A. Yes.

Were you still together, the three of you, or had you...
- A. Yes.

So the three of you went down the tunnel together? - A.
That's right.

Then you got to the bottom of the tunnel I presume.
Which way did you go, right or left? - A. I went to the
right.    Pete and myself had been to the same match the
previous year and we pushed to the right to stop getting
pushed around and also to get a good view.    I started to
move to the right, called over to Peter and Jon, who were
to my left, to follow me, and that was the last time I
saw them.

When you first exited on to the tunnel, intending to go
right, what was it like in that terrace as far as you
could see?   What was the situation like? - A. It was
crowded, as one would expect for such a big match, and at
that time as well, three o'clock.
                                               M. ROBERTON


You were there in 1988.   Did you get in about the same
or were you earlier? - A. It was earlier.   I think it
must have been about twenty to three.

How did the crowd when you entered the tunnel compare in
1989 with the crowd - not when you entered it in 1988,
but when you were there in that pen in 1988? - A. As far
as I can remember it seemed to be about the same.

You lost sight of your two friends quite early on? - A.
As soon as I started moving to the right.

Did you see anything of the match? - A. Nothing at all
that I can remember.

However, you had seen the players on the field before you
had actually... - A. That's right.

Did you see them again when you got into the terracing to
your recollection? - A. No.   I didn't notice them, no,
because as soon as I moved to the right the pushing
started.

You got moved to the right, you lost your friends... - A.
As soon as I moved to the right there was a gradual build
up of pressure from behind and like I said, that is when
I lost sight of Pete and Jon and that pressure gradually
continued.

Was it a pulse pressure?    Do you know what I mean by
that?   Like a surge.  Or was it a steady... -A. It was
really a steady pressure that was building up.

Did it move you forward or were you... - A. Forward.

How far down did you finish up? - A. I finished up just
behind the barrier that had collapsed.   I was just
behind that when the crushing eased off.

Did you see it collapse at all? - A. I didn't, no, but I
did feel a surge after about ten or fifteen minutes of
the crush which I think would have been that barrier
collapsing.

The match was finished, in play or what? - A. I really
didn't notice anything at all on the field.

I am trying to relate - your describe a surge, was that
when the match was still in play, as far as you know, or
can you not possibly say? - A. Like I said, I really had
no awareness at all of anything going on on the pitch.

Just as a matter of interest, how did you get out? - A.
Directly on to the pitch over the railings.
                                                 M. ROBERTON


You climbed over? - A. Not actually over.   I think it
was through one of the gates that had opened.

Was play still in being at that time as far as you
remember? - A. No, this would have been about quarters
past, twenty past three, when all the crushing had eased
off.

So the crushing had eased by then as far as you were
concerned? - A. Yes.

Just to go back to this barrier for the moment.      You
didn't see it go? - A. I didn't see it, no.

You didn't hear any sound? - A. No, there was just a
sudden further surge, and then the crushing eased.

You made some deductions but you don't actually know what
happened? - A. About the barrier, do you mean?

You don't know whether that was the point when the
barrier broke? - A. No, not for certain.

Can you show us on a plan where you were? - A.    Yes.
(The witness marked the plan)

     MRS. PERKINS:   That is C.414.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, while this gentleman is
marking the plan, you may remember the Owens had a query
about joining the crowd.   I think I have dealt with that
but if you want to dot any more "Is" or cross any more
"Ts"...   I think basically there is nothing wrong with
the transcripts.

     MR. KING:   Sir, it may be an obvious point and I
don't know whether you want to investigate it.   I am
puzzled, and I say it openly, by the evidence I have
heard as to timings because we know as a fact - it is not
in dispute - when Gate C was opened, which we know as at
14.48, the main one at 14.52 and then after the bulk of
people had gone through at 14.59.   Sir, I don't know
whether you want to investigate any further the evidence.
It is a great puzzle to me.

     THE CORONER:   It is a puzzle to me because the only
explanation is that it was...   If he right about the
match - if - then he must have gone in at 14.59.

     MR. KING:   Which would be a time when the great
mass of people had already gone through and we know on
the evidence, sir, that the problem outside the gates had
disappeared.
                                              M. ROBERTON


     THE CORONER:   I will just ask you this one further
question.   When you went through that gate, the
concertina gate, how wide open was it?   I have asked you
this already but try again. - A. I really can't remember.
It wasn't a narrow entrance, but then again I can't
remember whether it was fully open or not.

You are quite certain in your mind that you could see the
players on the pitch from the concourse end? - A. Yes.

Your judgment is they were actually     playing? You are
sure about that? -   A. Like I say, I   can't be entirely
sure but it looked   as if they were,   yes.

     THE CORONER:   I don't think I     can explore that any
further.  Perhaps we ought to explain to you what the
point is. We know what time these gates open, more or
less, and it is difficult to reconcile your description
outside the turnstiles with what was happening on the
pitch.   That is all we are trying to puzzle out.

            Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Mr. Robertson, when players come out before the kick-off,
what do they tend to do when they are on the pitch? - A.
Kick the balls round amongst themselves.

Pretty slowly? - A. Fairly slowly, but there again they
do sprint up and down.

As individuals, but you can see they are actually
exercising?   They are stretching calf muscles, thigh
muscles or whatever? - A. If one is actually standing on
the terrace watching, but I suppose looking through a
tunnel it is rather more difficult to tell.

If in fact the game is actually being played then there
is a cohesion about the way, for example, the Liverpool
team would be running up and down the field together? -
A. That's right.

From what you are saying to the Coroner, you had an
impression of that sort of cohesion, of people running
together? - A. That is what it looked like, looking
through the tunnel.

As opposed to before the kick-off kicking the ball about,
whether hard or not? - A. Yes.

But not without any particular purpose? - A. That's
right, yes.
                                                 M. ROBERTON


                 Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Mr. Robertson, none of my questions are in any way trying
to trap you.   I am just puzzled about timings.   You
also told us that it was ten or fifteen minutes after you
were on the terrace when you felt the surge which you
thought was the barrier going? - A. The sudden surge,
yes, and then the crushing eased off.

So you had been there for ten or fifteen minutes, and on
your evidence... - A. Actually in the crush not being
able to move.

Yes, I understand that.   You got there after kick-off,
on your impression, if you are right? - A. As it seemed
to me.

And then ten or fifteen minutes which would take us to
about quarter past three and throughout that whole period
you were still in such a prush that even the big surge
hadn't arrived yet?   The surge came after fifteen
minutes?

     THE CORONER:   No, he didn't say that.   What he
said was there was a surge which carried him forward more
or less as soon as he entered and then after ten or
fifteen minutes he felt another surge which he deduced
might have been the barrier going and that the then
tipped forward:

That's right? - A. That's right.   When I got in, like I
said there was a constant pressure and then after about
ten or fifteen minutes there was a surge.

     MR. KING:   So be it.   I can't take the  timings any
further.   We will have to try and fit the evidence into
other times.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. King, I have misled you as well
because I said he said there was a surge when he came in.
He didn't.   He specifically said there wasn't, there was
a constant pressure.    You are right that the only surge
he mentioned was this one.

     MR. KING:      Thank you, sir.   I am obliged for that:

So your evidence, Mr. Robertson, is the surge you
remember of significance was ten or fifteen minutes after
you had arrived on the terrace? - A. That's right.

Which from your impression - you thought the game had
already started, so that would take us to about quarter
past three, something like that? - A. I would think so.
                                               M. ROBERTON


I just want to ask two questions for family purposes.
You told us, Mr. Robertson, that you all stood for a
while before going towards the turnstiles for the purpose
you have described in the Leppings Lane area? - A. It was
actually on the bridge.

Yes.   The family have looked at a video, and this isn't
contentious, which shows that at some time between
quarter to and ten to three Jonathon, yourself and Peter
were clearly standing in Leppings Lane, not having got
anywhere near the turnstiles or the crowd there.   That
would fit in probably with what you have told us. - A. Is
Leppings Lane actually before you come to the bridge?

Mr. Griffiths will show us on the model.   It extends
over the bridge, I think. - A. That timing will probably
be right then, yes.

Did you actually join the crowd?   Did you actually join
it in terms of getting involved at the back of the crowd?
- A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Can   you ask him what    time he    sayshe
joined the crowd so we nail that as near      as we can.

     MR. KING:   I don't know whether you can be more
precise, but can you be precise as to when it was... - A.
Like I said, it was around ten to three.

When you were in your first position on the terrace. - A.
Yes.

Which we can call position 1.   Were you distressed
yourself at that time? - A. Not when I first got in, no.
It seemed to me just a normal big match crowd.

Then you became in distress? - A. Gradually, yes.

In that position? - A. No, gradually being pushed down
towards the front.

Was anyone else around you to your eye sight in distress
when you were in the first position? - A. Not in the
first position, no, but   like I say, gradually   as   we got
pushed down towards the front.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Robertson, do you know how long you were at the
turnstile area before you saw Gate C opening? - A. To the
best of my recollection, about five to ten minutes.
                                                 M. ROBERTON


Did you notice that gate opening just for a few seconds
at any time before you went in? - A. Not before we went
in, no.

                Further by THE CORONER:

Just two more things.   First of all the jury has asked
me to ask you a question which of course I will do and
then I want to ask you one more which had occurred to me.
When you were on the bridge, when Jonathon was waiting
for his friends, did you see any group of fans on the
bridge who appeared not to have any tickets? - A. No.

You didn't see any? - A. Not personally.

The other question I want to ask you is I think you said
Jonathon's friends never turned up? - A. That's right.

Does it mean when he entered... - A. He still had a stand
ticket.

But he did go down on to the terrace? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:      Anybody want to ask any more
questions?

     Mr. King, I know this point about the joining of the
crowds has been a tremendous anxiety to this family.   I
think we have resolved it.   I don't intend to take it
any further or to make any further adjustments to the
text because we have got the position now as near and as
clear as we are ever going to get it.




           MR. KING:      I think as you also know
                                                  R. C. BALL


     MR. KING:   And I think as you also know, sir,
what they were also concerned about was the earlier
part of the summary which has now been clarified, that
it was a snooker hall where Jonathan'had been earlier
on in the day before he went towards the ground.

     THE CORONER:      I was never worried about that.

     MR. KING:   I know but you can understand, sir.
why the families were.

     THE CORONER:    Yes.  I don't know whether the
Owens are here?   Yes, they are.  Do you want to check
whether they want me to ask any other question of Mr.
Robertson.

     MR. KING:      No, thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   As far as we can we want to get it
so that people are content.

Mr. Robertson, I am most grateful to you.  Thank you
very much for your help.  Thank you very much indeed.

         ROGER CHARLES BALL Called ('Sworn’)

                      By THE CORONER

It is Roger Charles Ball, is n’t it? - A. That is
correct.

And the address is
                     Hertfordshire,    is that right? -


Hr. Ball, I assume your wife is here as well? Yes.
Can I say before we begin that I am very conscious you
lost your lad, and he was only 16 I think at the time,
wasn t he? - A. That is correct.

On behalf of myself and everybody else I want you to
know that we are conscious of that and very, very sorrv
indeed. - A. Thank you.

As I said to one or two other families, or fathers, if
you like, in your situation, if we are going to take
evidence we are going to do it in the conventional way,
because it is better for you and it is easier for me.
It may even be easier for you for all I know.  Just one
°.    Polnt» you are a bank manager, I believe, is that
right? - A. That is also correct.

You came with your son, Kester, to the match on 15th
April, 1989, and I think there were a couple of other
                                              R. C. BALL


lads with you, is that right? - A. Yes, we had two of
Kester's friends with us.

You drove, I presume? - A. I drove.   That was the
normal procedure.

Do you know what time you left home? - A. It was
shortly after or roundabout 11 o'clock in the morning.

What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. Whereabouts
in Sheffield?  If I can just explain, we reached
Junction 34 of the Ml at about 1.30, having stopped en
route at a service station, Trowell Services, and it
then took us a further three-quarters of an hour,
roughly, to get to a suitable parking place.  There was
just a solid line of traffic from the exit of the
motorway, and we just crawled all the way towards the
city centre.  There were Police at intersections but
they had no control over the flow of the traffic.

It was solid, in fact? - A. Yes.

It moved, but slowly? - A. It was moving very slowly.

So in fact it took you, what, until quarter-past-2
before you got to a place where you could park on that
basis? - A. At one point I looked at the dashboard
clock and it said 1.56 and we had been trapped in a
line of traffic for five minutes, so I pulled out of
that and by various side roads, following a map of
Sheffield, I got to a point about a mile and a half
from the ground and I thought there was little point in
going further on so we parked there, probably at about
10-past-2, and then walked as fast as we could towards
the ground.

You arrived at the ground at about what time? - A. At
about 2.30.

When you got to the ground at 2.30 what was it like
there? - A. When I crossed the bridge at Leppings Lane
iny heart sank, it was such chaos, worse than I have
ever seen.   I have been going to football matches for
30 years and it seemed there were people milling around
in the road, supporters milling around in the road, and
there was just a melee of people crushing towards the
turnstiles, the B turnstiles.   We had tickets for that
entrance.   There were some Police standing around and
there were some Police horses inside the blue perimeter
gates.

Were they open, the gates, when you got there? - A.
They were.
                                              R. C. BALL


The horses were on the inside or on the outside, do you
remember? - A. They were on the inside, the ones I saw.
There were about three horses, I would say, mounted
Police, and they were in the middle of this crowd of
people trying to gain access to the turnstiles.  There
were no queues, no organisation at all.

Did you see what the horsemen were attempting to do, or
perhaps they were not attempting to do anything? - A.
They were shouting at the crowd.  They seemed quite
angry and there was a fair bit of anger around
actually, on both sides, because it was such a
ridiculous situation.  The people at the front were
more or less pressed up against the turnstiles and the
walls in between, and were kind of slipping into the
gateways as and when they could, and the whole kind of
crowd I would say was about 25 yards long at that
point.

You say the Officers were shouting and no doubt the
crowd were shouting as well, I think, from what you
said.  That is right, is it? - A. There was a fair bit
of argument on both sides.  The supporters were
complaining at the lack of organisation.

What were the Officers saying to the supporters? - A.
They were just saying, "Get back, get back.  Stop
pushing".

Did anybody appear to take any notice of that? -   A.
Some people were reluctant to join the queue for   the
turnstiles and were standing around.  As I said,   there
were quite a few in the road, there were quite a   few
near the fencing and on the bridge.

Did you notice whether there were others who were
pushing or not? - A. It seemed to me there was an
anxiety to get into the ground.   There was nobody
actually pushing, it was just the turnstiles seemed a
long, long way away from the back of that crowd, and we
in fact joined it for a few minutes but I was anxious
about the safety of the boys.   I saw a supporter nearly
knocked over by a horse and if you had gone down then
you would have been injured, or perhaps worse.

By the horse or by the crowd, or by both, if he had
gone down? - A. If he had gone down, by both.

I am a little bit puzzled by you saying there was no
pushing, it was a deep crowd, there was some aggro, the
Officers were shouting, "Push back", which is what you
told me.  What on earth were they saying that for if
nobody was doing anything? - A. Sorry, nobody was doing
anything?
                                                R. C. BALL


You were saying, you just told me, that there was not
any pushing.  I asked you that specifically and you
said no, there was not any pushing.      You also told me
that the mounted Officers, in whatever tone of voice,
were saying, "Don’t push".   Why were they saying that
if nobody was doing it? - A. Sorry, there was no
pushing from the back.  It w a s n ’t like people joining
at the back and pushing, it was the sheer numbers
trying to gain entrance to the ground.

So what you are saying is that you did not see anybody
deliberately push into the crowd but the sheer volume
of people was creating a pressure effect? - A. That is
correct.  As we joined it people came up behind us and
you felt as if you were being pushed from the back.
There was nobody actually in the middle of the crowd
pushing, that is what I was meaning.

You yourself, with the boys, got anxious, they didn't
like it in this situation, and you stepped to one side?
- A. I told the boys to come out of it and we went and
stood by the fence beside the river.

Were you already within the perimeter gates at that
point or were you still outside - presumably you must
have been within the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.   The
crowd at that stage had not reached the perimeter
gates.

So were you still outside the perimeter gates when you
stood to one side? - A. No, we were inside.

You were inside, and   you were able to step to one side,
in other words? - A.   Well, you had to kind of elbow
your way out.

But you could do it? - A. Oh, yes.

In that area things were better, would that be right,
or not? - A. As soon as we got out and stood where we
were, by the river, I could see that there was a blue
barrier which has already been referred to, which was
kind of containing the crowd in that area in front of
the turnstiles.

Are you talking about the bar, we call that the funnel
bar? - A. Yes, that is the one.

Of course, you were on this side of it, weren't you, on
the river side? - A. Yes, more or less opposite Gate C
but a little bit towards the perimeter gates.

The horses which you have described were higher up,
they were nearer the outer perimeter gates, is that
                                              R. C. BALL


right? - A. They were towards the back of the crowd,
nearer to the perimeter gates.

So you had stepped outside of this crowd and you were
now standing by the concertina gate.  I don't suppose
for a minute you expected it to open or did you? - A.
No, I was astonished when it opened.

Before we deal with that, you could now look at the
crowd within this funnel bar.  Did the people appear to
you to be distressed? - A. One or two I think were in
discomfort, a minority I would say.

What about the ones against the turnstiles?    Could you
see them? You have already passed them in a way, so
you may not have been able to see them. - A. I could
still see the turnstiles, I think, at that point,
because I was not exactly opposite Gate C.    Gate C was
in front of me but to my right.   I could see the
turnstile area but then I was diverted by what happened
with the perimeter gates, which were closed at about
20-to-3.

Why did that divert you?   In what sense did that divert
you? - A. Well, I decided, I was convinced   at that time
that we would not get in before the kick-off, so I
could not see much point in rejoining the mass of
people trying to get through the turnstiles.    Anyway,
the numbers did not seem to reduce.   The flow through
the turnstiles was incredibly slow because, I think, of
the problems up at the front.   People just could not
get into the gateways.   Then I noticed to iny left the
large blue perimeter gates had been closed by some
Policemen, and very quickly another crowd built up
behind those gates, and some people at the front were
distressed.

Against the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

So you now, in fact, had two crowds, so to speak, one
within the perimeter gate and the turnstile area and
one outside the perimeter gate and you could not see
the back of it, I presume? - A. That is right.  There
seemed to be - because the flow of fans to the first
crowd had^been been stemmed it was building up further
back outside the perimeter gates.

You were not in that crowd, of course, but you felt
that the people against that perimeter gate were
distressed? - A. That is right.  There were a few at
the front.  I remember there was a young girl who I was
quite concerned about.
                                                   R. C. BALL


Q. Did you see any further action or event with regard to
   those perimeter gates? - A. Yes.  They were being held
   shut, I think by some Police Officers, and they could
   not stem it. They were forced slightly open, some
   people got through or more or less fell through.   They
   were shut again but eventually they were reopened.   I
   think they were closed for no more than about five
   minutes, as far as I can recall.

Q. Did you see by any chance around that time a cordon
   formed by Police horses?   If you did not please say, "I
   never saw it". -    A. No, I didn't.

Q. Did you hear any tannoy messages addressed to the
   crowd? - A. Not that I recall.

Q. Did you see a Land Rover? - A. No, I did not.

Q. And I take it you never heard any messages from any
   loudspeakers, as opposed to a tannoy? - A. I don't
   recall any.

Q. You mentioned that the mounted Officers in the crowd
   were communicating.  Did you see any other Officers,
   particularly when you were near this funnel bar,
   attempting to communicate with the crowd? - A. Not that
   I recall, because first of all I was     looking atthe
   perimeter gates.    I was talking to the boys as well,
   talking about the situation, and then Gate C was opened
   very briefly.

Q* Tell me, you actually saw it open for a very short
   time, that is right, isn’t it, in the first instance? -
   A. I do recall seeing it open, just wide enough to let
   somebody out, and I remember some fans, just a handful
   of fans went and asked, I presumed they were asking if
   they could go in through there because they were
   pointing at the situation by the turnstiles, but I did
   not see anybody actually go in at that point.

Q. You didn't.  Did you see it open again? - A. Yes, a
   couple of minutes later.  I estimated about 10-to-3.
We know now that it was 8-minutes-to-3 but in my original
statement I said 10-to-3.

Q. Of course, at that time we did not have the benefit of
   the videos.  Did it open widely this time? - A. It was
   opened wider than the first time, but as I recall it
   was not fully opened and the first few people who went
   through, there was some attempt to make sure they went
   through in an orderly fashion, which they did.

Q. Can you recollect whether you saw it shut again on this
   second occasion? - A. No, because we went through it.
                                                              104

                                                       R. C. BALL


    Q. I see, so you don't know what happened behind you? - A.
        No.  I felt that in the circumstances that was the
        safest means of gaining entry to the ground.  I had
       never been to Hillsborough before.   I had been to most
„      large grounds in this country but never Hillsborough,
O      and I did not know what the situation was inside, so I
        thought it was better to get inside and then find out
       what was going on.

    Q. In view of the situation? - A. That is right.

    Q. In fact, you managed to get in quite safely? - A. We
       walked through.   As soon as I saw it open I said to the
        boys, "Okay, let's go in".

    Q. By the way, I did not ask you this but did you have
        tickets for the match? - A. We did.  We all had tickets
       although two of us only obtained tickets on the day.

    Q. On the way up, I think at the services? - A. At the
       service station, yes.

D   Q* Once you got inside there was a relatively large
u      concourse area, is that right? - A. Yes, that is
       correct.

    Q. I take it the crowd in there was more dispersed, would
        that be right? - A. It seemed almost empty.  It was
       most unusual at that time before a big game.

    Q. What time would you say that was again?  In your
       statement I think you said 10-to, but you now think it
       might be about 8-minutes-to-3.  You think you went
       through on the second opening is what you are saying,
       isn t it? - A. I believe we were among the first to go
       through the second time the gate was opened.  Nobody
       checked our tickets.




                     /Q. Can I just




H
A
                                                                 105

                                                          R. C. BALL


     Q. Can I just go back to the first opening that you
        described? Are you confident that nobody went
        through that first time? - A. Somebody came out, that
JJ      is what I saw. I didn't actually see anybody go in
        but I wasn't looking at it all the time it was open.

     Q. Because there were more openings, in fact, than the
        three we concentrate on and that is why I ask you.
        Whatever it was you were one of the first to go
        through the opening where people did go in? - A. We
        were actually ushered in. We were ushered in by the
        Police on the gate.

     Q. Having got in you say that it was fairly empty and I
        think the boys went to the toilet, is that right? -
        A. Two of the boys went to the toilet which is just
        to the left of the tunnel entrance.

     Q. You stayed outside I suppose? - A. I waited outside
        with the other boy.

D    Q. How long were they in there, would you say? - A. It
        seemed a long time, possibly two or three minutes. I
        was getting anxious to get in and on to the terraces.

     Q. Can you remember whether the gate stayed open all
        that time or not? Again if you did not see it, do
        not guess? - A. Yes, the gate was open because there
        was a steady stream of supporters from the gate
        walking orderly, in an orderly fashion, towards the
        tunnel all the time that I was waiting outside the
        toilet.

     Q. Did   you see anybody fall over? - A. No.

     Q. Did   you see anybody knocked over? - A. No.

     Q. You did not see anybody lose their shoes    either, or
        didyou? - A. No.

     Q. In this area I am talking about? - A. No, my
        recollection is of an orderly procession.

     Q. Was it a procession from which somebody could have
        stepped to one side? Was there enough room on the
        concourse area to allow people, if they did not want
        to go, to just get out of the way and go and buy a
        programme or go to the loo or wait for a friend or do
        whatever they wished? - A. There was a lot of room.
        You couldn't buy a programme. I didn't see a
        programme seller.

     Q. You did not see one? - A. I looked for one
        specifically because we always get a programme but



H
there were some people standing around. I think they
had been separated from friends and were waiting for
them to come through or whatever.

What I am trying to find out is that the group of
people going towards the tunnel were in such a mass,
if I can use that word, that once you were in it you
had to go with them or whether you had voluntary
movement in that group? - A. No, they weren't in a
mass at that time. As I say, it was an orderly group
of people walking in a line, you know, two, three,
four abreast, towards the tunnel.

Did you see a wall anywhere which divided the
concourse area near where you were standing by the
toilets either behind you or facing you? - A. Facing
back wards Gate C was a wall on the right.

Sergeant Griffiths, can you just point to that
dividing wall on the model? Do you remember seeing
that wall at all? - A. That is the wall I am
referring to.

Were you facing that wall or were you with your back
to it? - A. No, the toilets are to the left of the
tunnel. I was standing just outside the entrance to
the toilet facing back towards Gate C, with that wall
on my right.

Do you remember seeing that little opening in the
wall by any chance? - A. No, I wasn't aware that
there was any other access to the terrace.

No, that was not the question. I am just asking you
whether you happen to remember seeing that opening
there before? - A. I don't remember seeing that
opening.

You did not see any programme seller around that
area? - A. I did not, no.

The boys came out of the loo, yes? - A. Yes.

You had been there for two or three minutes and you
had now decided to go down the tunnel with them? - A.
Yes.

The four of you, in fact, were going down? - A. That
is correct.

What was it like going down the tunnel? - A. It
wasn't crowded. There was still a steady stream of
people walking in an orderly fashion but it did seem
                                                                 107

                                                        R. C. BALL

         to quicken up towards the end of the tunnel,   People
         gained speed towards the end of the tunnel.

B   Q*       y°u by chance look down the tunnel before you set
         off on to the pitch? - A. I think I did, yes. I was
         aware halfway down the tunnel of where we were. I
         could see the goal.

    Q. Could see the players, that is what I am after? - A.
       I am fairly sure there were players on the pitch.

    Q. I assume from that reply that you do not know what
       they were doing, whether they were playing the match,
       warming up or what? - A. They were kicking into the
       goal. They were not playing the match.
    Q. They were not playing the match? - A. No.

    Q. Did you assume that they had come out in readiness
       for the game? - A. That is right.

D   Q.    When you came to     the end ofthe tunnel, did youturn
         right or left? - A. In most grounds where there is
         that kind of situation where you go straight on to
         the terraces behind a goal there is a gangway at the
         back that you can walk along, either to the right or
         to the left, and it was my intention to walk along
         that gangway to the right, towards the corner flag,
         because we don't normally stand right behind the
         goal. We stand a little bit to the right. So as we
         came out of the tunnel, I looked around. I yelled to
         the boys, because there was a lot of noise, "Go
         right". At that point, in fact, one of them did
         stumble and Kester grabbed his collar and probably
         saved his life.

    Q. Did they follow your instructions and move to the
       right? - A. As far as we could but the flow of people
       from behind us coming out of the tunnel pushed us
       down more towards the right. It was impossible to
       make a sharp right turn.

    Q. In fact, what you are saying is that even though you
       had not been at the ground you assumed that there
       would be a passageway at the back? - A. That is the
       normal layout in a ground like that.

    Q.    You were   right, in fact, but what you are saying is
         that you could not make it? - A. I never saw it on
         the day.

    Q.    When you   first exited, when you first got onto that
         terrace, I realise you were trying to get to the
         corner, what was your impression of the terracing at



H
that stage? - A. It was very full. I didn't want to
be in there with those boys especially. It was, I
would say, at or above capacity from my experience.
I did not know at that time that it was an enclosed
pen. I thought there would be free movement to the
right and the left because where there are pens you
are normally directed into them in sequence.

If it is completely empty why do you need a
passageway at the back? If it is completely
undivided, why did you anticipate there would be a
passageway at the back? - A. What I mean is that
instead of terracing going right up to the back wall
there is like a path along the back, a flat area.

What you are saying is that if there are no dividing
fences, of course, you do not need that, do you,
because you can move along at any point? - A. In some
grounds the terracing does go right up to the wall at
the back. It was not until we got swept to the right
and I saw the radial fence that I realised we were in
a pen.

At what point did you feel that the match had kicked
off? - A. It hadn't kicked off at that time.

When did it kick off? Where were you when it kicked
off? - A. We then got swept down to the left again
and further down towards the front. I mean, there
was nothing you could do about it. You are trying to
keep your feet and Craig was in front. Kester was
next, I was next and then the other friend, Andrew,
was behind me. Eventually Kester and I ended up
about two or three feet from the fence at the front
and at that point I didn't know where the other two
boys were. I was facing the wrong way. I was facing
back and somebody told me to turn round and, in fact,
helped me to turn round and almost immediately the
pressure became intense so that you were stationary.
That really worried me because, all right, in that
kind of situation if a crowd is moving around it
should sort itself out but we just could not move.
It was about that time I think that the game kicked
off.

When, in fact, it solidified basically? - A. Yes.   I
had a lot of things on my mind at that time, as I
recall.

Obviously you were worried about Kester which is
quite understandable and, in fact, you looked across
to him at that point, did you not? - A. Yes, for a
period of about three or four minutes, I mean, we
were fighting for our lives. At one point I did look
across to him. He was about a yard to my left at the
same level. He seemed to be a little bit taller than
the people around him and he looked a bit pale but I
thought he was going to be okay and that I was going
to die.

I think it was shortly after this that you lost
consciousness, did you not, yourself? - A. I nearly
lost consciousness once and I might have lost it for
a couple of seconds. Then I forced myself back into
consciousness. There were quite a few things
happened in those two or three minutes where I just
couldn't breathe. I wanted to say to Kester, "Stand
on tiptoe", which is what I was trying to do, but I
couldn't. I couldn't breathe let alone talk. I had
my left hand actually touching the perimeter fence
trying to give myself some breathing room but it was
useless.

That is because there were people between you and the
perimeter fence, is that right? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

When you were there in that position you have told us
obviously that you could not even speak, did you hear
any cries and shouts around you? - A. Yes, it was
most eerie because I knew the match had started
because of the noise of the crowd. You could tell
from the roars of the crowd but in our area, our
immediate area, it was silent except for people
groaning and people shouting for help and for
somebody to do something.

Were you anywhere near the gate? Could you see it? -
A. I could see the gate. This is one of the things
that went through my mind. It must have been no more
than about ten feet to my right and it was closed the
first time I saw it and I thought, "Even if they open
it, it is going to take half an hour to get everybody
out through it" and so I discounted it, although I
did see it open later on. There were photographers
taking pictures of us from the other side of the
netting.

At this particular point in time? - A. That is
correct.

Are you saying the photographers were taking pictures
when the gate was still shut or are you unable to
say? I know from your statement that you had
difficulty in sorting some of the events out in time
sequence and I quite understand that? - A. I believe
from what I have seen of some of the evidence so far
that I must have eventually lost consciousness at
                                                               110
                                                      R. C. BALL


       about five past three because I don't remember the
       game being stopped. I knew Liverpool had nearly
       scored.
B
    Q. You knew that at the time? - A. I knew that Liverpool
       had nearly scored before I passed out.

    Q. Did you see people climbing over the fence? Can you
       recollect that? - A. Yes, I did. Somebody climbed
       over me. They were crawling across you on top of
       your head and I lost my spectacles. My wrist watch
       was ripped off and somebody bit a chunk out of my
       shoulder because they must have been in agony or
       something.

    Q. Did you see any Police Officers? - A. I do recall
       seeing a Police Officer walking from my left to my
       right towards the South Stand in a very slow manner,
       almost caricature of a Policeman is how I remember it
       with his arms behind his back. People were shouting
       at him to open to gate or to do something and he was
D      just ignoring those cries.

    Q. He did not appear to react sofar asyou   couldsee? -
       A. He did not appear to hear.

    Q. Did you see any Officer using a radio? - A. No, I
       didn't. One thing I did see before I passed out, I
       saw Andrew on the other side of the fence and so I
       knew he must have got out through the gate. I
       thought Kester was going to be okay but I did not
       know where Craig was and I was most concerned about
       Craig.

    Q. He was okay, Craig, was he not? - A. He got out, yes,
       because what happened, I mean, listening to the
       evidence today I do not know if people understand but
       in that kind of situation there will be periods of
       pressure on particular parts of the crowd which will
       then ease off and even gaps might appear. A gap
       appeared and Craig was to the left of both me and
       Kester. A gap appeared and he was able to duck under
       a barrier and went back out through the tunnel.

    Q. He went out through the tunnel? - A. This was very
       shortly after the match had kicked off.

    Q. In fact, you came to when you were already out on the
       pitch. Somebody was resuscitating you I think and
       slapping your face and waking you up, that is right,
       is it not? - A. I was carried out the back.

    Q. I am sorry, I beg your pardon. - A. I eventually woke
       up back outside Gate C.



H
                                                  R. C. BALL



Q. Can you show us on the plan where you were? - A. Yes.

     MR. JONES:     This will be C.415, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Are there any questions?

              Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Mr. Ball, did you see the Police Officer at the rear
   of the terrace indicating there was an access point
   there when you went down the tunnel on to the
   terrace? Did you see a Police Officer at all? - A. I
   never saw any Police Officers on the terracing.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Ball, thank you very much indeed.
I am exceedingly sorry. I have obviously distressed you
and I am sorry about that but I do not know how I could
have avoided it if I was going to ask you any questions.




                                /MR. MANNING
     MR. MANNING:  Can I just tell this gentleman how
much you have spoken for all of us down here as well,
as to the great regret that we have that he has lost
his son and he has come bravely to give his evidence
here today.

     THE CORONER: Thank you very much indeed.   Mr.
Ball, thank you very much.

     Ladies and gentlemen, that will be all for today.
I will just tell the lawyers who we are having
tomorrow and then we are all going as well, I think.
Have a nice evening.  See you in the morning at 10
o'clock tomorrow.

           (In the absence of the Jury)

     THE CORONER: Tomorrow we are planning, all being
well, S. M. D. Gray, C. Griffiths, C. Jones, A. Owen,
J. Kenworthy and B. Devonside, that is Mr. Devonside
of course sitting there, plus any fillers depending on
how we do, but I am not making any promises at all.
There is nothing urgent that you need to raise with
me? .... Good.  Tomorrow morning, then, at 10 o'clock.

     (The Inquests were adjourned until 10 o'clock
                the following morningl
