  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER                                                  CITY COURTS
                                                                         THE TYRLS
For the County of West Yorkshire                                         BRADFORD BD1 1LA
        (Western District)                                               Tel: 0274-391362




Dr. S. L. Popper,                                                        My ref: JAT/AP
H. M. Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,                                                    Your ref: SLP/JT
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 7ET                                                                         8 July 1991




Dear Stefan,

Many thanks for your letter of 27th June with its enclosures, which are most useful.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely,




J. A. Turnbull
H. M. CORONER
 r




                                                            9th July          91




     SLP/JT/HO/INQUESTS.
     CRN90 I 70/3/1.




     Mr. P.R.C. Storr,
     E Division,
     Home Office,
     Queen Anne’s Gate,
     London. SW1H 9AT.


     Dear Mr. Storr,

     Thank you for your letter of the 21st of June.

         I note the Groups terms of reference and that you already have a copy of my
         letter of the beginning of May which you will be considering.

         There was a considerable overlap in Lord Justice Taylor’s terms of reference
         and those of the duties laid upon coroners.

         Despite the apparent narrowness of a coroner’s jurisdiction his inquiry is
         likely to be extensive particularly in a major disaster because inter-alia:-

                    The flexibility of the word ’h o w ’.

                    The rights of interested parties and parties whose conduct may be
            (ii)
                    called into question.

           (iii)    The possibility of appeal because of inadequacy of inquiry or
                    rejection of evidence.

            (iv)    The requirement for reaching the criminal standard of proof
                    if certain verdicts e.g., Unlawfully Killed are to be considered
                    by the coroner or the jury.

                    The expectation and pressure from the public usually personified
                    by friends and relatives of the deceased (and possibly amplifie
                    by media interest).


         It is my view that unless there were some fundamental alteration in coronal
         function, these factors will apply whether or not there has been a public
         inquiry.

         A coroner and his jury are at present positively discouraged from ^ “ 8
         recommendations to prevent a re-occurance (except as provi e   or ^     . ,
         43). By way of contrast precisely the opposite appears to apply to judicial




BAJABL
inquiries which may be set up following a major disaster.

Whilst there was a very substantial core overlap between the inquiry and my
inquest, I nevertheless dealt with aspects which were not really explored by
the inquiry e.g., specific pathological evidence relating to each deceased.
Lord Justice Taylor similarly dealt with numerous matters which 1 did not
touch on and in particular made very many recommendations with a view to
improving the safety of the public and sporting events.

Interestingly and despite this, there were certain aspects which neither I
nor Lord Justice Taylor dealt with to the extent that some of the bereaved
wished us to e.g., the arrangements within the temporary mortuary.

From a practical point of view, and given that there are already well
established procedures for sorting out the question of civil liability and
criminal culpability (see my comments in Schedule C of my communication of
the 1st of May 1991) it is my view that neither the inquest nor the public
inquiry should be concerned with either of these issues.

If this   is agreed, then it would be necessary to ensure that the public were
clearly   to understand what the purposes and limitations of an inquest/publie
inquiry   are.  There is no doubt in my mind that people’s expectation at the
present   time are that issues of liability and blame are or should be dealt
with.

This expectation is as far as inquests are concerned encouraged both by the
rights of interested parties to ask questions and also because of the need to
record conclusions (colloquially known as the verdict).  If this requirement
were to be abolished, then the coroner’s inquisition could more properly be
directed at establishing the facts and making appropriate recommendations
irrespective of the question of responsibility or culpability by one or more
persons.  The possibility of having an inquisition without a conclusion is
not entirely far fetched and I draw your attention for instance to R - v
St. Pancras coroner’s court ex parte Robert Richard Higgins, Queens Bench
Division, May 23rd 1988 in which the conclusion was expunged.  See also R - v
- coroner for Inner West London ex parte de Luca Queens Bench Division, 30th
of March 1988.

Any statistical problems which such an approach might give rise to could I
think be overcome without particular difficulty.

Whether or not the requirement for a conclusion (’verdict’) is retained or
abolished either,

          (1)   the inquest should be enlarged so as to encompass and
                incorporate those aspects of a public inquiry which are at
                present outside its remit and in particular the coroner and or
                his jury should be allowed to make appropriate recommendations.
                It may also be possibly considered right that in specific cases
                the coroner’s remit should be widened so as to enable him to
                deal with a range of topics which are related to the incident
                but not directly connected with a death of any particular
                person or

          (2)    The public inquiry should take over the coronal functions. It
                would have to adopt those matters which may already have been
                dealt with by the coroner e.g., release of a body for
                burial/cremation which may well take place before the proper
                   establishment of a public inquiry or

             (3)   where a public inquiry is ordered the inquest should be
                   truncated and should be dealt with in a manner analogous to
                   Section 16, Coroners Act 1988 procedure.

Which option to adopt is of course a political decision.  I recognise that
public clamour, and a natural desire to be seen to be doing "something"
produces considerable pressure to appoint a public inquiry whenever a major
disaster occurs.

It is also undeniably true that a senior judge:-

     a   .    Carries a great deal of prestige.

     b.       Has considerable authority.

     c   .    Has great skill and ability particularly in the evaluating
              of evidence.

     d.       Has the independence and ability to speak his mind and
              therefore to make recommendations which may not be
              palatable.

   the other hand, judges are used to:-


    (i)       An adversarial system.

   (ii)       The consideration of narrow points honed by the pleadings
              and presented to them by advocates.

  (iii)       The application of judicial skills to the arguments propounded
              by the respective parties and the application of the law to these.

It is probably true that the more senior the judge the more concerned he will
be with points of law and the less with issues of fact.

By way of contrast, whilst the coroner does not have the prestige of a high
court judge (though he too has to have reached a certain level of attainment
and experience in his profession) he is a judicial officer and his daily
work involves him in inquisitorial investigations of unnatural and violent
death, including the collection and consideration of evidence as to how a
particular person came by his death as well as the application of law to
the facts.

It must also be remembered that whilst a major incident involving multiple
deaths generates a great deal of national interest, to an individual who has
lost a loved one, the singleton incident is as much a major disaster even if
not of such national interest.

It can therefore be argued that a coroner is better suited to undertake an
investigation where multiple deaths have occurred particularly if his
jurisdiction is widened so as to include the right to make recommendations
for future safety.

It may be said that part-time coroners may find such responsibility an undue
strain and that they lack the experience and skill to perform the tasks
though if Mr.  Sturt, a part-time coroner is an example, he certainly
demonstrated his ability to hold a major inquest (Zebrugge).

Nevertheless it might be worthwhile considering whether out of the corpus of
coroners a certain number should be identified as having the appropriate
skills and experience for undertaking inquests into major disasters.
Whilst this might involve extra territorial jurisdiction,  I feel reasona y
confident that any problems relative to this could easily be overcome.

Even if it were decided not to enlarge the coroners jurisdiction, but to
utilise public inquiries in major disasters, I think some thought should be
given to the terms of reference, and in particular whether or not a public
inquiry should criticise and comment on the conduct of individuals prior to
the exhaustion of civil or criminal proceedings.  Public inquiries frequently
are not trammeled by conventional rules of evidence and consequently
subsequent criminal proceedings may be prejudiced by them.

For various reasons I did not incorporate the public inquiry findings or
evidence per se into the inquests.  The reverse may however not apply
and it may be possible that a public inquiry would be able to utilise the
findings of fact established at an inquest and thus avoid duplication.   T is
would of course require close corporation and the necessity for the inquest
not to be postponed to the public inquiry.

Dealing now with some of your specific points:-

    1.    There was a very considerable overlap between the inquiry and the
          inquest. As I was sitting with a jury I felt that the witnesses
          should be heard de novo.

          I have already indicated that I do not consider this duplication
          satisfactory.

     2.   I think the holding of a public inquiry probably deferred the
          holding of the inquest.  It was impractical to try and run them
          together and on the one occasion when I met Lord Justice Taylor
          I readily agreed to let him go first.  I did consider whether there
          was some way of utilising the report but in the end, as already
          indicated, decided in effect to re-hear the evidence.

          I heard many witnesses who had not given evidence at the public
          inquiry but of those who did the fact that there were transcripts
          of the evidence meant that their replies could be checked
          and they could be challenged.  This certainly had the potential
          of problems at the inquest. I was also somewhat concerned over
          the legal implications of using the transcripts of the public
          inquiry (which were not on oath) and where witnesses, as far
          as I am aware were not given specific warnings against
          self-incrimination (though I understand that Salmon letters
          were sent out).

     3.   I met Lord Justice Taylor on one occasion I believe on the
          18th of April very briefly. Also I think I met Counsel to
          the inquiry on one occasion and had contact with Treasury
          Solicitors.  I was treated with courtesy, supplied with copies
          of the daily transcripts and of the interim and final reports.
          I did not have any detailed discussion with the Inquiry Team^
          regarding the inter-relationship of the inquest and the inquiry,
but I did have very close contact with the West Midlands Police who
were servicing the public inquiry as well as my own. I had no
difficulty in obtaining copy statements from them and received every
possible assistance.  In fact a great deal of work particularly with
regard to identification of the deceased was done by them which
played no part in the public inquiry’s investigation.   (I enclose a
Flow diagram dated 24/4/89 prepared by West Midlands Police which
may be of interest to you).

The expectation of relatives is a very difficult question.    I do
not think that they obtained   sufficient information from the public
inquiry about the individual  circumstances of their relative’s
death.  Indeed, Lord Justice Taylor actually deals with this point
in paragraph 15 of the Interim Report and it is clear that this was
seen to be a function of the inquest.

I do not think it would be appropriate for me to comment on whether
or not the public obtained all that they were expecting from the
inquests themselves though it is of course common knowledge that
some at least were very disappointed with the verdict.  Perhaps
this again underlines my concern about the requirement for having a
conclusion at all. I have also already indicated that certain
matters were not dealt with  and others may not have been not dealt
with as fully as some people would have wished.

May I make the following additional comments:-

1.   I think that in inquests involving major disasters the
     coroner should be assisted by a sufficiently strong legal
     and secretarial team, including counsel to the inquest.   I
     recollect that Lord Justice Wolff at a conference which I
     attended made a suggestion on these lines.
     It seems to me that for a public inquiry this sort of support
     is axiomatic.  I can see very little reason why coroners should
     be thought to be able to cope with the issues and work-load
     without such support.

2.   I think that financing of inquests in major disasters needs to
     be sorted out. It seems to me inherently unfair that the
     local community should have to find the cost of a major inquiry
     and investigation which may run into many hundreds of thousands
     of pounds and which may have national and possibly even
     international implications. A public inquiry is funded
     centrally and I can see no reason why in appropriate cases
     an inquest should not also receive central support.

3.   I did sit with a jury to hear the Hillsborough Inquests.   I
     was very impressed with them. They showed considerable
     dedication and interest and awareness, judging by the number
     of questions which they asked me to put to various witnesses.
     It must have been extremely frustrating for them that they
     were precluded from making any significant comment.


     I appreciate that a jury is a group of lay people whose views
     may not be shared by experts in the field.

     There seem to be two solutions:-
               (1)   Either that in coroners inquests juries should be
                     abolished or only be called if the coroner feels that
                     in any particular case it would be appropriate to hear the
                     case with a jury, or

               (2)   If a jury is to be impanelled that they too
                     should be allowed to make recommendations, it being
                     clearly understood that recommendation by a jury would not
                     be binding on the party to whom it is addressed but
                     simply a matter for consideration and implementation if in
                     fact it proves to be sensible and practical.

I hope the foregoing will be of interest and assistance to you.  If it will
be of help to you I would be quite prepared to make myself available to see
you or the other members of the Group.

Yours sincerely,




S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
                               •                               •
                                       I N Q U I R Y IIMTO
                             H IL L S B O R O U G H F O O T B A U
                                           D IS A S T E R




                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
                                                                      COUNSEL
               ASSESSORS
                                                                    SECRETARIAT



          TECHNICAL                      OVERALL                             SPECIALIST
         ENQUIRY TEAM                  ENQUIRY TEAM                        ENQUIRY TEAMS
             HSE                                                            AS APPOINTED
                                            WMP




                              H. M. CORONER
T.1826                                                                            JM J/24.4.89
                                                       HOME OFFICE
                                                Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                        Direct line: 071-273-3777
                                                      Switchboard: 071-273-3000


 Our reference:    crh /9(j   ?0/3/1
                                                                     21 June 1991
 Your reference:



Dr S L Popper
HM Coroner
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD
South Yorkshire
S3 7ET




Dear Dr Popper

I am writing to you in my capacity as Chairman                     of    the   Inter-
Departmental Working Group on Disasters and Inquests.

The Group's terms of reference are:

                   "to consider the duplication of inquiries which results when
                   a major public inquiry is held into a civil disaster and the
                   deaths in the disaster are also investigated in a coroner's
                   inquest in England and Wales; and to make recommendations."


The Group's membership comprises of officials from various Government
Departments with interests in disaster inquiries and inquests.

As a first step the Group is seeking to identify the problems which
arise from the overlap between a public inquiry and an inquest.  Your
helpful comments on these matters in the light of your experiences in
conducting the Hillsborough inquest have already been passed on to me
and will be considered by the Working Group.     If you feel able to
elaborate any further on these matters I would welcome any additional
thoughts you may have.

We are seeking the views of other coroners who have held inquests
relating to disasters and have asked their views in particular on:

                   the areas of overlap which might have occurred between the
                   inquiry and the inquest;
           whether this overlap was unnecessary and could have been
           avoided or whether the two inquiries served two separate
           functions;

           whether the knowledge that there was to be a public inquiry
           modified your approach to the inquest and if this presented
           difficulties;

           whether you had any contact    with   the   Chairman   or other
           members of the inquiry;

           whether you sought any information from the inquiry to assist
           with the inquest and if this caused problems.

We are also interested in learning your views on the expectations of the
relatives of those who died, in particular whether you considered that
they gained sufficient information from the public inquiry about the
individual circumstances of a relatives death, or whether this was seen
as a function of the inquest. Any other observations you may feel able
to offer would also be welcome.

The next meeting of the Working Group is planned to take place on
23 July and I should be grateful to receive your response by then.




                                          P R C STORR
                                          E Division
                SCHEDULE   C

                                                  1st May 1991.




Ref: SLP/JT/HO/INQ




INQUESTS AND PUBLIC INQUIRIES.

You will be aware that I have recently concluded a series of inquests into
the Hillsborough Disaster which took more than 90 days to complete in the
presence of a jury. In addition, there was a major public inquiry under Lord
Justice Taylor which sat for 31 days, apart from the criminal investigation
undertaken by the D.P.P. and the civil process which has also been
involved.

Thus you will see that without taking into account the police
complaint procedures or other internal and private investigations and
inquiries, there were four major investigative procedures and which because
of a lack of definition, tend to overlap and repeat to a largeextent the
work of each other.

I suppose that if one wanted to approach the matter logically, one could
argue that the role of the inquest is to establish how a person came by his
death, a public inquiry to establish what can be done in order to avoid a
repetition of such an incident, the civil aspects to determine the questions
of negligence and compensation payments if any and the D.P.P/Criminal Courts
to deal with the issue of criminal liability and punishment insofar as it is
deemed necessary or appropriate.

Unfortunately although lip service tends to be paid to the principle that an
inquest is not concerned with issues of civil or criminal liability the
fact remains that particularly with regard to criminal matters, the powers of
the coroner have only been modified to the extent that he no longer is in a
position to name someone who may or may not have committed a criminal
offence. As one of the possible verdicts remains that of unlawfully killed,
it unfortunately follows that in order to enable a jury to intelligently
apply their minds to the possibility of this verdict, a comprehensive amount
of evidence has to be taken in order to enable them to form a judgement.
Similarly public inquiries, e.g.,the Sheen report and Lord Justice Taylor’s
report have been framed in such a way as to not only overlap with the coronal
jurisdiction but have also tended to be critical of individuals.(See for
example the comment by Lord Justice Bingham in R-v-H.M.Coroner for East Kent
ex parte Peter Alan Spooner et al, Queens’s Bench division, 6th of October
1987). Quite apart from the difficulties which this may create should a
prosecution subsequently be brought, it tends to impinge on the D.P.P’s and
the civil litigation aspects, quite apart from the impact which it may have
on^an inquest.

                            n                                     .
The main purpose of this lett&r however is to draw to your attention the
urgent need to sort out the inter-relationship between coroners inquests and
public inquiries.

I do not need to say that I fully appreciate that I am not the first to note
this. Indeed Mr. Justice Bingham in the case referred to says "one might
suppose that one inquiry of this magnitude even into a disaster on this scale
would be enough but the law required Her Majesty’s Coroner for East Kent to
conduct an inquest with a jury pursuant to Section 3 of the Coroners Act
1887".  That was of course precisely the situation in which I found myself as
well.

There are many options and I mention five:-

1.    To make no change, which I consider to be unsatisfactory.

2.    To recognise that an inquest is in fact a judicial public
       inquiry of a limited nature but that coroners each day
       throughout the country deal with sudden violent death which
       to those individuals who are involved are just as important,( even
       though they are only singletons) as a major disaster is to those
      persons who are involved in that.

3.    To broaden the base of inquests in appropriate circumstances, possibly
       by direction from the Home Secretary, so that where it
       is felt necessary to undertake a more extensive inquiry and in
       particular to look at prevention and improvement to authorise the
       coroners inquest to deal with these matters.

4.    If it is felt that 3 is not an appropriate choice
       in any particular event and a public inquiry (whether statutory
       or departmental) is the appropriate way of dealing with the matter
       then that Inquiry could also be given the task o f .performing the
       appropriate coronal function with or without the appointment of the
       coroner to sit as a member of the Inquiry.


      If that were the preferred option, consequential amendments
      would have to be made to primary legislation in order to remove
      the duty to hold this type of inquest with a jury.

5.    Another way forward might be to extend the provisions of Section
       16 of the Coroners Act 1988 so as to permit say the Home Secretary in
       appropriate circumstances e.g., (a Public Inquiry)
       to give a notice or direction which would enable the coroner
       to deal with the inquests in the same way as he at present
       is entitled and empowered to do where a person has been
       charged before Magistrates Court with certain offences or where the
       D.P.P. gives the appropriate notice under Section 16 (1) (b).

 I want to make it quite clear that I am not seeking to reduce the powers or
 the authorities of coroners, on the contrary, there may be an argument -for
 enhancing them. What I am not happy about is the apparent duplication of effort
and evidence inherent in the present arrangements.

I understand that there are high level discussions going on in relation to
tj>is issue.

Over the recent years there^as been several major disasters.
                           .*


              Bradford F ii t e Disaster.
              Zeebrugge Ferry Disaster.
              Kings Cross Fire.
              Kegworth Air Crash
              Clapham Train Disaster.
              Marchioness Sinking.
              Hillsborough Football Disaster.

I believe that not one coroner involved in any of these disasters has been
invited to participate and contribute to the discussions, a situation which
find quite extraordinary and regretable.
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER                                                     CITY COURTS
                                                                            THE TYRLS
For the County of West Yorkshire                                            BRADFORD BD1 1LA
        (Western District)                                                  Tel: 0274-391362




 Dr. S. L. Popper,                                                          My ref: JAT/AP
 The Coroner’s Office,
 Medico Legal Centre,                                            Your ref: Dr. S. L. Popper
 Watery Street,
 SHEFFIELD.
 S3 7ES                                                                         27 June 1991




Dear

Further to our recent conversation, I enclose a letter I have written to the Home Office
setting out my views in relation to major disaster investigation. I hope you have no objection
to my reference to Hillsborough.

No doubt you will let me know if anything I have said is inaccurate or needs correction from
the point of view of the Home Office.

Kindest regards.

Yours sincerely,




J. A. Turnbull
H. M. CORONER
P. R. C. Storr, Esq.,                                                        My ref: JAT/AP
E Division,
Home Office,                                                        Your ref: CRN/90 70/3/1
Queen Anne’s Gate,
LONDON.
SW1H 9AT                                                                         26 June 1991


Dear Mr. Storr,

Thank you for your letter of 21st June, which I have received today and for seeking my views
on the question of duplication of inquiries following major disasters. I note that you are the
chairman of an inter-departmental working group on disasters and inquests and I have
observed the group’s terms of reference.

In my experience there are considerable areas of overlap between the public inquiry and the
inquest and this can cause difficulties, although in the case of the Bradford fire these were
in fact minimal for reasons which I will explain later. One of the problems is that the
expectations of bereaved families and the public in general are not always in line with the
precise purposes of the inquiry on the one hand and the inquest on the other. Moreover,
the public inquiry usually, or often, takes place with some degree of urgency fairly soon after
the disaster, at a time when it is possible that all the evidence subsequently before the
inquest is not available. Again, the public inquiry usually has to direct its attention to
specific points and therefore the public expectation of its results is not always fulfilled.
When the subsequent inquest discloses further information, which perhaps allows a more
accurate conclusion as to the minutiae of the factors involved, confusion arises. This can
give rise to heated arguments, affected of course by a good deal of emotion, particularly
when there is obvious conflict. Whilst I appreciate that in some cases there is an
understandable sense of urgency to have a public inquiry as soon as possible in order for
recommendations to be made to Government which may lead to legislation, as in the case
of the Bradford fire disaster, which closely followed a death at a football ground in
Birmingham, I am not sure that this need outweighs the dangers which can ensue by the
production of a conflict between the two "inquiries". As a matter of fact, the difficulties
which I am outlining were minimal, or perhaps non-existent, in my particular case. In
Bradford the cause of the fire was very quickly established and Mr. Justice Popplewell was
able to produce his report speedily, following which he made important recommendations
which were able to be implemented or led to legislation with the least possible delay. I do
not believe that the same was the case at Hillsborough, where a good deal more relevant
information seemed to me to be available to be placed before the inquest than was
available, or at any rate apparent, before Lord Justice Taylor. It seems to me that one of
the consequences of that imbalance, or lack of information, gave rise to expectations

                                                                              Continued/.
-2-
P. R. C. Storr, Esq.
26 June 1991


following the inquiry which were not justified by the more detailed evidence brought before
the inquest.

I acknowledge that in the case of the Bradford fire the two inquiries served two separate
functions, and I believe very satisfactorily. I am bound however to make comparisons
between that of Hillsborough, partly because I took an intense interest in the Hillsborough
disaster for obvious reasons, but also because I have some considerable knowledge of it as
Dr. Popper was good enough to keep me informed and from time to time seek my
observations upon the progress of the inquiry. As far as I can judge, there was not the same
need in Hillsborough for a public inquiry as there was in Bradford following that disaster so
soon after the events in Birmingham. I would urge the committee to consider the dangers
of precipitating an inquiry whose urgency might place too great a stress on the investigative
authorities in an effort to be seen to be doing something.

On the question as to whether the knowledge that there was to be a public inquiry modified
my approach to the inquest, I suppose I must answer that it did. I cannot say, however, that
it presented particular difficulties because of the courtesy extended to me by Mr. Justice
Popplewell, who made it plain from the outset that he did not wish to "trespass" in his
inquiry upon the purpose of the inquest. However, as I have said, the causes of the fire at
Bradford were very speedily established and a number of red herrings quite quickly disposed
of. I do not believe that this was the case at Hillsborough. As I have inferred, I did have
contact with Mr. Justice Popplewell, the chairman of the inquiry in Bradford, and he was
most courteous and considerate and understanding of the Coroner’s role. Moreover,
arrangements were made for me to see and have available for my jury copies of his interim
report, so that the recommendations were seen and both endorsed and added to. At this
point I would contend that another advantage of the inquest is the presence of a jury, usually
of local people with local knowledge who, if they can remain dispassionate and are properly
directed, can make an inestimable contribution by way of recommendation to the prevention
of similar fatalities. I know that strictly speaking they are prevented from making
recommendations, but I think that this is unfortunate. My experience is that juries at
Coroner’s inquests take an intense interest in the matters before them, concentrate very hard
and are highly conscientious in performing their function.

I am happy to let you have my advice on what I believe to be the expectations of relatives
of those who are killed in tragedies of this sort. First of all I think that they expect to have
the bodies of the deceased as quickly as possible, and I believe too that this procedure in

                                                                               Continued/.........
-3-
P. R. C. Storr, Esq.
26 June 1991


the early stages is facilitated by the ability of the Coroner to have a "hands on" function in
supervising the instigation of the inquiry at the scene immediately that it happens. I am
totally convinced that my presence at the Bradford fire before it was extinguished and my
experience and my advice to the investigating police was of great value, both in getting the
investigation off on the right foot, and also in enabling identification procedures to be
instituted in extremely difficult circumstances (due to the condition of the bodies), thus
enabling the inquest to be opened and the bodies released for burial or cremation within a
week of the event. Moreover, it allowed me to keep close contact with the investigating
authorities, so that I believe that I had a close and intimate and useful knowledge of all the
steps of the inquiry. This enabled me to be clear I think in summarising the evidence to the
jury and, indeed, in bringing the appropriate evidence before them.

The next expectation of the relatives of course is that there should be a clear explanation,
through the evidence, of precisely what happened to their individual deceased. I come back
to the point which I have made in relation to Hillsborough. I think that the public inquiry,
through no fault of its terms of reference or conduct, raised expectations in the minds of the
families which could not be fulfilled because they did not understand the limit of the inquiry
as distinct from the wider ambit of the inquest, which later, as I see it, placed with greater
accuracy different stress on different aspects of the causes. I am convinced that this was
because time had been taken to collect all the available evidence, to consider what was
relevant to establish the facts and to take a very long time at the inquest so that no stone
was left unturned which may suggest that any evidence had been omitted. Of course the
inquest did not start until many months after the event. I would argue that it might have
taken place somewhat sooner had it not been for the intervention of the public inquiry.

Still on the subject of relatives’ expectations, I would argue that the general public are more
likely to comprehend the purposes of an inquest than a public inquiry because they read
about inquests every day. They rarely, I think, consider in detail the specific terms of
reference of a public inquiry, or if they do they may misunderstand them and the purpose
of the inquiry itself.

I think you will have gathered from what I have said that I would urge the working group
to closely consider suggesting that emphasis be placed in these cases upon the inquest, and
if necessary to recommend the extension of the scope of the inquest and the function of the
Coroner. In order to work towards this end I would summarise my reasons with the
following points:-

                                                                              Continued/........
-4-
P. R. C. Storr, Esq.
26 June 1991


1.    The public inquiry can be instituted at a time when all the facts about a disaster are
      not known and cannot at that time be known.

2.    The purpose of the public inquiry is not clearly enough understood by the public,
      whose expectations are raised at too early a stage, when they expect everything to be
      known and established.

3.    Except where there is some particular urgency for recommendations to be made for
      future safety, there is rarely, in my view, a justification on other grounds for a public
      inquiry, particularly when the inquest is perfectly capable of fulfilling most terms of
      reference, especially if the function of the inquest could be enlarged to embrace areas
      where there could be some doubt as to the inquest’s function.

4.    Investigation into sudden death is the Coroner’s lifework, and I do not think that the
       experience gained day to day in even straight-forward accidents, perhaps only
       involving one death, should be discounted or minimised, particularly of course in the
       cases of whole-time Coroners, who may deal with many hundreds of inquests in a
       year, and as a consequence have very close connections with the investigative
       authorities; not only the police, but the ambulance service, the fire service and the
       hospitals. In short, there is an investigative network already established which works
       well and which can readily be expanded to embrace any sort of inquiry involving
       sudden death which is likely to come along. Of course the Coroner of a small
      jurisdiction who has other work may be in some greater difficulty, although this
       certainly was not evident in the case of Mr. Sturtt, who conducted the inquest into
       the Zeebrugge disaster in a thoroughly professional and impeccable manner, despite
       the fact that he is holding only a "part-time" appointment. Of course, if the
       procedures which I would recommend were instituted, there might be a case for
       certain types of inquest to be conducted by Coroners with certain experience or
       certain length of service. Though the difficulties presented by this contention are
       obvious, they are not insurmountable.

5.    The involvement of a jury, which would almost always ensue with an inquest, is, in
      my opinion, of the greatest value. It would be likely to comprise of people with local
      knowledge, with intense interest and with a desire to establish the facts and to make
      recommendations for the benefit of their own citizens.


                                                                              Continued/.
-5-
P.R.C. Storr, Esq.
26 June 1991

6.    One final point which is, I suggest, of the least importance in a way, but nevertheless
      needs to be borne in mind, is the expense. I very firmly believe that it is only in
      exceptional cases that there is justification for two inquiries of the sort that I have
      been commenting upon with the consequential high cost.

I hope that my observations have been useful. I shall be very pleased to elaborate upon
anything I have said, or answer any further questions upon my comments. Moreover I would
be very happy to attend at the Home Office to discuss my views if this should be thought
to be useful. I might add finally that I am serving on a Coroners’ Society committee which
is considering the same matters.

Yours sincerely,




J. A. Turnbull
H. M. CORONER




cc. Dr. S. L. Popper
                HOME OFFICE
                Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H9AT
                                          Direct line 071-273 3 5 g Q
                                         Switchboard 071-273 3000



                                                                Your reference
        Dr F L Popper
        HM Coroner
                                                                Our reference
        Medico Legal Centre
        Watery Street                                          CRN/91 66/21/1
                                                                Date
        SHEFFIELD
        S3 7ET                                                  19 June 1991




        Dear Dr Popper


        HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

        I refer to my letter of 1 May which enclosed copies of
        correspondence which the Home Secretary has received from
        Eddie O'Hara MP about the Hillsborough inquest.

        I would be grateful to know if you are able to let me have any
        comments you feel able to offer on the points raised.

                                                            Yours sincerely




                                                            G HARRISON(MISS)
                                                            E Division




                   (2.   6-


        J   o                 *




S 363
                                                                       r         j i 11




                                                          17th June         91



     SLP/JT.
     CRN/91 66/21/1.




     Miss G. Harrison,
     E Division,
     Home Office,
     Queen Anne’s Gate,
     London. SW1H 9A T .


     Dear Miss Harrison,

     Thank you for your letter of the 1st of May enclosing a copy letter f^om
     Eddie O ’Hara MP re Mr and Mrs. Aspinall. I am sorry to read the second
     paragraph of Mr. O ’Hara’s letter.

         In the light of the second paragraph of your letter, I do not think that it
         is necessary for me to enter into a detailed justification into the points
         raised.

         You might however be interested to know that shortly after the conclusion of
         the inquests a press release was issued by the West Midlands Police and I
         will quote one paragraph from it:-

               "As a matter of interest the Coroner’s Inquests sitting with
                a Jury had been the longest running in recent history, if not
                for all time.  Including the interim inquests in April and
                May of last year the Coroners Court sat for a total of
                ninetythree days over a total of nineteen weeks.  There were
                over 520 appearances by witnesses and 540 exhibits examined.
                The transcripts of the proceedings amounted to over 8,650
                pages recording over 3.6 million words spoken".

         You may also be interested to know that my recollection is that the
         solicitors representing the vast majority of the bereaved (including I
         believe Mr. and Mrs. Aspinall) were very satisfied that I agreed to take
         evidence in respect of each individual deceased in April/May 1990. Because
         the D.P.P. had not yet completed his inquiries and it was therefore important
         not in any way to prejudice his decision, the evidence which was taken
         was limited to questions of who, when and where and matters of a
         non-controversial nature.

         After the D.P.P. announced his decision I made arrangements to resume the
         inquests and this commenced on the 19th of November 1990.

         Yours sincerely,



         IST.y.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.

BAJAAL
                HOME OFFICE
                Q ueen   Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                  Direct line 071-2733 5 6 0
                                                 Switchboard 071-273 3000




                                                                     Your reference

 Dr S L Popper                                                       Our reference
 HM Coroner                                                          CRN/91 66/21/1
 Medico Legal Centre                                                 Date
 Watery Street                                                        1 May 1991
 Sheffield     S3 7ET




^ p e a r Dr Popper

  HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

  I enclose a copy of a let ter of 9 ^ ^ o n ^ h a ^ o f his
  Secretary has received from Eddie 0 Hara             ^
  constituents, Mr and Mrs Aspinal ' w ° teful for any comments
  Hillsborough disaster.  I should be grateful ror    and
  you may be able to offer on the points raised by Mr and
  Mrs Aspinall.
   In our reply to Mr O'Hara we will, of course, s^ate       *
   coroner is an independent judicial         *ncoroners law, he
   though the Home Secretary is responsible for coroners ± ,
   has no authority to intervene in or comment on
   which a coroner conducts his inquiries       Y
                                                                        Yours sincerely




                                                                         G HARRISON (MISS)
                                                                         E Division




    ghlm ay-3



            v




    S 363
                                         H O U SE OF CO M M O N S
                                             L O N D O N SW1A0AA

9th April 1991


The Rt.Hon.Kenneth Baker MP
Home Secretary
THE HOME OFFICE
c0 Queen Anne's Gate
  ,ndon SW1



^ e a r Home Secretary,                  ___________________________________

    RE: M R .& MRS. ASPINALL^________________________________________________
                                 HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST




              crowd control?                                                                         -u-iii-v


A             to the jury at the main inquest.
                                                                   •i-Vifa flow of crowd outside
     3.       Why w as n o c o n t r o l e x e r c i s e d o v e r t h e
              the ground?                                                                    ,,ar                    1 5


     4.       r e n ^ f n r ^ i r t o ^ n 'o S ^ ^ t f r L f ^ f " ^                  ^                               .




      5.      t l T   o   l 'A   T   ^    S r t i S n So f c er L S a i h n e ^ ri g e n L f -   ^               '


      6   .

      I w o u ld very m uch a p p r e c i a t e       y o u r o b s e r v a tio n s on ^ e s e , . ^ t t e « ^

      Yours sincerely,                                                                               *•      •>, ’•;
               _________ & __ * 1



       Eddie O'Hara MP
       (Knnwslev South)
                                                           17th June         91



     SLP/JT.
     CRN/91 66/21/1.




     Miss G. Harrison,
     E Division,
     Home Office,
     Queen Anne’s Gate,
     London. SW1H 9AT.


         Dear Miss Harrison,

         Thank you for your letter of the 1st of May enclosing a copy letter
         Eddie O ’Hara MP re Mr and Mrs. Aspinall. I am sorry to read the second
         paragraph of Mr. O ’Hara’s letter.

         In the light of the second paragraph of your letter, I do not think that it
         is necessary for me to enter into a detailed justification into the points
         raised.

         You might however be interested to know that shortly after the conclusion of
         the inquests a press release was issued by the West Midlands Police and I
         will quote one paragraph from it:-

               "As a matter of interest the Coroner’s Inquests sitting with
                a Jury had been the longest running in recent history, if not
                for all time.  Including the interim inquests in April and
                May of last year the Coroners Court sat for a total of
                ninetythree days over a total of nineteen weeks.  There were
                over 520 appearances by witnesses and 540 exhibits examined.
                The transcripts of the proceedings amounted to over 8,650
                pages recording over 3.6 million words spoken".

         You may also be interested to know that my recollection is that the
         solicitors representing the vast majority of the bereaved (including I
         believe Mr. and Mrs. Aspinall) were very satisfied that I agreed to take
         evidence in respect of each individual deceased in April/May 1990. Because
         the D.P.P. had not yet completed his inquiries and it was therefore important
         not in any way to prejudice his decision, the evidence which was taken
         was limited to questions of who, when and where and matters of a
         non-controversial nature.

         After the D.P.P. announced his decision I made arrangements to resume the
         inquests and this commenced on the 19th of November 1990.

          Yours sincerely,




         Ig.'ty.Popper,
          H.M.Coroner.

BAJAAL
            HOME OFFICE
            Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                          Direct line 0 7 1 -2 7 3 3 5 6 0
                                         Switchboard 071-273 3000




                                                                Your reference

Dr S L Popper
                                                                Our reference
HM Coroner
Medico Legal Centre                                             CRN/91 66/21/1
                                                                Date
Watery Street
Sheffield     S3 7ET                                             1 May 1991




Dear Dr Popper

HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

I enclose a copy of a letter of 9 April which the Home
Secretary has received from Eddie O'Hara MP on behalf of his
constituents, Mr and Mrs Aspinall, who lost a son at the
Hillsborough disaster.  I should be grateful for any comments
you may be able to offer on the points raised by Mr and
Mrs Aspinall.

In our reply to Mr O'Hara we will, of course, state that a
coroner is an independent judicial officer and that even
though the Home Secretary is responsible for coroners law, he
has no authority to intervene in or comment on the way in
which a coroner conducts his inquiries in any particular case.

                                                                 Yours sincerely




                                                                 G HARRISON (MISS)
                                                                 E Division




ghlm ay-3
                              HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
                                 L O N D O N SW1A0AA

 9th April 1991



 The Rt.Hon.Kenneth Baker MP
 Home Secretary
 THE HOME OFFICE
 cr> Queen Anne's Gate
   ,ndon SWl




^^ear Home Secretary,

 RE: M R .& MRS. AS PI NALL

                        HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

 I have received representations from my constituents, Mr.& Mrs.Aspinall
 who lost a son at the Hillsborough tragedy.

 They expressed extreme dismay and distress at what they saw as a
 carefully orchestrated evasion of the key issues at the recent inquest.
 In particular, M r .& Mrs.Aspinall have asked me to put the following
 six questions to you:

 1.      Whyalcohol tests were made on the dead at the football ground
         and not the living (i.e. the police who had responsibility for
         crowd control?

_2 .     Why was no advice given to the families about the possibility
         of ignoring mini inquests and having full presentation of evidence
         to the jury at the main inquest?

 3.      Why was no control exercised over the flow of crowd outside
         the ground?

 4.      Why did M r .Popplewell not allow any evidence of events after 3.15 p
         when many died up to an hour afterwards?

 5.      Why were only two options given to the jury by M r .Popplewell
         and not the third option of criminal negligence?

 6   .
     Why did the families have to bear the costs of the inquest
     (£3,000 per family). The police,allegedly, spent £1 million
     in defence costs - this was not only a burden but, was inequitable.
                                                     . %:■
 I would very much appreciate your observations on these, matters.

 Yours sincerely



 Eddie O'Hara MP
 (Knowsley South)
                                                           16th   May        91




         SLP/JT.
         CRN/90    30/27/2.




         P.R.C. Storr,
         Head of E Division,
         Home Office,
         Queen Anne’s Gate,
         London.SW1H 9AT.


         Dear Mr. Storr,

         Thank you for your letter of the 29th of April.  You are of course quite
         correct that I am very disappointed with the contents.

         Do you think that there are any other avenues which I could explore with a
         view to finding some central government funding as a contribution towards
         these particular exceptional costs?

         Yours sincerely,




         S .L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




BAGABT
                                                HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                 Direct line: 07l-273-3
                                               Switchboard: 071-273-3U00

   Our reference:
                     CRN/90 30/27/2             29 April 1991
   Your reference:   SL P /BW




Dr S L Popper
HM Coroner
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD     S3 7ET




I am writing in reply to your letter of 26 November to Mr Rowlands
asking whether central funds could be made available to meet the cost
or contribute to the costs of the inquest into those who died during the
Hillsborough disaster.   I am very sorry that you have had to wait so
long for a reply.

Miss Harrison explained in her letter of 16 August that the Home Office
does not finance the coroner's service and so there is no direct source
of funding which could be drawn upon to meet your request.    Nor, I am
afraid, are there any contingency funds available for this purpose.
While the Home Office has provided funding in the past for unforeseen
and exceptional expenditure on a major scale incurred by local
authorities this has, as far as I am aware, been confined to
exceptionally heavy costs which have fallen to services for which the
Home Office has some responsibility for funding. As I have mentioned,
we have no locus in the funding of the coroner1s service.

I understand the reasons for your concern in this matter but I am afraid
that we are unable to help.

I am sorry to have to send you what I know will be a disappointing
reply.


                                          VflVWS jrvMC&xtk,




                                            P R C STORR
                                            Head of E Division
29apr-1
                                                                                                        1      ^   CoP~\

                                          OFFICEOF H.M.CORONER FOR               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                 WATERY STREET
                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                 SHEFFIELD
                                                       (West District)
                                                                                 S3 7ET
             STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                           CORONER


                                      Telephone:SHEFFIELD(0742)738721             '2'6"NovembeT'   .19 9 0 "




        SLP/BW
        CRN/90 82/1/1


        Hr J. H. Rowlands,
        Home Office,
        Queen Anne’s Gate,
        London
        SW1H 9AT


        Dear Mr.      Rowlands,

        Further to my letter of 15th November, I have recollected that on 2nd August
        I wrote to Miss Harrison regarding the financing of the Hillsborough Inquest.

        In order to avoid any misunderstanding, I think perhaps I ought to say that
        both that letter as well as this, is that it was written entirely on my own
        initiative without any prompting or consultation from or with the Local
        Authority.

        However, the point which Simon Hughes has raised and which you will probably
        know has now been canvassed in the Press a few days ago, both reinforces and
        indeed adds a further dimension to the need and appropriateness for some
        central financing of inquests in the nature of those leading into the
        Hillsborough disaster.

        I do not wish to bore you with the detail but both the direct costs to the
        Local Authority in connection with the Inquest and the indirect costs arising
        out of their contribution to these funds, are likely to be of a very
        substantial nature.

        I entirely accept Miss Harrison’s point that if one wanted to make a
        fundamental shift of responsibility from Local Authority financing to
        central funding, e.g. the Lord Chancellor’s Department or the Home Office,
        then primary legislation is likely to be required.

        However, what I have in mind is                         that there must be some contingency funds
        available and accessible to the                         Home Office or some other appropriate
        department in order to fund, or                         at least make some contribution to the costs
        of unusual and, hopefully, rare                         inquests of this nature.

        I would be grateful in the light of the matters raised for this matter to be
        reconsidered again and look forward to hearing with interest whether funds
        could not be found.

        Yours sincerely,



        S. L.Popper
        H. M. Coroner
R8606
        c.c. Miss G. Harrison.
        BAD/ABL
                            OFFICEOF H.M.CORONER FOR               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                   WATERY STREET
                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                   SHEFFIELD
                                        (West District)
                                                                   S3 7ET
STEFAN   L. POPPER, LL.B.,B.MED.Sci..B.M..B.S.,M.R.C.G.P.
                                             CORONER


                        Telephone:SHEFFIELD(0742)738721             ••••l-Sfch-Hoyenke* 19-90-

Tour Ref: CRM 90 28/37/1


M r. J . H. Row lands,
Horn# O ffice*
Queens Anne’ s S a te ,
London,
SW1H 9AT



Dear Mr. Row lands,

Thank you for your letter o f 13th Novenber e n c lo s in g a l e t t e r froa
Simon Hughes IIP for Southw ark Bermondsey.

1. I have t o say that I a n somewhat s u r p r is e d t

a . by th e f a c t t h a t I was f i r s t made aw are t h a t th e r e was a l e t t e r
from Mr. Hughes t o th e Homes S e c re ta ry when a r e p o r te r from a National
Newspaper v i s i t e d nre a t home s h o r tly a f t e r 2 p.nt on Sunday 9th Ho t .
1990.

b . t h a t th e MP f o r Bermondsey i s c o n ce rn in g h im s e lf w ith th e ru n n in g
o f in q u e s ts i n S h e f f ie ld a s I assume t h a t n e ith e r S h e f f ie ld C ity
C o u n cil nor m yself n o r an unnamed L ib e r a l D em ocratic c o u n c illo r n o r
f o r t h a t m a tte r L iv e rp o o l o r N ottingham f a l l w ith in h i s c o n s titu e n c y .

c . t h a t a concern re g a rd in g a p o s s ib le c o n f l i c t o f I n t e r e s t should be
r a is e d w ith me th r e e w orking days b e fo re th e recommencement o f th e
H illsb o ro u g h In q u e s ts p a r t i c u l a r l y when I had a lre a d y s p e n t s e v e r a l
d ay s i n A p ril 1989 opening th e inquests and had resumed w ith a ju r y
betw een 18 th A p ril - 4 th May 1990. The transcripts of th e e v id e n ce
o f these h e a rin g s ru n to over 1000 p a g e s. In a d d itio n th e r e was
e x te n s iv e n a tio n a l p u b lic ity re g a rd in g th o s e p ro c e e d in g s. The
c o n c lu sio n o f th e in te r im h e a r in g s on 4 th May a r e th e m selv e s 5 aonths
p r i o r to th e d a te o f Mr. Hughes l e t t e r .

2 . E v e ry th in g t h a t i® r e f e r r e d t o in H r. Hughes l e t t e r ( a p a r t from any
references to Coosittee (seating matters of Sheffield City Council of
which I have no know ledge) was known i n A p ril 1989. T h at was th e t i n e
when anything regarding p o s s ib le conflict of interest should have
been raised and n o t 13 aonths o r s o l a t e r .

3 . I would rem ind you t h a t a C oroner is an in d e p e n d en t j u d i c i a l
officer and i s an a p p o in te e and n o t an employee o f th e lo c a l
a u t h o r i t y . The l a t t e r have i n t e r a l i a a du ty to rem u n erate hiis and
pay h i s c o s ts and ex p en ses b u t th e y do n o t c o n tr o l what he does o r how
h e d o e s i t . They a r e not a b le t o resove him fro® o f f i c e w hich is a
r i g h t re s e rv e d f o r th e Lord C h a n c e llo r, and in presum ably v ery r a r e
in s ta n c e s , th e Grown C o u rt.
A nav® sought to m a in ta in good relationships with the officers of
Sheffield City C o u n c il, to behave responsibly with regard to the
incurring of costs and expenses and to keep them informed possibly to
a g r e a te r e x te n t th a n was s t r i c t l y n e c e s s a ry .

4. As I understand it I was the only eligible coroner under the
legislation unless the p ro v is io n s of Section 14(1) Coroners Act 1988
had been im plem ented and some other coroner had agreed to take the
transfer, or the provisions of section 14(3) or 13(l)(a) and 13(2)
Coroners Act 1988 had applied which I co not think was or is the case.

A lthough a la r g e number o f th e deceased c o re from Merseyside by no
means all did, and i t would n o t in try o p in io n have been right to ack
the coroner in M erseyside or L iv e rp o o l to take o v er th e inquests.

if I co u ld have d iv e s te d m yself in April 19&9 o f th e r e s p o n s i b i l i t y
for the in q u e s ts in to      th e deaths caused by th e d i s a s t e r X have no
doubt I would have g la d ly a s s e n te d and i t c e r t a i n l y would have madean
enormous d if f e r e n c e t o ray l i f e .

5. I t i s in h e re n t in th e c o ro n a l system    which is territorial in n a tu re
that th e coroner may coise i n to c o n f l i c t      w ith th e local a u t h o r i t y .
This is no doubt one of the reasons why                 the coroner’s position is as
is described in paragraph three of this                 letter.

The Coroners Act 1988 specifically mentions various disqualifications
from appointment to coronal office, I draw your attention to Sections
2 (2 ) and 2 (3), It seems therefore to me that had parliament wished
to include provisions to cover the sort of situation describes bydr.
Hughes, it would have been childs play to legislate for it
particularly as sections 2(2) and 2 (3) actually oeal with the
appointment of a coroner who is or was a   councillor or alderman.

6. Whether it is a pood thing that a coronc-r*c jurisdiction is
territorial and that he is locally appointed as opposed to centrally
by say the Lord Chancellor is another question. I do not think
that this letter is the appropriate place to deal with these issues
though I may write to you again on this alter the inquests are over.

The seperation of powers is very fine in principle but not so easyto
rcrieve in practice, for instance even the head of tne judiciary is
hirself a political appointee.

7. It goes without saying of course that should someone feel that
proceedings are defective then judicial review or the provisions of
Section 13 Coroners Act 1988 are open.

8. You will no doubt be aw are that in the normal course of things
should 1 require some expert legal help 1 ( and I believe coroner's in
general ) would in the first instance look to their local authority’s
legal Departments for help.

I wep. however conscious from very early on that there was the
pOi*&ilility of criticism of the C o u n c il's involvem ent in connection
with the disaster, I felt that it would be inappropriate to
consult with their* as this could give rise to a conflict of
interest it I were to discuss matters with them when the officer's
or th e C o u n c il's condu ct m ight be called in q u e s tio n . 1 th e r e f o r e
arranged for a meeting with the then Chief Executive and inter alia
agreed w ith hits t h a t it would be ri& h t t h a t in the Hillsborough
d i s a s t e r I would seek in d ep en d en t le g a l a d v ic e i f 1 f e l t t h a t I needed
it and instruct independent solicitors which I have done. I had
thought about the problem and in so far as it was necessary I had and
have continued to take steps to avoid difficulties arising.
In f a c t I seem t o r e c o l l e c t t h a t I approached some one in th e Hone
O ffic e to see if legal help was available from you or treasury
solicitors but 1 was told that that was not possible.

8* I most say that 1 an not entirely happy with the suggestion that
has been raised and even l e s s so w ith the tim in g and manner of its
m aking. I have had to devote considerable time to this reply which
could have been better spent in getting prepared for those inquests.

I hope the foregoing will be of assistance to you. Please let me have
a copy of Mr. Waddington's reply.




Yours s in c e r e ly .




S . L. Popper.
H.M. Coroner.
14m   '{if!   09:16           1"72                                   MEDICO'LGL CXTER                              D r POPPER

                                                 .ME O IT IC E
                                          ' .:        AO-iK’s Gaic L ondon SW1H 9a t

                                                                            m ^ c r f e c Oi.,271 ^ 3 0 ”
                                                                                          ;)i..™; 3000


                          i--r £ 1. ? p ~.'
                           - 7 1 ;■"•;; r: •*: r1
                          7 -~C                   *,"                                              i'O™ ':~iC'"rSiX
                         7: -:§>'■y :•
                         £ te f 7 i       i -
                         ^ O U S. V r. r*j;£ •;.
                                                                                                                            c;o   28/37/1
                         S3 ‘ 77                                                                                   '7   SovSKber       1990

                         D b s l T- D r    ? or:::e

                                                                •■.* S.,      K        2   C- C      .   '" V :\


                         7 ? 8;\ ™ = ;                                     ...........                                            •-
                         7 : “ i r uwi u a g n                                    557.-1-1:                        * 7 £1    :7;is
                         ^.5,


                                                                            ^?-C8            *7;:.i.e. to           'i£lO.T7ji5„
                         “°     a 3 S ls r       us     :iR   °y r         rep ly     to          7rl Euerhes,



                                                                                    To urs          sincere!*




                                                                                     J « HOMLAIDS




                      SS^JA
   I                                                   ---------------
 •-1,1.. ' 9 0   09:1,1}        FAX   »74 2   726247,„       ,,JlJHCp JJL   CXTER   -*-*•» Dr POPPER

                                                                                                       •V"
                                                                   jrt
                                                                                                             K -&
                                                           fiFlf                         ^         &
                                                                                              <o
                                               H O U S E OF C O M M O N ?
                                                   I G N O O X SW1A OAA


 Rt.                                              O.
 Secretary of State,
 Home Office,
 50 Queen „•
 London SV1.


 10th                         1.990



                                                                                    1   o
  W          ^4W-i v^-
                         ,d                                              d, A r d       p £


 Staff.ield CoOTier

 it has been brxxight to oy attention that th= Sheffield Crooner is paid. et
 gi full time rate but does other jobs,

I am also troubled by 'the at least apparent conflict of interests between
somebody, although Her Majesty's Coroner, who pp paid for by 'the City
Council, when he is ad the sure time conducting sr. Inquest Inquiry" loir
the liability of' the

1 nave discussed this rnattar with iny colleague .Alex: CarOdun Q-C, . rpo nrcop
my concern.

1 could set out the details further if this world he helpful arid, so snare
th a t this matter is nor/ a r
City Council,
view on the subject and I said I.
attention.

i am. happy to discuss the matter with you. id' this would te the most
appropriate way to proceed, 1
as possible.


 'f iu f         Jt»\ M/T Oj




Simon Hughes
MP for Southwark Bernic
