    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions


Owning Organisation:        South Yorkshire Coroner

Title Memo:                 Pre Inquest Review Audio Cassette No. 2

Description:


This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the digitised version
of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement by BR Consult to reduce noise
and improve audibility of the incoming radio transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
    Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                      101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                   Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
        Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
0 0 :0 0 :1 5


CORONER:              - a relative could give useful evidence. If he/she really felt that they
                      couldn’t go through the trauma, I’ll be very sympathetic to that point of
                      view. So supporters include relatives, friends - and what I’ve just said
                      for relatives applies to them as well, though to a slightly lesser degree -
                      other contacts with the deceased and others, people who were there
                      who didn’t necessarily have something to do with the deceased, but who
                      can tell us something about what happened which I consider to be
                      relevant to the purpose of my inquiry.

                      That is the first group. The second group will be local residents; the third
                      group will be people like shopkeepers and so on; the fourth group will
                      be, what I call, other independents - 1don’t mean that supporters aren’t
                      independent, but I mean people who weren’t —who were either
                      professionally present or who may not even have been at the scene. I
                      will give you an example: media people for instance. Then we’re going
                      to take evidence from club employees or people who were engaged with
                      the club, e.g. turnstile operators, stewards and people of that nature; the
                      police of course.

                      While I’m on the subject of the police, there are in the case of a few
                      police officers - and indeed at least one other person - statements which
                      were taken under PACE, that is under the Police And Criminal Evidence
                      Act. It is my normal practice at the moment if I was dealing, say, with a
                      road traffic incident that, if there was such a statement from,say, the
                      driver, I would have that either read or played on the audiotape. I have
                      decided that I am not going to - that I’m going to do that in this case as
                      well. So, we will hear whatever is said in these statements. I intend, at
                      the moment, to use the order tape rather than to have them read
                      because then we have it as it was recorded.

                      I have decided that I will not circulate the list of witnesses who I intend to
                      call in advance. There are several reasons for this. I don’t have to give
                      you all the reasons but I will give you a few just so that you know that
                      isn’t an entirely arbitrary decision. The first, and maybe the most
                      important, point is this is an inquiry which I conduct. It is an inquisitorial
                      procedure and not adversarial. Totally different, in fact, to every other
                      legal proceeding in England, anyway. There is, in fact, I think - certainly
                      the books tend to indicate that it is quite proper not to disclose or
                      circulate names, and I never do. When I say ‘never’ that is a big word;
                      there may be the odd exception where I have had to let somebody see a
                      statement for very special reasons, but in principle I don’t and I don’t
                      intend to do it in this case.

                      Secondly, we haven’t got the capacity, even if I wanted to do it, to deal
                      with the circulation of statements. We have got our work cut out in
                      coping with my needs, my Coroner’s office. I am very lucky, in fact, I’ve
                      got what I suppose for Coroners quite a good sized team, but we have to
                      remember that I am just a Coroner, an inferior court in fact let me remind
                      you, not anything else. There are limits to what I can muster, so I can’t
                      do it from a practical point of view.
00:04:42
                      The third thing is: circulation of statements. We did do it with


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                  2
                      summaries, as you may remember; we did circulate the summaries
                      because we thought that would be helpful. In fact, to a certain extent in
                      some cases that bounced back on me because people weren’t entirely
                      happy at what was the evidence which was given wasn’t word for word
                      what had been sent out in the summary, which was intended really as a
                      guide and to give legal representatives an opportunity to comment and
                      to come back and enable us to make any further investigations. I have
                      learnt from that so I don’t intend to get into that situation again. So, I
                      know this may come as a bit of a disappointment to some of you but
                      that’s the position. So, no, I am not sending out lists of witnesses nor
                      am I circulating statements in advance.
00:05:58
                      What I will do, if I may, is to put on a notice board the proposed
                      witnesses for the next day or two days, and maybe even three days, to
                      give you some idea of, you know, what’s coming. I’m not trying to be
                      difficult; I want to make life as easy as I can for all of us but that includes
                      me as well. We will, almost certainly, allow the witnesses to refresh their
                      memory from the statements on the day. Do you follow what I mean by
                      that? In other words it’s 18 months ago that this event happened
                      approximately. Some of the witnesses may have given statements or
                      written down recollections which are 18 pages long or even longer.
                      They may not recollect in detail what they said and indeed they may not
                      recollect the event. So, it is likely that we will allow them to have a sight
                      of their statement, though I don’t expect them to have them in the
                      witness box; we would not normally do that.

                      With regard to Lord Justice Taylor’s report, if I can deal with that next, I
                      do not intend to admit that report as part of the evidence at the inquests.
                      The only way one could do that would be to read it in toto and I don’t
                      think that would serve any useful purpose. Secondly, I perceive that it’s
                      going to cause more problems than it’s worth if I did that. So, I do not
                      intend - thank you very much - to admit that. Similarly, I do not intend to
                      use the transcripts of the evidence at Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry. Of
                      course, I am fully aware that you will have access to the transcripts, as
                      indeed I have, and I wouldn’t be at all surprised if you looked through
                      them with a view to seeing what people have said. I would expect you to
                      do that and I don’t mind that, provided that your questioning is relevant
                      to the inquest.

                      What I wouldn’t permit is if, for instance, a witness were to exercise his
                      right not to answer an incriminating question, I would not permit you to
                      put to that witness quotations from the transcripts so that in fact he could
                      then exercise his rights not to answer the question, but in fact you
                      would’ve put what he had said. So, I’m going to use commonsense. I
                      don’t want to muzzle you, I don’t want to prevent you asking all proper
                      and legitimate questions in order that at the end of the day, as far as
                      possible, you will feel that you’ve had a fair chance, so to speak.
                      Equally, I intend to be fair to the witnesses as far as I am able to do so.

                      As I say, although I don’t intend to allow Lord Justice Taylor’s report to
                      be introduced as evidence, it’s going to be very difficult not to refer to it
                      from time to time. Commonsense, I think, will dictate where we draw the
                      line. I think it’s also right to say that there may be the odd occasion
                      where I will have to breach what I have just said and that we will have to
                      use some of the transcripts, but I think it’ll be a rarity.
00:10:49

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                   3
                      Documents; by that I mean bundles of documents, or plans and
                      photographs, any exhibits if you wish. Bearing in mind, (a), we’re
                      dealing with inquests, (b), with a jury and, (c), that we’re going to have
                      our work cut out as it is with the number of witnesses, I want to restrict
                      as far as I’m able the number of documents which are put in as exhibits.
                      There’s very little point in having hundreds and hundreds of pages of
                      documents if the jury cannot absorb them.
00:11:36
                      I am prepared to listen to you on this point because it is a difficult one.
                      What I have in mind, and perhaps I could pause after this to enable you
                      to come back on what I have said and also on this point, is that if, for
                      instance, we were to introduce, let us assume, The Green Guide - which
                      I think is a document which we won’t be able to avoid referring to - as an
                      exhibit, I wouldn’t expect the jury to read the whole thing from cover to
                      cover because a lot of it we don’t need for the inquest.

                      If you have a particular point on it which you wish to make to the witness
                      then I would expect you to either pick that paragraph out and read it or
                      I’ll read it or somebody will read it, or, if we’ve already dealt with it, we
                      can then just refer to it. So, in the end what the jury will have in mind will
                      be, I don’t know, ten paragraphs out of The Green Guide and ditto with
                      other documents. There may be other documents which we may need
                      to refer to. So, at the end of the day they will have only to think about
                      those bits of the exhibits which are actually relevant to us and not,
                      maybe, 50 or 60 pages which are there but which are totally
                      unnecessary for our purposes. Is that reasonably clear what I’m trying
                      to say? I think it’ll be easier to do than for me to explain it.

                      Shall I pause here and allow you, Mr King - have I dealt with some of
                      the points that you have in mind?

MR KING:              Sir, you have. I might (several inaudible words) one or two. Sir, if I deal
                      with matters which you feel ought to be reserved for legal argument
                      please stop me.

CORONER:              Yes, I will do.

MR KING:              Not in any way trying to trespass on times when I shouldn’t.

CORONER:              Yes.

MR KING:              Can I deal first with matters arising out of what have been known as the
                      mini inquest? You have already referred to the fact that on individuals
                      (several inaudible words) to certain questions already.

CORONER:              Yes.
00:13:55
MR KING:              I have an ever increasing number of sets of instructions as to individual
                      questions, matters relating to those individual mini inquests, specifically
                      the factual matters laid out in the summaries to which you’ve referred to,
                      which I understood were laid before the jury. I don’t wish to go into them
                      now this afternoon. What I would wish to have liberty to do is to
                      communicate with you under the name of each individual deceased,
                      hopefully won’t be as long as I’m perhaps indicating, but there are
                      specific issues of fact where I know those who have lost their loved ones
                      are very anxious that either factual inaccuracies or omissions, if

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                  4
                      possible, could be rectified.
0 0 :1 5 :1 6
                      So, if they could be laid before you in written form you may take the view
                      - and I would hope that you might - that in most of those cases you’ll be
                      prepared for those matters to be rectified, perhaps straightaway at the
                      beginning of the inquest or, if necessary, to hear a small amount of
                      evidence relating to them. Obviously until you see/hear the questions
                      you can’t make your mind up, but I wouldn’t wish to give notice, if I put it
                      that way, that that is what I’m instructed to lay before you. I don’t know if
                      you want to comment on it straightaway?

CORONER:              Can I tell you my view on that? I was aware that you might well be
                      raising this point. I’ve already made it clear that I don’t intend to reopen
                      all the 95 cases, and indeed I’ve had correspondence from the odd
                      people where they’ve raised matters. If the matters are put to me and if,
                      when I’ve seen them, if the instructing solicitors would communicate with
                      me, if I feel that the point which you make is - 1will use the word justified
                      but it’s not intended to be rude at all - justified, legitimate and proper to
                      be dealt with then, of course, I would consider that sympathetically.

                      There may well be matters which may be raised which either I feel have
                      been adequately dealt with, in which case I’ll say so, or alternatively
                      which I feel are outside the scope of the inquiry in which case I will also
                      say so. So, I’m not turning you down; I’m just reserving the position
                      depending upon what you actually say.

MR KING:              Sir, the purpose of my rising on that matter now is really to give you
                      forward notice of it and to emphasise that I know there are those here
                      that are hearing what I’m saying. They are matters which inevitably are
                      dear to the heart of many people here.

CORONER:              Yes, I understand that.

MR KING:              Sir, might I now address you, if I may, on the cut-off point as it’s been
                      called of the scope?

CORONER:              Yes.

MR KING:              As I understand it you’ve indicated, sir, that you have in mind the arrival
                      of the first ambulance which is probably going to be for some time
                      getting there exactly from my memory but it is -

CORONER:              15 minutes past or something like that.

MR KING:              I have a submission to make too which is very heartfelt by those I -

CORONER:              Could you just speak up a tiny bit? I am sorry.
00:17:06
MR KING:              Yes. My submission to you on behalf of those who I represent, and I
                      was saying that it is a matter which is very dear to them, that it should be
                      extended, that timing, to about 4 o’clock. I explain why. A number of
                      those who I represent are anxious that there will be an inquest into the
                      nature of the medical attention which was given to those who had been
                      in the crushing in regard to the allegation which certainly they wish to
                      make and wish to investigate, that the absence of proper medical care
                      facilities, attention and technique led to those (inaudible), in any event,

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                  5
                      dying perhaps when they might not have died at all, or certainly dying
                      sooner than might have been the case. Specifically the diagnosis of
                      when somebody had actually died.
0 0 :1 8 :0 7
                      So, I know that in selecting your cut-off point you have, I understand,
                      having read some correspondence on the matter relating to it, that those
                      are matters which your immediate feeling was it would be worth going to
                      go into. Certainly my submission is that they are relevant to the how in
                      respect of the deceased here because the time of death is obviously of
                      importance and how they died involves a consideration of the attention
                      paid to them when perhaps they were still alive. That is a very relevant
                      matter.

CORONER:              Yes. Can I stop you there because I think we’re getting into a legal
                      submission?

MR KING:              Sure.

CORONER:              I’ve heard what you say. I don’t think it would be right for me to give a
                      ruling on that because I would be breaching, if you like, the procedural
                      aspects of this meeting, except to say that obviously I’ve thought about
                      this point quite a bit and at the moment I’m not persuaded yet that I
                      would want to go down that road. I have reasons for it but I don’t think I
                      will deal with them. So, I wouldn’t want to encourage you to think that I
                      will actually accede to that but if you could just remind me before we end
                      that you’ve made this point because it may be that what we should do is
                      have another meeting, possibly before the 19th, but a formal meeting of
                      the inquest proper, so to speak, but without the jury where legal points
                      can be discussed in a more conventional way. So, can we move on to
                      your next point?

MR KING:              Sir, well, as I say, in many ways I’ve only really given notice.

CORONER:              Yes, I understand.

MR KING:              Equally, when dealing with matters which, sir, you have ruled on in a
                      sense because you have very properly indicated how you propose to
                      proceed. I know not whether again I’m trespassing in asking to be heard
                      on a matter where the decision is made, if you’re inclined to make it, sir.
                      Could I just be heard to comment on the decision not to circulate in
                      advance the names of witnesses? I understand the logistical problem of
                      the statements, I fully understand that. The great advantage to those I
                      represent of knowing in advance the names of witnesses is this: that I
                      would hope, sir, that you would be willing at the end of the day to hear
                      representation as to your calling of witnesses who hadn’t been called.
00:20:46
CORONER:              May I interrupt you, Mr King, for one moment? I have in fact forestalled
                      you on that because I have already written - 1think it must be a month
                      ago; I haven’t got the letter in front of me - to every single firm of
                      solicitors that I was aware of - if I’ve missed any I apologise - specifically
                      requesting them to name people who they wished me to consider as
                      witnesses. I made it clear that the final decision would be mine but I did
                      invite them to draw my attention to anybody who they wanted me to
                      think about. You may be interested to know that I think I’ve had five
                      replies out of I don’t know how many I wrote to. Three of them said they
                      didn’t have any names and the other two did put forward a few names.

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                  6
                      There may be six but, anyway, a very small number.
0 0 :2 1 :5 6
                      So, if I can just come back to your point, that opportunity has already
                      been given. The mere fact that I don’t circulate names does not actually
                      stop you from telling me the names of people who you want me to
                      consider.

MR KING:              Sir, I appreciate that. Ever so gently and not wishing to (inaudible) your
                      time, I want to put the counterargument in that the nature of this inquiry,
                      where there have been a vast number of witnesses - when I say
                      witnesses; we know from the inquiry investigation the vast number of
                      statements from many, many people —

CORONER:              Yes, I know.

MR KING:              - before the Taylor inquiry began they were circulated and were added
                      to as it went on. I know a technique which has been adopted - it may be
                      the technique of convenience which will have to be un-adopted - on
                      many of those instructing solicitors, myself included, “Well let us wait
                      and see whom the Coroner intends to call to see whether we can see
                      any obvious omissions,” rather than doing it the other way round of
                      sitting down and making up their own list as if they were the Coroner of a
                      complete hole. Obviously there would be a duplication of effort on a
                      major scale. So, all I could urge upon you in the nature of an inquest of
                      this sort would be the extreme helpfulness of a list - not a list with any
                      statements at all. So, I leave that with you.

CORONER:              Yes, understand that.

MR KING:              Perhaps you might consider it again.

CORONER:              I will reconsider what you’ve said. I’m not sure whether I’ll be able to
                      oblige you but I will certainly reconsider it.

MR KING:              I’m obliged. Sir, again, I repeat ever so gently because I know I’m
                      trespassing on your jurisdiction, I urge you to make (inaudible) decision
                      as you wish as to the use to be made of the Lord Justice Taylor report.
                      We’re in support of the submission that it should be put before the jury,
                      not in its entirety - again, this perhaps might be reserved for an
                      argument before you when the other matter is concerned - but certain
                      paragraphs which can be identified because they are paragraphs which
                      go to facts and they would curtail a lot of argument as to certain events
                      because they’re there made out very clearly and succinctly.

                      So, if I might draw an analogy I know this is an inquisition; it is not a trial
                      - it’s not a civil trial and it’s not a criminal trial - but in the civil litigation,
                      which is now complete, a very useful device which everybody agreed to
                      was that it was agreed that the core facts, subject to anybody’s right to
                      say, “I dispute a particular fact,” would be as set out in certain numbered
                      paragraphs which were given and handed in. Everyone agreed at the
                      end of the day to approach it on that way and it proved to be a great
                      boon as a setting and a base upon which everyone could operate from
                      because, of course, of the difficulty of not wishing to be a public inquiry.
                      I could only urge again that perhaps some consideration could be given
                      to that.
00:24:46

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                         7
CORONER:              Yes. One of the reasons why I’m reluctant to use the report is because
                      it doesn’t necessarily follow that it is accepted, or that every paragraph is
                      accepted by every single party before me. It will be improper to use it. If
                      I did we would then have to argue out all the disputed aspects of it
                      insofar as they were relevant. If it were possible for the parties to reach
                      an agreement and say, “We accept the following paragraphs X, Y and
                      Z,” then of course I wouldn’t have any objection to that because it would
                      be an agreed statement and I would be quite happy with that. What I
                      don’t want to do is to introduce sections maybe of the report which
                      rightly or wrongly somebody may take objection to. That is why I want to
                      call the evidence, if you like, in toto in order to try and be fair to people
                      as far as I’m able.
0 0 :26:02
MR KING:              Maybe between now and perhaps (inaudible) if we do fix a (inaudible)
                      recovery view, if I can call it that, well that is a matter which could be
                      lack of communication between the parties.

CORONER:              Yes, exactly.

MR KING:              Sir, if I could just clarify the transcript evidence. You would have no
                      objections, as I understand it within the rules that you’ve laid down as to
                      privilege, for the transcripts being used in cross-examination as putting
                      to him, if it be the case, a previous inconsistent statement?

CORONER:              Yes, within certain limits.

MR KING:              Oh, of course.

CORONER:              Yes. The difficulty is that the public inquiry was done, if you like, on
                      slightly different premises from my powers, if you like, and also from the
                      way I intend to run this inquest. My main objective is to try and make
                      sure that we do things fairly.

MR KING:              Of course.

CORONER:              Which I’m sure you would want to support.

MR KING:              Sir, I have, you’ll be pleased to know, no observations on the documents
                      because, as I understand it, we’re going to feel our way through it, if I
                      can put it that way. I commend that and one can make observations,
                      perhaps, as it arises.

CORONER:              Yes.

MR KING:              Sir, might I just raise one piece of evidence which hasn’t been
                      mentioned so far which is I understand there is a video - 1may be wrong
                      -which is in your possession, Sir, of the events. I don’t know to what
                      extent you were intending to use that video to the jury.

CORONER:              Yes, I am glad you’ve reminded me about that. In fact you’ve reminded
                      me of two things. I will give everybody else a chance as well. At the
                      moment it looks as if Mr King’s got sole rights here but I will come back
                      to everybody. If I deal with him it may deal with some of the points
                      which are in your minds.
0 0 :28:01
                      There is what is known as a compilation video which is used in Lord

www.merrillcorp.com
                      Justice Taylor’s inquiry. It is about a two-hour tape. It is my present
                      intention to use that, to show it to the jury, because it is a useful
                      summary and actually so vividly demonstrates, if I can use that word -
                      there are one or two other videos also available, say, of 1988 events and
                      indeed I think there’s a bit of a video of an 1981 event which I might also
                      show them.
00:28:37
                      I have two caveats about the videos. First of all I do not intend to show
                      67 hours, or however many hours there are - but there are an awful lot -
                      of video footage. It is of no benefit to my jury or to my inquiry and I don’t
                      intend to do it. Secondly, I have no facilities for providing copies of this
                      video. Normally speaking, of course, if I take evidence I prepare a
                      transcript and if you want one you can have one, as indeed some of you
                      have done. You may say that, “If you show the video then that’s exactly
                      the same thing, it’s an exhibit and, therefore, you must produce copies.”
                      I have none.

                      So, I cannot - in fact I will not - produce copies for distribution to people
                      on request. If that isn’t acceptable then I would rather not —
00:29:40




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                      9
