    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions



Owning                     South Yorkshire Coroner
Organisation:

Title Memo:                Mini Inquest cassette - Meeting with Mark Webster, David
                           Pearson(?) and Pat O’Neil

Description:



This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the
digitised version of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement
by BR Consult to reduce noise and improve audibility of the incoming radio
transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
   Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                     101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                  Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
       Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
CORONER:              Meeting with Mark Webster Legal Department (telephone
                      number 734018). David Persian and Pat O’Neill. 10.20 AM.
                      W e’ll discuss the procedures relating to the matter. Mr
                      Webster was letting me have a synopsis of the legal position
                      as he understands it, but it appeared to him that at the
                      present time Baumber was the only officially seized enquiry
                      enforced. One additional enquiry was anticipated. In
                      addition to that, the Department of Environmental Health
                      would be holding their own enquiry, and in particular they
                      were concerned about the safety of the site. They requested
                      I should let them view any videos which existed, relating to
                      the area between the turnstiles and the tunnel, so that they
                      can determine whether any additional safety barriers were
                      needed.


                      I said that I would try and find out what videos we had, and
                      see if arrangements could possibly be made. I could see no
                      objection to it.


                      Part two, and I explained that I wanted to be as cooperative
                      as possible, it had to be clearly seen that I was independent
                      of the council, particularly as the council was, to a certain
                      extent, involved in the situation, because of their licensing
                      responsibilities. This was agreed and accepted.


                      Three: We discussed health and support. In particular, the
                      sort of inquest which we’d run, so that I had (inaudible
                      words), because it depended to a certain extent upon the
                      announcement today, but I anticipated we would need quite
                      a lot of space. I did not think that the inquest would be held
                      in the very near future.

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                       2
                      I outlined briefly my thoughts on how to organise things, and
                      explained that we would open inquests on Tuesday. I also
                      said that I anticipated that we might need legal help from a
                      counsel to the inquest more secretarial help and various
                      other things, but that I would be in touch and discuss this as
                      the need arose.


                      No objection was taken. Indeed, everybody wanted to be as
                      cooperative as they possibly could in the matter.


                      Next paragraph, I totally understand and the funeral
                      directors in Liverpool had been in touch with us and said that
                      they did not want us to move bodies in block. That they
                      wanted to come and collect them themselves and they were
                      not making any extra charge to the relatives for the excess
                      journey.


                      He said that he would be in touch with Graham to find out
                      who had been on the phone, and the council would do all
                      the necessary negotiations in that field.


                      Said that they were more than happy to assist with anything,
                      and in particular, that the Press Officer would be very happy
                      to help and would be in touch with me to see what needed to
                      be done.


                      The next was the matter of the stadium on the 29th of April
                      and it was urgent that the council makes decisions as to
                      what additional recommendations regarding barriers or
                      safety requirements should be implemented before then.


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                       3
                      Next section, I spoke to Chief Lieutenant Addis who rang
                      me. He confirmed that, as far as he was concerned, there
                      were now no police objections to the removal of the items of
                      equipment. I asked him that if West Midlands were going to
                      investigate the matter, they might want to have sight of the
                      locus without movement. He said that they still didn’t know
                      whether West Midlands would be dealing with the case, and
                      he would let me know as soon as he knew who the contact
                      man was.


                      In the meantime, I said I might get in touch with them myself.
                      He said it was a matter for me.


                      I took the opportunity of explaining to him that the hiccup
                      with (inaudible) wasn’t really as serious as he might have
                      thought because, even if we’d ask them to come there
                      would have been at least an additional three hours delay as
                      the turnout time is around four hours according to this sheet.


                      Mr Addis wasn’t sure whether West Midlands would be
                      merely looking into the police, whether they’d be acting for
                      me, or what the position would be. He would keep me
                      informed.


                      Telephone call from Mr Mice734643, one of the Assistant
                      Directors at Environmental Health. Apparently it had begun
                      to rain at Hillsborough, the engineers saying that if they
                      didn’t remove the metalwork straight away it would make it
                      very difficult to make a proper assessment. I said I thought




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                     4
                      that I had been told that it had been protected. He said:
                      “Yes, but only as well as one could.”


                      I explained that, if there was a judicial enquiry, the judge
                      might well want to see locus’, indeed the police. I said I’d
                      come back to him.


                      Next number, I had to telephone Mr Mattress and discussed
                      it with him. He explained the relationship between himself
                      and Sheffield City Council and said that, whilst there was
                      some overlap in legislation, that they had a more specific
                      role , it was agreed that Sheffield should be doing the
                      investigations, but that he would check with the mechanical
                      engineers as to whether it was absolutely essential for the
                      metalwork to be removed. He said he’d come back to me as
                      soon as possible.


                      Next number, telephone call to Chief Constable of the West
                      Midlands Police authority 021 236 5000. I spoke to Assistant
                      Chief Constable Jones, Mr Jones, who informed me that it
                      had not yet been definitively decided that they would be
                      charged with the task, nor had the terms of reference been
                      agreed, but as far as he knew, decisions would have to be
                      taken by 3pm. Similarly, we’re not yet in a position to say
                      who the judge if any will be heading the inquiry.


                      I explained the reason for my call was the urgency in relation
                      to the metalwork.


                      Next number: Mr Jones from Birmingham rang back and he
                      said that they were still not in a position to express a


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                     5
                      definitive view, but his Chief Constable’s advice was that he
                      felt that both they and the Judge would want to see the locus
                      and that the metalwork should not be removed. Until that
                      had been done he assumed that there would be a stink
                      tomorrow if they were appointed.


                      Next number: I telephoned Mr Rice, spoke to him and David
                      Persian I explained to him what had been said in
                      Birmingham, and asked them to take whatever steps were
                      necessary to preserve the scene, including erecting a tent or
                      what have you (inaudible) suggestion from Birmingham. Mr
                      Ricesaid that he would get in touch with the ground and put
                      things in hand.


                      In addition he mentioned that they were a little bit concerned
                      about the security of the site as some people seemed to be
                      wandering around.


                      Next number: Mr Max (?) (inaudible) telephoned me back.
                      He confirmed that the engineers had covered (inaudible
                      words) with some protective material and obviously they
                      wanted to do it as quickly as possible. I told him that I
                      suggested that this was properly covered (inaudible words),
                      he felt that they would not have the capacity, suggesting that
                      the club should be asked to do it. Mr Macarel, Club
                      Secretary, telephone number 343122.


                      Next Number: I telephoned Mr Persian again, and spoke to
                      him. I asked him whether he thought he had the capacity to
                      deal with this, so that I could ring the club, but I would prefer
                      not to do so, bearing in mind that it was their equipment we


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      6
                      were talking about. David said that the matter was in hand
                      and whatever needed to be done would be done.


                      Next Number: (inaudible) mentioned that he was a bit
                      concerned about the security at the site.


                      Next Number: I spoke to Mr Burden his assistant. I told him
                      what was happening to preserve the site and mentioned that
                      there was some concern about the security. I said would he
                      please make sure that no one else was present in access to
                      the offending area. He said that this would be put in hand.


                      Next number: I spoke to Mr Tidy as Dr Knapman was out. I
                      asked him how they set about adjourning the Clapham Train
                      disaster inquest. He said that, at the opening, they
                      adjourned it sine dire. They then resumed it in January with
                      solicitors, and had a further resumption in February when
                      formal identification evidence and pathology was taken, I
                      think this was in fact before a jury.


                      Next number: I had a conversation with the Vicar of
                      Grenoside (several inaudible words). We discussed
                      procedures. I said that we were not planning to have family
                      here tomorrow or Wednesday because we would no doubt
                      have them back at the main inquest, but there’s plenty of
                      time to do planning for that.


                      Next number: Superintendent John Charles, Detective
                      Inspector. Normally stationed a Rotherham but now
                      attached to Hammerton Road police station, 852211
                      extension 3201, came to see me. They had been charged


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                     7
with dealing with the inquiry, and assisting me. They
wanted to know what was happening as far as the opening
was concerned, and in particular whether I needed the
officers or any other witnesses at the opening. I said that as
far as we were concerned they were dealing with it
documentary,    by way of documents, that we had all the
necessary paperwork. I didn’t need anyone else there except
that I wanted a letter from him, confirming that there was no
objection to releasing the body


We discussed the interaction of the various enquiries and the
need for statements. I said that as far as I could see,
provided that statements were taken, I could see very little
advantage in triplicating these. Obviously at some point I
might well want to see them.


We discussed identification of location of the various
deceased. It was explained to me that there was
considerable difficulty with continuity, because bodies were
carried by all and sundry. Some of them were just dumped
at the mortuary, so nobody knew precisely where those
people had been standing who had been killed. There were
photographs, but it would be an absolutely enormous task to
try and identify where the people were located, assuming
that I wanted that done.


We discussed this for a while, and I suggested that they
should look through the photographs to see whether they
could find some good ones of the particular locus. These
could then be enlarged and the individual photographs taken
were sent to the families who might be able to identify their
                      own loved one much more quickly and more efficiently than
                      any police officer could. They thought this was an excellent
                      idea and were going to look into it.


                      Although initially I thought it wasn’t terribly important to know
                      precisely where the people were, the more we talked, the
                      more it seemed that this would be a good idea, not only from
                      the point of view of the inquest, but also because it might
                      give an answer as to what was actually happening.


                      Next number: Both officers offered me their full co­
                      operation, which I thank them.


                      Next number: I immediately told them about the problem
                      with the videos and asked them if they would be kind enough
                      to find out precisely what they did have, particularly of videos
                      of that area, and let me know. I said this was urgent and
                      they understood this.


                      Apparently there is an officer who’s summarising the videos
                      and would let me have a copy of the statements.


                      Next number: apparently the BBC have refused to release
                      their footage. Joan remind me about this when you give it to
                      me please, because I need to write to the BBC and ITV and
                      ask them for copies of the videos.


                      Next number: I asked them if they could please obtain a
                      copy of the log the inspector Jackson (?)when he rang me
                      on the Saturday afternoon so that I could get the correct
                      timing.


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      9
                      Next number: I spoke to Michael Jadroldine (?)01671 office
                      301199. We discussed arrangements for the openings so
                      that they would have people available in case relatives
                      turned up.


                      Next number: I spoke to Phillip Dent, Press Officer 734052. I
                      read him the press statement, which he thought was good.
                      He said he’d come back to me as quickly as possible as to
                      how it could be best released.


                      Next number: I spoke to Mr Dent again. Press conference
                      was at 6.30. David Persian thought it would be a good idea
                      if I was present, and he would say I wasn’t answering any
                      questions. I said it would be very difficult for me to be there
                      at 6.30, and in any case I wasn’t sure whether I wanted to
                      be. We agreed that I would drop off the press statement and
                      they would distribute it.




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                    10
