HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

- S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

            15th March, 1991




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                 Page

     M. GODDARD Recalled

          Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning (Cont)     1
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King              12
          Further by The Coroner                  21
          Further Cross-Examined by M r . King    22
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien          38
          Cross-Examined by M r . Russell         54
          Further by The Coroner                  58
          Cross-Examined by M r . Payne           61
     J. K1LLOCH Recalled

          By The Coroner                          61
PROCEDURAL MATTERS                                63
     T. BICHARD Sworn

          By The Coroner                          73
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning           87
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King              95
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs           108
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King     111
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne    111
          Further Cross-Examined by M r . King   111

PROCEDURAL MATTKRS                               113
           SEVENTY FIRST DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

               FRIDAY. 15th MARCH. 1991


               MICHAEL GODDARD Recalled

      Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING (Continued)

Mr. Goddard, since I have not got the transcript in front
of me, perhaps let me spend thirty seconds just finding
out where we were.   We had established, Sergeant, that
within the Control Box the numbers of people, that it was
very much a team.   Although there was rank, obviously,
amongst that team, nonetheless if somebody had seen
something that was needed to be drawn to another's
attention that, as part of the team, would be done
automatically within it? - A. That is correct, sir.

You accepted that yourself had been experienced, you have
been described as very reactive to any particular
situation, that you knew there were men of considerable
experience in Sector Commanders and down through the
various Commanders down to the PCs who were doing the job
week in, week out, knowing what they had to do, knowing
what was expected of them? - A. That is correct.

We had established that even though you were a Sergeant,
that if one of the Superintendents had said something
that you thought was perhaps not a correct assumption or
not a correct assessment of the situation, you would have
been prepared to have said, "I am not sure that is
right ? -A. Yes, sir.

My learned friend Mr. Isaacs helps me by what I think was
the last answer, "If I had thought they were wrong I
would given my own impression of it."   Can we look at
the views on the monitor that you have in front of you,
or more precisely, they are almost above you? - A. Above
me, yes, sir.

You have got to crane your neck? - A. Yes, you look back
and up.

That, of course, is one of the reasons why PC Bichard
sits in the row behind because he has a more natural look
of those monitors? - A. A direct view.

I think it is right to say that the view on the monitors
does not give the view of the turnstile wall itself?
You cannot see people right up to that wall? - A. That is
correct.
                                               M. GODDARD


So when it was that Mr. Marshall said to you there was
crushing at the front that was something you could not
see? -A. That is correct, sir.

When you looked at the monitor of what was going on what
was going on in Leppings Lane it would be right to say
that you could not, yourself, other than that there were
people there, you could not see why he was asking in the
first instance for the road to be closed? - A. That is
correct.

When he said to you ultimately that the gates needed to
be opened, again you could not see at that time what it
was that was in his mind, in his sight, to have caused
that to be said? - A. That is also correct, sir.

Of course, as we have established before, Superintendent
Marshall was a very experienced Officer, second-in-
command, effectively took command when the Commanding
Officer wasn't there? - A. That is correct.

Therefore, on that basis there was very great weight to
be placed upon his statements? - A. Undoubtedly, yes,
sir.

Insofar as the general watching is concerned, and now I
go back a stage to come forwards, it is right that
although 1988 had by common agreement been a very
successful operation, that the one problem that had been
noticed was the point on the Kop end between the two sets
of supporters? - A. That is correct.

When it came to the orders for 1989, one of the specific
monitoring points was that Kop end? - A. That is correct.

Indeed, it was considered to be so significant that one
camera was trained on that particular position? -A. That
is right.

Can we now look at talk-through?   I do not think we need
too much by way of technicality because we have all heard
in general terms that it means everybody can hear what is
being said on the radio.   If 800 Officers were all
talking on the radio that, of course, would be an
impossibility? - A. That is correct.

What it means is that messages have to be kept relatively
short and that by and large they have to be kept to a
relevant point? - A. That is correct, sir.

Of course the relevance of the Control was not only in
relation to what was going on inside the ground, but also
immediately outside the ground and then in the environs
of the ground? - A. That is correct, sir.
                                                             3

                                                    M. GODDARD


Q. Whilst it may not have been as relevant at say quarter to
   three, from twelve o'clock onwards you were getting
   reports on the radio from people in the environs about
   problems and disturbances at public houses with
   householders complaining about people urinating?    All
   these sort of things were happening the area were coming
   through Control as well? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. By and large it is right to say that the talk-through
   mode is the mode adopted by most Police Forces for this
   sort of situation? - A. That is correct.

Q. It was not something particularly innovative so far as
   South Yorkshire is concerned? - A. No, not at all.

Q. Although one may have some doubts about its success and
   particularly on this day, may I just suggest to you three
   instances where talk-through clearly saved the necessity
   of you having to send out another message as a result of
   hearing or receiving a message?   The first was that a
   message was received from the front for PC Buxton to go
   with the Land Rover? - A. To Leppings Lane, that is
   correct, sir.

Q. It is right, isn't it, that without you having to send
   that message to PC Buxton wherever he was, that PC Buxton
   actually radioed in and said, "I am on my way”? - A. Yes,
   he responded immediately.

Q. The second one was in fact in relation to the monitoring
   of conversations by the civilian engineer.   You would
   have had to have called him up when you received the
   information that the radio was down, or was breaking up,
   but in fact you had an opportunity to do so he had
   already crossed from wherever he was and got to your
   Control Room because he too had heard it on talk-over? -
   A. that is correct.

Q. The third one, just yet another very different is the
   Inspector Sewell situation, where a request was made for
   Serials to go to the Leppings Lane turnstiles.   This was
   part of, if one may say, the rescue attempt.   In other
   words, the attempt...

          THE CORONER:   I do not really think it matters what
     it was for and I am not sure whether it is relevant to
     give all of the examples, but if you want to give the
     example, fair enough, but not the reasoning.

Q.        MR. MANNING:  Is it right, Sergeant, that Inspector
     Sewell, without your having to put a message through, he
     went immediately on to the air and said he had spare
     Serials and that he would despatch them? - A. That is
     correct.
                                               M. GODDARD


In terms of the breakdown of the radio, would you agree
with me that that had a calamitous effect insofar as your
ability to operate is concerned? - A. Yes, exactly.
Yes, sir.

And that that was compounded by the actual physical
disruption that came from (a) not being able to
immediately have one microphone changed for another
microphone and that still did not work and (b) then
having to get up from your seat and having a man crawling
under the table trying to fix wires, pull out a spare
system and get it all up and going again? - A. Yes, it
was certainly disruptive.   Most disruptive.




     Q. That was at a time
                                                               5

                                                      M. GODDARD


Q. That was at a time that was critical to the general
   running of the whole operation? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is it right to say that the knock on effect of that is
   that people who are trying to pass messages through to
   you are not able to do so? - A. That is correct.

Q. So they begin to queue up for the ability to get on to
   the air? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. In doing that, if you pause for a moment or   even pause
   momentarily to take a breath, it might give   somebody
   else the opportunity to come in on that air   wave and to
   take over the message so that you might get   the mumbo
   jumbo of one person talking and getting the   phrase in
   and somebody else coming in and getting the   next one? -
   A. Yes, that is absolutely correct, yes.

Q. We were not there, Sergeant, you were. Perhaps what
   you take as normal we need to understand so far as the
   difficulties and major problems you were experiencing
   on that day? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The one difference between what you had before when it
   was working and what you were left with after the
   engineer had finished was that you then had no override
   feature? - A. That is correct.

Q. How important is that, Sergeant? - A. It is most
   important. You are trying to keep messages down to a
   minimum or the length of messages down to a relative
   minimum. Everyone knows that but unfortunately it does
   happen that people do on occasions tend to ramble on
   when we could stop them. With the sets being down we
   could not stop them at all.

Q. You could not in any way gain priority for something
   which you might know is more urgent than somebody's
   message? - A. Yes, that is correct, sir.

Q. Can I now turn to look at another topic and that is the
   pens. You said that you always have a general look
   around the ground from where you are sitting? - A. That
   is correct, yes.

Q. It is right to say, and the Jury have been there as
   have all of we, that the straight view ahead of you is
   in fact along the Leppings Lane terrace, along the West
   Stand. That is more or less in front of the Control
   Box as you look straight out of the window? - A. Yes,
   to look from my position directly out of the window you
   would be looking along the perimeter track more so,
   directly along Leppings Lane.
                                                                   6.

                                                          M. GODDARD


Q. You said that at 2.15 you had looked through those
   windows and there was nothing to draw your attention to
   any problems? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. You said that at 2.30 PC Bichard drew your attention
   and may I first of all put to you, Sergeant, that is
   again an example of the team work.  He had seen
   something and he drew your attention to it? - A. That
   is correct, sir, yes.

Q. Your evidence to the Inquest is very simple;  you never
   saw anything unusual in that Leppings Lane terrace in
   the pens there until you saw the people climbing over
   around three o'clock? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

Q. I wonder having said the negative, Sergeant, I wonder
   if you can help us with signs of normality that you may
   have seen.   Did you at any time see people climb on to
   the barriers and then dive off them again? - A. Not
   climb on to barriers and dive.   No, I did not see that.

Q.   Did you see swaying in the crowd? - A.   There was
     movement in the crowd, yes.

Q.   Did you see a beach ball? - A. Yes, it was being
     knocked around within the central pens, yes.

Q. Is that in your experience something which displays
   normality in people? - A. Most definitely, yes, sir.

Q. Did you see at all people punching the air to either
   acknowledge or applaud the teams when they were being
   announced? Do you remember seeing that at all? - A.
   Not particularly, no, sir.

Q. You have said that your view is principally along the
   perimeter track itself.  That is the straight view.   So
   far as the pens themselves are concerned I am right in
   thinking that your view is partially obscured certainly
   at the front by the overhang of the perimeter fence? -
   A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. Would you agree with me, Sergeant, that the view in
   front of you is more easily ascertainable than the view
   at the distance?  In other words, that you have a
   somewhat blurred view of pen 6? - A. Most definitely,
   yes, sir.

Q. Could I invite you to have a look at a couple of
   photographs please? These are photographs we have seen
   before, 490 and 449 from 1989.  That is No. C.490.  490
   is the view not quite of what you are going to get from
                                                         M. GODDARD


       the Control Box because it is more straight on to the
       pens whereas you are more looking down the fence but
       not dissimilar to the view you are getting.  Would you
 B     agree? - A. Yes, I would agree.  Obviously we are a
       little bit further to the right and so the front part
       we just cannot see.

     Q. We are looking there across numerically upwards, in
        other words, 1 and 2 in front of you and looking down
        towards pen 6? - A. Yes, that is correct, sir.

     Q. That in 1988 is said to be an even distribution of the
        crowd across the whole terrace with all the sections of
        the terrace being more or less equally filled? - A.
        Yes.

     Q. Would you now look at the second photograph, Sergeant,
        which is C.449? That again is looking across.   It is
        obviously a slightly different angle and probably
        slightly different again from what you would be seeing
        but can you cast your eye across there and look towards
        pen 6 again? - A. Yes, I can, sir.

     Q. Can you see any obvious difference between what you saw
        on that earlier photograph - and keep your finger in
        490 - looking at pen 6 from what you can see there
        looking at pen 6? - A. No, I can't, sir.

     Q. Of course, 449 was taken in the disaster match and we
        now know that pen 6 was an area where there was an
        awful lot of space? - A. Yes, that is correct, sir.

     Q. That is not something in any way that you could... - A.
        That I couldn't see, no.

     Q. My learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, put to you yesterday and
        I put to you again, Sergeant, just to get the picture,
        that you accept part of your Control Room duty is to
        monitor the ground as a whole? - A. Yes.

     Q. Obviously, therefore, the pens and the Leppings Lane
        terrace is part of that ground? - A. That is part and
        parcel of it, yes, sir.

     Q. Again when you accept part of that responsibility it is
        fair to say that that is a team effort? - A. That is
        correct, yes.

     Q. You have said you are the recipients and conveyors of
        pieces of information from all sorts of sources and so
        far as the Leppings Lane terraces are concerned we have
        the serials in the West Terrace, the serials of the
        Community Officers on the perimeter and any other




HI
                                                    M. GODDARD


Officers all of whom could feed information in to
you? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

In the monitoring process is it right that PC Bichard
spotted and brought to your attention a Police horse
that was apparently outside on the Leppings Lane
entrances and appeared to be at that time surrounded by
a crowd? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

As a result of that did you completely off your own
bat, being reactive to that situation, send a message
to Sergeant Soresby to send any spare mounted Officers
round to the Leppings Lane entrance? - A. I don't know
about that. I just cannot remember on that. I know
that mounted were sent but whether it was in relation
to that particular incident I do not know. I cannot
say, sir.




                         /Q. Did you know in general.
                                              M. GODDARD


Did you know in general terms, Sergeant, that the
Leppings Lane Terrace had all of its radial gates
locked open? - A. They were open, yes.

And that the terrace was treated, so far as   the Police
were concerned, as one unit ....

     THE CORONER:   We have had this. That is
precisely what I don't want to do, Mr. Manning, it is
unnecessary.  I want to take evidence on what this
Officer did, saw and heard, insofar as it is relevant,
and insofar as it is applicable to your client.

     MR. MANNING:   You knew that people generally, or
some people generally preferred to take a position
behind the goal, is that your experience? - A. Yes,
that is correct, sir.

That the part behind the goal tended to have people in
more quickly than the parts at the side? - A. Yes.

But that the North West Terrace was also a popular
viewing spot?- A. That is correct as well, yes, sir.

You knew that in 1988 in the essence of the "Mole" plan
that the crowd had spread across the terrace in a
successful way? - A. That is correct, yes.

Did you believe that Hillsborough was a well policed
Ground and that the South Yorkshire Police was a good
Force in relation to its policing policy of football? -
A. Most definitely, yes, sir.

I have suggested to you that you could not see the wall
of the turnstiles, and the reasons why we had to look
particularly at Mr. Marshall as being the experienced
Officer on the spot, but it is right, isn't it, that
when Mr. Marshall made his request for Gate C, or for
the gates, to be opened that P.C. Bichard then zeroed
in on or concentrated his camera on Gate C? - A. That
is correct, yes.

At that time, having brought his camera to bear there,
he said either, "The gate s gone", or "The gate's
burst", something to that effect? - A. Something was
said, whether it was P.C. Bichard that said that I
don't know, but something was said, "The gate's gone",
"The gate's burst".

And by that time you had caused tannoy messages to be
sent over the tannoy outside the Leppings Lane
turnstiles?
                                               M. GODDARD


     THE CORONER:   That is not right.    He did not
operate the tannoy.

     MR. MANNING:   I did not say that.   I said, "You
had caused ....".

     THE CORONER:   Sorry, I misunderstood you.     Let's
see whether he had caused it.

     MR. MANNING:   Had you? - A. Mr. Murray had,
certainly, yes.

Had you heard that? - A. I had heard P.C. Ryan on the
tannoy, yes.

Thank you very much, that helps.  You had sent the
mounted Police and the reserve serials? - A. Yes.

And the words, and we have established it already, from
Mr. Marshall were, "Open the gates or people will get
killed"? - A. Yes, sir.

Had you in your experience, Sergeant, ever come across
a situation like that? - A. Not at all, sir, no.

Would you accept the words that have been used, unique
and unprecedented? - A. I would.

And you used the word already that it was a demand? -
A. Yes, most definitely, yes, sir.

Did you form the view that there was any time then for
delay? Of course, I am talking about the third
message, if you like, the "demand" message.  Was there
any time then to delay making that decision? - A. There
was no time, none at all, sir, no.

In your view, Sergeant, was there any alternative but
to accede to that request/demand? - A. None whatsoever,
sir, no.

Is it right to say that you had to display intense
concentration upon that decision in an effort to save
lives? - A. That is correct, sir.

Is it right to say that in the tremendous pressure to
take that course of action you were intent upon saving
lives, and nothing else was obvious to you at that time
except to save lives? - A. Yes, sir.

You were watching the monitor of people coming through
Gate C at the time that Sergeant Higgins then requested
the opening of Gate A? - A. I would have been, yes,
                                                M. GODDARD


Is it right then that the camera then moved via P.C.
Bichard to show a shot of Gate A? - A. Yes, it lifted
up to go to "A", yes.

Is it right, Sergeant, that you did not form any link
or risk so far as you were concerned of the people who
were already standing on the terraces as a result of
the opening of the gates? - A. That is correct.

You have said that when the fans got onto the concourse
you believed that there were a number of options, both
as to what they would then do at that moment in time,
and then where they would go? - A. Where they would go,
yes, sir.

And you have said, I remind you, Sergeant, that you
believe that there is probably nobody who has got a
better knowledge of the Ground than you? - A. That is
correct, sir.

But you, even with that expert knowledge, did not think
of any link between Gate C and the tunnel? - A. None
whatsoever, no, sir.

Does it follow from that, Sergeant, that if you had
considered that there was any risk, whether in relation
to the tunnel or indeed to any other aspect of safety,
and particularly bearing in mind that the action had
been taken to try and save injuries occurring or even
the loss of the life, that in those circumstances you
would have taken all action that you could have
considered necessary? - A. All possible action would
have been taken, yes, sir.

Thank you very much indeed, Sergeant.

     MR. KING:    Sir, can I say I don't intend to be as
long as I have   been with a number of witnesses on these
matters.

     THE CORONER:    I am pleased to hear it.

     MR. KING: Can I say, sir, if I omit to put   to a
witness that this is not accepted on behalf of my
clients, that should not be inferred as a concession
that it is, if you understand me.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, of course.

     MR. KING:   I am mindful, sir, of your indication
to get on with matters.
                                             M. GODDARD


             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Sergeant Goddard, can I first of all go to the opening
of the gates? The first message came through and you
believed the first message only concerned Gate C, that
is right, isn't it? - A. That is correct, yes.

Because of that, was that your process of reasoning,
therefore, that because it only applied to Gate C, when
not long after that first request had been made you saw
it open and shut for 20 seconds and a few people came
through, you thought that was the end of the matter,
was that your reasoning? - A. Not necessarily the end
of the matter, but it had alleviated -- it had
required what Mr. Marshall wanted, that  had been done,
yes.

Because you believed he wanted just one gate opened? -
A. That was my belief, yes.

Of course, if you had believed he wanted three gates
opening the same process of reasoning could not have
applied to you, could it? - A. Exactly.

You would agree with that? - A. Yes.

Secondly, you say, I think, there were three messages,
I think that is your recollection? - A. That is my
recollection, yes, sir.

We have dealt with the first one; following the first
one, opening and shutting of Gate C. The second
message comes through; you don't get a decision
straight away after the second message from Mr.
Duckenfield, do you? - A. Not straight away, no, but by
that time, of course, the third one had come.

I am going to deal with the difference between the
second and the third.  Between the second and the third
there was, wasn't there, discussion going on within the
Box as to whether or not to open the gates? - A. I
believe there was some form of discussion going on as
to that, yes, sir.

And that discussion would involve Mr. Duckenfield? - A.
Yes.

And Mr. Murray? - A. And Mr. Murray.

In that discussion did anybody voice this question:
where does Gate C lead to? - A. Not that I am aware of,
                                             M. GODDARD


The video camera, of course, was concentrated on Gate
C, wasn't it? - A. That is right, yes.

At the time this discussion was going on? - A. Yes.

And outside Gate C you could see a large crowd of
people? - A. No.  You can't see it because of the wall,
the gate.

I won't argue because it is a matter of evidence and
there is video ....

     THE CORONER:   I think there is a
misunderstanding.  I think Sergeant Goddard means he
can't see exactly outside the gate.

That is what you are saying, isn't it, you can't see
precisely outside the gate? - A. No, no way.

     MR. KING:   Let me put it this way, because I am
mindful about not arguing about what is right, what is
wrong - that is for the Jury, not me:

You knew there was a large number of people outside
that area, put it like that? - A. I did, yes, sir.

Putting it simply, if Gate C was opened it was obvious
that a large number of people were going to come in? -
A. Yes.




                  /Q. So I go back
                                             M. GODDARD


So I go back.  During that discussion which you have
told us about, no one asked you, "Where does that gate
lead to?” that is right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Of course, you were well versed with the ground, were
you not? - A. Yes.

If you had been asked the question, say by Mr.
Duckenfield who did not know the ground, "Where does
that gate lead to?” you could have told him, could you
not? - A. I would have done, yes.

If you had turned your mind to it, and I accept it
appears you did not but if you had turned your mind to
it, you could have been able to say, "Well, Gate C
leads to outside turnstiles A to G, turnstiles A to G
is where the Leppings Lane fans come into the terraces
and it leads onto the concourse where there is a big
tunnel", you would have known that? - A. I would have
known that.  It obviously leads onto the concourse,
yes, but it just does not lead to the tunnel.  We have
got the options.  Once we are in the concourse, we
then have the options of going where we want to go.

Mr. Goddard, I appreciate what you say about options
of people coming in in ones and twos.  I just want to
ask you questions about what you knew, what answer you
would be able to give as to where it led on to.   You
would know, would you not, from your intimate
knowledge of the ground that that part of the
concourse immediately on the other side of turnstiles
A to G was the way in which people going onto the
terraces that day were going to come? You knew that?
- A. Yes.

You would know, would you not, that immediately in
front of you as you came through those turnstiles the
main entrance open to you and visible to you as you
came through was a big tunnel, you would know that? -
A. Yes.

I will not take it any further with you as to what was
obvious because that is a matter of argument, and I am
not going to, but the fact is you could have supplied
such information as had been requested of you in that
discussion if anybody had asked you the question
"Where does this gate lead to?"? - A. Yes sir.

If anybody had asked you the question, "Where is this
large crowd of people likely to go once they are
through?" if anybody had asked you that, that is again
a question you could have turned your mind to? - A. I
could have done, yes.
                                             M. GODDARD

But again no one asked you that question? - A. That
was not asked.

Then, of course, the gate was opened on the orders of
Mr. Duckenfield? - A. That is correct, yes.

I want to clarify, if I may, the time gap between the
order to open Gate C and it being opened, which we
know was at 2.52, and your recollection, not based on
what people have told you but your recollection, of
when the request for Gate A came through.   Is it not
right, first of all, that your recollection was that
it was something like three or four minutes after, I
shall call it the official opening of Gate C, that the
request came through from the person we know to be
Sergeant Higgins, requesting Gate A to be opened? - A.
There was a request from Sergeant Higgins.   What
period of time went by between the C gate opening and
the request for A gate to be opened, I do not know,
but I would not suggest to you that it was three to
four minutes.  I would think it was less than that.

That is what you are saying now, but let me
investigate it a bit further.  First of all you
thought, did you not, originally, your original
recollection, that by the time Gate A was opened, Gate
C had been closed after its opening? - A. That was my
original idea, yes.

We know that Gate C was opened at 2.52, and we know
that Gate C was closed at 2.57, just after, some five
minutes later - all right? - A. Yes.

On that recollection that by the time Gate A was
opened Gate C had been closed, it would put the
opening of Gate A on that about five minutes after the
official opening of Gate C, would it not? - A. Had my
initial thoughts been correct, yes, that would have
been right.

Your official thought may be correct to this extent.
You clearly had the view on that thought that there
was a substantial period of time between the official
opening of Gate C and the opening of Gate A.  That
would fit in with that recollection, would it not? -
A* It would fit in with that recollection, yes.

Can I also suggest to you again that your original
thought was that it was three or four minutes, or it
might be less but three or four minutes, after the
opening of Gate C, the official opening, that this
request came through for Gate A? - A. That was my
original thought, yes.
                                              M. GODDARD

So you accept that then? - A. Yes.

So your original recollection was (1) that Gate A was
opened after Gate C had been closed and (2) that the
request for Gate A was something like three or four
minutes later? - A. A period like that, yes.

Of course, if that is right, there was during the
period Gate C was opened between 2.52 and 2.57 no
distraction a3 regards the request for Gate A, no
distraction by that request from everybody in the
Control Box being able to see what was happening as
the people came through Gate C, that is right, is it
not? - A. That is right, yes.  Everybody was
concentrating on Gate C, yes.

Why have you changed your mind, if you have, as to
this length of time between the opening of Gate C
officially and the request for Gate A? Why have you
changed your mind? - A. Because I subsequently found
out that my original recollections were not correct.

From whom have you found out? - A. Certainly after the
event.

From whom? - A. The Mr. Justice Taylor Inquiry.

Forget about Mr. Justice Taylor's Inquiry, he can get
things right, he can get things wrong.  I can in fact,
if necessary, remind you of what you said to Lord
Justice Taylor which fits in with your original
recollection totally. - A. And I saw it on video, of
course.

The only thing we have on video - and I think I will
be corrected if I am wrong - is 2.58, is it not?

     THE CORONER:   As far as I know, that is all there
is on video.

     MR. ISAACS:    But that, sir, is the gate actually
opened.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I think that is right.

     MR. PAYNE:  It is slightly unfair, sir.  This
Sergeant is asked what made him change his mind, he
has given his answer and now he is told, "Forget about
it".

     THE CORONER: No, no, no, no.

      MR. KING:  I know it is Friday and I know we are
coining to an end, but really!
                                             M. GODDARD


     MR. PAYNE:  That is exactly what happened and the
transcript will show that is exactly what was put.

      THE CORONER: Mr. King was surprised that he said
it was Lord Justice Taylor who made him change his
mind.

     MR. PAYNE:   That is his answer.

     THE CORONER: MR. King, please, you may ask one or
two more questions on this.

     MR. KING:  Let me do this through questions.  If
the video shows Gate A in the state of openness at
2.56 - all right? - A. Yes.

That certainly is consistent with your original
recollection that Gate A became open some substantial
time after Gate C was originally asked to be opened
officially, that would be right, would it not? - A. A
gate was opened after C gate certainly, yes.

Think this through, Sergeant Goddard.  Your original
recollection was that Gate C was officially opened, is
that right? - A. Yes.

Then there was a gap of time which we know was about
five minutes while people came through, and then it
was shut, and then your original recollection was that
Gate A then became open in the way you have described.
That is right, is it not? - A. That was my original
recollection, yes.

On that original recollection then, of course, Gate A
would become open at about 2.58? - A. Yes.

So piecing together these pieces of evidence from
different sources, your original recollection that
Gate A was not asked to be opened until after Gate C
had been closed, your original recollection that it
was three or four minutes after the official opening
of Gate C and the request for the opening of Gate A,
and the video evidence that at 2.58 we see Gate A in a
state of openness - all that fits together, does it
not? - A. Yes.

So really there is no reason, is there, for you to
change your original recollection? - A. There is no
reason other than the fact that when I saw other
things I realised that obviously my timing was wrong.

I am going to suggest to you no more than your timing
is right.
                                                           18

                                                   M. GODDARD

 Q*        THE CORONER:  We are going round in circles.   Can
      you tell me as plainly as you are able, and then I
      think we will have established this, what has
      happened, or what have you learned, which makes you
      now believe that your original timing was wrong, just
      tell me what it is? - A. Basically because I saw a
      video prior to Mr. Justice Taylor's Inquiry and
      obviously on looking at that it led me to believe that
      my timings were wrong.  That is the reason, sir.

Q.    That is the sole reason why? - A. Yes, and I think I
      was questioned on that by Mr. Justice Taylor's
      Inquiry.

Q*          MR. KING: Apart from the video which we know
      shows Gate A in a state of openness at 2.58, what else
      do you recall is to be seen on a video which helps us
      as to the opening of Gate A? - A. I just don't know,
      sir.  I do not know what you mean.

Q.    Let us leave that for the moment because again that is
      just a question of fact.

           THE CORONER: I think that is right.  I do not
      think we can take it much further than that.

           MR. KING:  It is a question of fact, sir.
Q.    But on that fact, if it be the fact that there was
      this period, a substantial period on these figures of
      anything between four and six minutes, between the
      official opening of Gate C and the request for Gate A,
      during that period there was ample opportunity within
      that period for everybody in the Control Box, if they
      so wished (1) to look at the people coming through
      Gate C because that was on the video the whole time,
      was it not? - A. Yes.

Q.    And (2) to look at the terrace if they so wished? - A.
      Possibly, possibly, but the main concentration was on
      Gate C, that is the obvious thing.

Q.    I am talking now after.  I have moved on a bit.  I am
      talking about after Gate C was opened and people came
      through in a stream - all right? - A. Yes.

Q.    On this basis of fact, which is not for me to resolve,
      that there was this period of up to six minutes before
      the Gate A request came through, during that period
      everybody could see the stream of people coming
      through Gate C - right? - A. Yes.

Q.    As I understand it, when that happened you were no
      longer concentrating on that because on your evidence
      that had alleviated the situation?
                                                     '' 19

                                               M. GODDARD


     THE CORONER: Can I just stop you for a moment,
Mr. King, because you put it to him that in his
original statement he said it was three or four
minutes.

     MR. KING:  I did not get that from his original
statement.  Do you want me to say where I got it?

     THE CORONER: Yes.

     MR. KING:     I got it from the Lord Justice Taylor
Inquiry.

     THE CORONER: I have turned up a reply of his to
Lord Justice Taylor, and I have also got his original
statement and, in fact, he specifies on two occasions
the time when the request came through from Sergeant
Higgins.  Perhaps if you are going to ask him the
question, then you must put that to him as well.  Do
you want to see a copy?

     MR. KING:     Certainly I will take it in stages
then, sir.

     THE CORONER: I do not want to spend too much time
on this.

     MR. ISAACS:    Which page, could you help us?

     THE CORONER: Lord Justice Taylor, page 99.  It is
a reply to Mr. Jackson.  Mr. Jackson puts it to him
and he agrees, and it fits in with his original
statement.




                            /MR. KING:   Sir, that
                                                            20

                                                     M. GODDARD


     MR. KING:   Sir, that is right on the timings as
regards his assumption that Gate A was 2.52.   I accept
that, sir.   However, what is more important is his
recollection which I have been putting to him of the
relationship between the request for Gate A to be opened
and the other events, sir.   If one looks at his evidence
on the same day in the same transcript, he was not being
pinned down as to whether he was right or wrong about
what time Gate C was opened, but he was being questioned
about the relationship between the Gate A order and the
earlier request.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I realise that.    I understand
that point, but what I am concerned about is if we are
dealing with that I think it is also important to find
out why he mentioned a time, which he did.

     MR. KING:   Sir, can I deal with this and then can I
ask for a break after I have dealt with this part?

     THE CORONER:      Yes.

     MR. KING:   Can I show him, sir, first of all the
passage on pages 86 and 87 of the transcript and then I
will take him to page 99, sir?

     THE CORONER:   All we want to do is to establish the
facts as far as we can.

     MR. KING:      Indeed.

     THE CORONER:      What   were the pages,Mr.   King?

     MR. KING:   Pages 86, 87 and 99.   Page 86 is letter
C, sir.   Page 87 it is letters D to E, sir.

     THE CORONER:   In fact that is exactly what you have
established from him up to now.

     MR. ISAACS:   Save, sir, that he says quite clearly,
"I would say three or four minutes, maybe.   It might be
less than that.

     MR. KING:   With respect I said that to him, sir.
I said to him, "Four minutes or less," when I put it to
him.

     MR. ISAACS:   My learned friend is very good at this
and I have great admiration for his advocacy.   He picks
the bits he wants to rely on and he rejects the rest.
We all know that through the course of these Inquests
that witnesses were looking at these events at a time
when they were not thinking that at some stage later they
were going to have to remember what happened.   We all
                                                M. GODDARD


also know that never mind about this aspect of the
matter, many witnesses have said many things that have
been directly contradictory or they have moved their
times, because people just did not know.   My learned
friend, as he did at the outset, before you very fairly
drew his attention to certain aspects of the evidence,
and particularly that 2.52 time, was happy to pick out a
little bit, as we see - "Three to four minutes  - and
leave out the next bit, "It might be less than that."

     MR. KING:   With respect, sir, I did not leave out
the less bit because I put it to him that he thought it
was three or four minutes, or might be less.

     THE CORONER:   We will see from the transcript if it
is there.   May I put this to this witness and then we
will break and you can pick it up?

               Further by THE CORONER:

Sergeant Goddard, what we are trying to do is to
establish as near as we can what happened.  You have told
Mr. King and the Inquest various things about your
original ideas as to when Gate C was opened and as to
when Gate A was opened.   You were asked almost identical
questions before Lord Justice Taylor? - A. That is
correct.

Now you have got those sheets in front of you.    You were
asked on that occasion - first of all you were asked how
long after the opening of Gate C, did Gate A open.    I am
summarising two questions.    Read the answer at C.   Is
that correct what you said there? - A. Yes, "Probably
three or four minutes I would suggest.    I would say
three or four minutes, maybe.    It might less than that."

Then you explain why you authorised him to open the
gates? - A. Yes.

On the next page, page 87, it was drawn to your attention
that in your statement you had said - this is at letter D
- you had said, "By the time A Gate was opened the gates
at C had been closed."   You were asked,  Is that right?"
Your response was, "That was my belief at that time,
which is basically what you have told us now. - A. Yes,
sir.

You were then asked whether it was right again and what
did you say? - A. "I do not believe so, not now.   Not
now I have seen the video."

I asked you about that and you have told us that the
reason why you have changed your mind is simply because
you saw the video? - A. That is correct.
                                                               22
                                                      M. GODDARD


Q. If we turn to page 99, you were asked about this again.
   In fact this is also in your statement.   One of the
   lawyers asked you, "At 2.52, or thereabouts, Sergeant
   Higgins came through and said words to the effects that
   the gates at A have got to be open as if not somebody
   would be killed?"    Now your response...   Look at the
   response.   Is that a correct answer to that question
   that is written down there? - A. Yes.

Q. What was it? - A. "That is correct, yes, sir."

Q. Why did you agree that the request from Sergeant Higgins
   was made at 2.52 or thereabouts? - A. Basically because
   that was the question that was put to me and no doubt
   Sergeant Higgins had in his own statement given the time,
   this time factor.   In relation to times that is
   something I cannot dwell upon in that I would not have
   known whether it was 2.52, 2.51, or whatever, sir.

Q.   If you have a look at your  statement in the middle of
     this page - check that that is your signature at the
     bottom. - A. Yes.

Q. Can you see there is a reference to a time there? - A.
   Yes.

Q. That is your statement, is it? - A. That is my statement.

Q. What time is mentioned there? - A* "Approximately 2.52."

Q. Where did that come from? - A. That was my belief at the
   time.   These were notes I made relatively shortly after
   the 15th of April.

Q.   Did you   have any hard evidence for that time? - A. No.
     I think   I describe in here that in relation to the
     events,   the timing of things, it is only what I believed
     at that   time, and that is certainly in my statement, sir.

                Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. It follows from that, Sergeant, that in your original
   statement you said two things:  one, your belief that
   Gate A was opened after Gate C had been closed? - A. I
   did, yes, sir.

Q. You also said you thought Gate A had been opened at 2.52?
   - A. Yes.

         THE CORONER:     Request for...

         MR. KING:      I had better do that in stages then:
                                                 M. GODDARD


Your understanding was from your statement that the
request for Gate A to be opened came after Gate C had
been closed?   That was your original understanding and
that is in your original statement? - A. That is correct,
sir.

Also in your original statement was that you put the
request for Gate A at 2.52? - A. At approximately 2.52.

It follows from that that as far as you were concerned in
your original statement in your mind, if Gate A had been
2.52, then the closure of Gate C had been before 2.52? -
A. At around that time, yes - before.

Then you would have to go back in time again before you
came to the official opening of Gate C? - A. Yes.

So it is not the timings which we can rely on through
your evidence.   What is clear in your mind from your
original statement was the relationship, that is what I
have been putting to you, the relationship between the
official opening of Gate C, people going through, then it
closing and then the request for Gate A.   As far as that
relationship goes you, in your original statement, were
clear that the request for Gate A came after Gate C had
been officially opened and Gate C officially closed? - A.
Yes, that was my belief at that time.

You also thought that period, to Lord Justice Taylor, was
three or four minutes or might be less? - A. That is
correct, sir.

The only thing which may have changed your mind would be
something which you may have seen on the video? - A. That
is correct as well.

To be fair to you you can't tell us what it is you saw on
the video which made you change your mind? - A. Not now,
no, sir.

You accept that what the video does show is Gate A in a
state of openness at 2.58? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:     Very well, we will break for coffee.

                    (Short adjournment)
                                                  M. GODDARD


I want to investigate now, if I may, Sergeant Goddard,
your statement to us before to the question which was
not asked of you but if it had been asked of you your
answer was, "They had an option" and I just want to
investigate this option with you from what you could
see? - A. Yes.

In a sense, and I accept this, and I hope the Coroner
will bear with me, it is hypothetical to this extent
because you were not asked the question and I have
established that, but if your mind had been directed,
for example, by Mr. Duckenfield, "Where is this large
group of people likely to go when they come through the
concertina gate?" and you had applied your mind to
it? - A. Yes.

I accept you did not. First of all, you would know if
you had applied your mind to it that there was on the
concourse on the other side of turnstiles A to G this
tunnel and you would know that? - A. Yes.

You would know that that tunnel was a wide tunnel
clearly marked with "standing". You would know that? -
A. That is correct, yes.

You would know you were not dealing in the situation of
the question, "Where are these people going to go?"
with just ones and twos coming through turnstiles, you
are dealing with a whole mass of people being
introduced through a wide concertina gate? - A. Yes.

You would be able to see, and indeed you did see, on
the video how they all came in together in a stream? -
A. That is correct, yes, sir.

Clearly they would have the option of going down the
tunnel, would they not? - A. That would be one option,
yes.

How would they know, do you say, this stream of people
coming in en masse that they had the option of going in
some other direction? - A. Because of the signing. The
signing to the area on the south-west terrace and at
the angle they would come in at, at gate C, they would
be basically facing the south-west terrace rather than
the tunnel.

What would they see? - A. The entrance not just to the
tunnel but to the south-west terrace.

What would they see which amounted to an entrance do
you say? - A. It is not an entrance as such as
                                                   M. GODDARD


obviously the tunnel is but an open space which is
totally open where obviously yt>ur spectators can go.

That is what you say.  You agree with me it is not an
obvious entrance as such? - A. It was an open space
between the rear of the West Sttand and the boundary
wall.

You have agreed with me it was not an obvious entrance
as such on to the terrace? - A. I wouldn't agree that,
no.  It seemed to me to be a perfectly fair place as an
entrance.

Pair enough, that is your evidence.  Did you see on the
video when the people came in the way they were moving?
That is to say, as you looked at the video could you
see the way they were moving? - A. For a certain
length, for a certain area, yes.  They came in and
there was like a mass and they appeared at some stage
to me to stop to get their directions as to where they
would go.

Did you see the way they were (moving, this stream? - A.
As far as I was aware, sir, they were moving in all
directions.

I need not take you any furthejr with that because we
have that video evidence.  Let me just go back.   I
wonder if Mr. Griffiths will ppint out gate C and
follow it through.  Imagine Mr. Griffiths' pointer is a
mass of people going through.   You have now gone
through.  Pausing there, Mr. G0ddard, are you seriously
saying to this Inquest that thjere would be an obvious
entrance to the right to peoplle coming through en masse
like that? - A. Yes, sir.

You are? - A. Yes.

Just point out again the featufe which you say makes it
an obvious entrance on to the terraces? - A. The area.

     THE CORONER:   Walk up to it. - A. This here is a
totally open area which gives access to the terrace.

     MR. KING:    Yes, we know that. That was not my
question.  What was it when a great mass of people came
through that gate, and use the pointer to take us
through the ga t e    _

     THE CORONER:  Mr. King, you are asking him to say
what was in people's minds.

     MR. KING:   You are quite right.
                                                   M. GODDARD



     THE CORONER:   All he can say is what he thought.

     MR. KING: Yes, but I am entitled to test the
obviousness of it.
     MR. ISAACS: Sir, he has actually been asked this
now three or four times and my learned friend again,
being the good advocate he is, does not like the first
answer and so he comes back to it and he comes back
hoping that he is going to get it changed.

     MR. KING: No, I am entitled to investigate the
factual basis for it because it is important.

     THE CORONER: No, I think you are entitled to
investigate why he thought that there were options but
you are not entitled to ask him why somebody else might
or might not have found the entrance in the same easy
way as he might have done.
     MR. KING:   I agree, fair enough, sir.

Let me deal with the option of the tunnel. You have
agreed with me that was an option straight in front of
people as you come through? - A. Yes, sir.

What about the other option? What was the other option
you say people would have if they came in a large
number in that way? - A. You have got any number of
options, (a) that is one of them,(b) which is  not so
much an option is to go through here on to the other
side.

Pausing there, how do you say that people would know
that is an option available to them? - A. Quite simply
had it been any other Club than Liverpool it may not
have been an option but Liverpool being regular
visitors down at Hillsborough, bring good numbers with
them all the time and that again is that they were
there the previous year and so, therefore, we are
looking, I am not saying all the same spectators were
there but they know the area of the ground that they
are going to go in.

So be it. I hear your answer. I am not going to waste
any time cross-examining on that point. Let me deal
with an allied aspect of this same issue. You told us
in a question to my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, that
had you considered that people would go down the
central tunnel and considered the area in the central
pens were too full, those things had gone on in your
                                                     M. GODDARD


mind, no one would have gone down the tunnel. That is
what you told Mr. Isaacs? - A. That is correct, yes.

Tell us what you say could have been done to ensure
that no one would have gone down the tunnel? - A. Two
things (a) gate C would not have been opened when it
was opened because we would have needed manpower
obviously to barricade the tunnel and to get that
manpower would obviously take a little time. Obviously
people would have to be diverted accordingly.

In other words, you would have taken some time to
organise a diversion? - A. Yes.

I am not going to ask you to give evidence about how
long that would have taken because we have asked
questions of that to other persons but you are quite
clear in your mind as to what you said to my learned
friend, Mr. Isaacs, that if you had considered those
matters then clearly there would have been an obvious
duty to you to have closed off the tunnel? - A. Had I
considered those matters, yes, sir.
I know you were not asked to consider the question of
where they were going to go. Let me ask the other side
of this question which is the question of the state of
the pens. You were not asked to consider that question
either, that is to say, the state of the terraces at
the time of the decision for gate C to be opened was
made, were you? - A. No, I wasn't asked, no, sir, but
by the same token had I known anything or believed
anything would have been amiss within those pens I
would have said something. I wouldn't have needed
asking.

Just pause with me, Sergeant Goddard, and consider what
the question is. First of all, you told us earlier on
that pen 1 was not as full as you might have
anticipated and as far as pen 6 was concerned it did
appear to have less people in it. My note finished in
and I did not quite catch the end but I assume you
meant less people in it than something else. - A. Less
people in it in relation to the other pens. That is
all I can think of.

So you were in a position to assess the relative
fullness of the pens across the terrace? - A. Yes.

You are   not suggesting that   from that Control Box you
are not   able to assess, for   example, the difference
between   the centre pens and   the side pens because
clearly   you were able? - A.   It would be far easier to
                                                  M. GODDARD


assess the difference between the centre pens and pen 1
rather than pen 6 because of the distance.

Of course, but you were actually able to tell us that
pen 6 appeared to have less people in it than
something? - A. Yes.

You told us I think when you were giving evidence
before that the problem with pen 6 was that you could
not get right down to the first six or seven steps, was
it? - A. Six or seven steps, yes, and you are looking
down on them so that all you would see anyway is heads.

Just let me deal with the six or seven steps for the
moment.   If one accepts that for one moment, just have
a look at C.326A.   This is not your view of pen 6 but I
am just looking at the steps.   This is a view of pen 6
from a different side but we can see the steps in the
front portion of that terrace, can we not? - A. We can,
yes, sir.

Indeed if one counts up from the front six or seven
steps that does not take us, does it, throughout the
whole of the section which on this photograph one can
see clear empty space, does it? - A. I would say to you
on my counting here, six or seven steps, is where those
spectators are.




                                 /Q. Yes, but behind.
                                                M. GODDARD


Yes, but behind those spectators there is big space? -
A. Behind those spectators there are spaces, yes.

Very obvious space, there is a wide area between them
and the next band of people, isn't there? - A. There
are wide spaces from that photograph and from that
angle, yes, but when you change it from the other side
of the Leppings Lane -- on the other side of the West
Stand, all you see is heads.  You don't see space.

Sergeant Goddard, if that were right how are you able
to even make the assessment to us that Pen 6 had less
people in it? - A. Because of the numbers.  As I said
just a short while ago it is far easier to assess on
Pen 1 than onto Pen 6.

Of course. - A. And that is why I said that it appeared
less because on the volume side of it, on the heads,
yes, but you can't see totally and say, yes, there are
 'x" spaces there. You just can't see that.

If the view of Pen 6 was so poor from the Control Box
you in the Control Box would never be in a position,
would you, if you are right, would never be in a
position to assess the state of the wing pens? - A. Of
course, yes, from the Control Box you can see the
Leppings Lane Terrace.   Quite obviously, as you can see
on the photograph, where the Control Box is it is far
easier to assess 1 than it is to assess 6.

You have, do you not - and I am not in these questions
suggesting that this is all down to you, I had better
make that clear, but you are entitled, of course, to
warnings which have not been given, and so forth.

     MR. KING:   Sir, you will appreciate that I am
investigating what I am investigating.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, that is why I have not given
any warnings yet.

     MR. ISAACS:    Sir, actually in fairness to my
learned friend and the Witness, having regard to the
answer he gave to one of my learned friend's questions
perhaps he should at an appropriate time have a
warning.  I am concerned about that.

     THE CORONER:   Very   well.   I will give him a
warning as a precaution:

Sergeant Goddard, you don't have to answer any question
which may tend to incriminate you, in other words which
might make a possibility of some prosecution or penalty
action being taken against you, so if you are asked
                                                  M. GODDARD


such a question, if I spot it I will draw it to your
attention.  If I don't but you think it is one which
imperils you then you are entitled to draw it to my
attention, so to speak, and say you don't want to
answer it.  You understand that? - A. I understand
that, yes, sir.

     MR. KING:   Let me take it in stages, Sergeant
Goddard.  Are you saying that from the Control Box it
is not possible to make a sensible assessment of the
difference between the centre pens and the wing pens? -
A. No, I am not saying that at all, sir.  I am saying
that an assessment can be made but it is probably a
little more difficult, in fact, it is more difficult to
assess Pen 6 than Pen 1.

It is important, that question, because I understood,
and you may be able to help us, that it was accepted
that one of the roles of the Police in the Control Box
was monitoring the state of the Leppings Lane Terraces,
and you accept that? - A. One of the roles, yes.

Because clearly if your judgment was that you could not
possibly make any sensible assessment of the wing pens
you would not accept that role, would you?

     THE CORONER:      He didn't say that.

     MR. KING:      So be it, sir, quite right:

The facility within the Control Box includes cameras,
doesn't it? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

Those cameras are an aid, an addition to your visual
eyes, aren't they? - A. They are, yes.

Let me therefore take it in two ways.  First of all, if
you had been asked by, for example, Mr. Duckenfield, at
the time the decision to open Gate C was being taken,
what is the state of the pens, you first of all would
be able to tell him, wouldn't you, that Pen 1 had lots
of space in it? You would be able to tell him that? -
A. Pen 1 had space in it.

Well it had lots of space in it, didn't it? - A. I
don't know about lots of space but certainly space.

Just let me point to a contrast between 1988 and 1989
as regards the area beneath the Control Box, of which
there could be no doubt as to what you could see.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. King, he has said space, you
say lots of space.     We have seen the photographs ....
                                             M. GODDARD


     MR. KING:   So be it, sir, I take the point:

Let me then quickly ask you the next question on this
line.  If you had been asked the state of the centre
pens, that is to say whether the centre pens at that
time had space for a large number of people, your
answer would have to have been no, wouldn't it? - A.
No, sir.

You don't agree? - A. No, I don't agree.

Again, I accept the learned Coroner's ruling that it is
a matter of the evidence to be assessed, but just let
me be sure I understand your question.  Are you saying
that looking at the centre pens you would have been
able to say that there was room in those centre pens
for the sort of numbers which you could see were about
to come through Gate C? - A. You are assuming there,
sir, everyone coming through Gate C is going to go into
the centre pens.

I have done this in stages, with respect, Sergeant
Goddard; it is a different question.  The question as
to what was to be expected where people would go is one
question, I have dealt with that.  I am on a different
question now.  I am on the question of what you are
saying would be an assessment of the centre pens at the
time the decision to order Gate C to be opened was
made.  You are not seriously saying that there was any
room of any significance in those pens, are you? - A. I
believe there was room in the centre pens.

So be it.

     MR. KING:    Again, sir, that is a matter of
evidence.

What you have told us though is what you could have
done if a different assessment had been made? - A. Yes.

And the difference between us is whether or not one
assessment was obvious or the other assessment was
right, that is the difference between us? - A. Yes.

And that, as the learned Coroner says, is a matter of
evidence and I won't go into that. - A. Yes.

Let me deal, if I may, with one or two other matters.
First of all, earlier on in the day at 2.15 you told
us, you remember the visit from Mr. Jackson, don't you?
- A. Yes, sir.

You told us that it was clear then that the Nottingham
Forest end was filling up well? - A. Yes.
                                             M. GODDARD


But it was also very clear then, wasn't it, that there
were a lot more Liverpool supporters to come? - A. That
is correct, yes, sir.

Indeed, you would therefore expect in the next 45
minutes really the bulk of the supporters to be coming,
having viewed it at 2.15, that is right, isn't it? - A.
Having viewed it at 2.15, yes, the bulk.

Yes, the bulk, the majority of spectators could be
expected on that view after 2.15? - A. Yes.

Also you had access, didn't you, to the Control Room of
the Club, where precise figures could be given for the
numbers going through turnstiles? - A. Access by
'phone, yes.

That includes, does it not, numbers as to going through
A-G onto the Leppings Lane Terrace end? - A. Yes.

Did you at regular intervals after 2 o'clock receive
numbers and figures from that Control Room? - A. I know
that I personally did not speak to the Control Room,
but I know that was done and numbers were obtained,
yes.

Indeed, didn't you yourself check with P.C. Guest, this
is to say at about 2.15, and check with him as to how
many Liverpool supporters were in the Ground? - A. A
check no doubt was done but I don't believe it was me
personally, no.

Let me just show you, because I want to investigate
this, please, page 92B of what you told Lord Justice
Taylor. - A. Yes, I had checked with P.C. Guest.

So do you accept that you did check with P.C. Guest? -
A. Yes.  When I say that to you, I am saying I had
checked, but I as part of Control.  Whether it was me
personally, I don't know.  I cannot tell you now but I
know checks would be made.

So in other words, what you are saying is, your
evidence is, that at 2.15 checks were being made within
the Control Room of P.C. Guest in the Club Control Room
as to how many Liverpool people were in the Ground, and
the figures were given? - A. Yes.  It could have been
me that said to P.C. Ryan, "Phone Harold Guest and see
what we have got", yes.

And we know that the capacity of the Liverpool end was
approximately 24,000? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                M. GODDARD


I think your evidence is that at 2.15 what was being
said was there were a few thousand in? - A. Yes.

And therefore again one has that same assessment both
from figures and from visual impression that the great
bulk of supporters had to come in the next 45 minutes?
- A. That is correct, yes, sir.

That was not known just to you, it was known to
everybody in the Control Room? - A. Yes.

Indeed, you continued, didn't you, to receive figures
well after that time? - A. Yes, I would assume so.

     THE CORONER:   Can we just make sure that when he
says that he means the Control Room, not him
personally?

     MR. KING:   I am interested in within the Control
Room, that is right.

     THE CORONER:   And you are asking him whether to
his knowledge figures were being received?

     MR. KING:     Yes, that is right? - A. Yes.

     MR. MANNING:   I am sorry, I am only looking for
clarification, both of the point that you were making
and also the Sergeant said, "I assume so", and I think
it is very important to know whether he actually knows
so, as opposed to whether he assumed so.

     THE WITNESS:   I did not make any checks myself
but I know that checks were made, yes.

      MR.   KING:   And you can certainly say that it was
not just    one check, it was certainly three or four
times in    the period I am talking about that checks were
made for    figures, wasn't it? - A. Yes, with regularity,
ye s.

And those figures were being passed around? - A. Yes.

I need not ask you any further questions about those
figures because again it is a matter of evidence.   At
2.30 you told us that when you looked at the Leppings
Lane end, because of the comment P.C. Bichard had made,
what you saw was unusual, wasn't it? That is what you
told us yesterday? - A. Yes, it was unusual.  I had
seen that before but it was unusual, yes.

It would certainly be unusual at a semi-final because,
of course, it was a capacity game when you were hoping
for everybody to come in a steady flow over a long
                                             M. GODDARD


period of time, that is right, isn't it? - A. You can
always, always hope for that but you know that you are
never going to get that.

Is that right? - A. Yes.

That is helpful, thank you.  So anyway this is the
picture, at 2.15 we know from what you tell us that
within the Control Box to your knowledge the picture
was that the majority of the Liverpool fans still had
to come? - A. Yes.

Figures were being obtained, three or four times? - A.
Yes.

And at 2.30 you could see what you described as an
unusual situation of the numbers outside the Leppings
Lane end? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

Now at some stage P.C. Bichard -- sorry, I am wrong,
he had made the comment at that stage and the video
camera was actually concentrated then on the Leppings
Lane end, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

Therefore the Control Room were able to watch from that
moment onwards the build-up of these numbers, these
unusual numbers which you saw at 2.30?  - A. That is
correct.




                 /Q. It is right
                                             M. GODDARD


It is right, is it not, to be fair to you, that you
have to crane your neck to look at the monitors, do
you not? - A. Yes.

Someone in the position of Mr. Duckenfield behind you
has a much easier look directly at the monitors, does
he not? - A. Yes, it would be easier.

Within the next 10 minutes, that is between 2.30 and
2.40, there are a number of incidents which tend to
show that things are getting out of hand, and can I
put one or two things to you to see if you can
remember them.  First of all, do you remember a
request for mounted assistance? - A. I do, yes sir.

Do you recall a sending out of a message for such
assistance? - A. Yes, I sent a message to Sergeant
Salisbury.

I do not know if you remember a message from Mr.
Marshall asking for a tannoy message to be put out
over the Leppings Lane end, do you remember? - A.

     MR. MANNING:  I got stopped for this, sir, at
about quarter-past 10.

     MR. KING:  With respect, sir, it has a factual
basis now on the picture I am coming to.

     THE CORONER: I stopped you giving the reasons, I
seemed to remember.  I did not actually stop you. I
was tempted to stop you, I do admit, and I am tempted
to stop Mr. King, but I did not stop you for asking
him to recite.

     MR. KING:  Sir, if my learned friend wants to
know in advance what I am leading to, I am leading to
a short investigation of delay in kick-off, that is
what I am leading to, and I did indicate that that was
an area which I think legitimately, in the
circumstances, I can investigate with the witness
because he is the one who gave evidence of receiving a
message.

     THE CORONER: Yes, you can do that.   We will see
how you go.

     MR. KING:  Thank you, sir.
After 2.30, after this unusual situation which is then
the scene at 2.30, you have got these additional
features which I am putting to you - the request for
assistance of mounted Officers, the request by Mr.
Marshall for some tannoy messages - yes? - A. That is
one thing I cannot recollect specifically.  Tannoy
                                             M. GODDARD


messages did go out, but I don't know who they came
from.

Were you able to observe yourself some difficulty with
a mounted Officer being surrounded by people? - A.
Yes, I was.

Do you recall at that stage, either at 2.30 when you
first saw an unusual situation, what you describe as
unusual, or not long afterwards, a discussion between
Mr. Murray and Mr. Duckenfield as to the agreement
which had been reached as to when kick-off would be
delayed? - A. I don't know, sir.  I was certainly
aware of the general reasons why kick-off would be
delayed, but I don't think there was anything specific
about that.

When you yourself had a request for kick-off to be
delayed, or as you received a request for kick-off to
be delayed, that was from PC Buxton, was it not? - A.
That was from PC Buxton, that is correct.

You gave a reply immediately, did you not? - A. Yes, I
did.

You did not refer it to a senior Officer in the
Control Box? - A. No.

In fact, it would have been a decision, would it not,
delaying kick-off, for a senior Officer in the Control
Box? - A. Yes, it would.

Your immediate reply was, "It's too late, one team is
already on the field"? - A. That is correct, yes sir.

Why did you believe automatically that it was too late
to delay kick-off because a team has run out onto the
field? For example, they can run back, can they not?
- A. They can run back, sir.   I would like to know of
an occasion when that would have happened.   If you get
to a stage that a team has run out, and it was
Liverpool that ran out, when the question was asked
they were running onto the field, and that was
obviously 2.54, I believe, something like that.   For
that to happen, for the kick-off to be delayed then
would have meant someone going down onto the ground to
see the referee and taking them back off the field,
and in that space of time the logistics of it said
basically there is no way you can do that.

Did you know that there was this agreement as to the
circumstances in which kick-off would be delayed? - A.
I knew the general outlines as to why kick-off would
be delayed.
                                               M. GODDARD

 What was that general outline? - A. The general
 outline was quite basic, in that when it was no fault
 of the spectators on their arrival, in relation to
 certain incidents occurring away from the ground,
 obviously you would then consider delaying kick-off.

 But if it was their fault, what was the position? - A.
 The norm there was that we would try and get kick-off
 to go ahead on time.

So it comes down to this, that on that policy, on that
agreement, if the assessment is, "It is the fault of
the fans^for their late arrival, then we don't delay
kick-off", that is how you understood it? - A. That is
how I personally understood that, but you will find
obviously at any football match, whether it be a semi­
final or any game you want to mention, you will get
fans coming in after kick-off.

Let me, if I may, go ahead to after the gates had been
opened and it was seen people coming over the fences,
and so forth.  You had the control, did you not, of
messages, communications, between the Control Room and
the outside world, did you not? - A. Yes.

For example, there was a communication line, was there
not, with Snig Hill, that is to say the Force
Headquarters? - A. Force Headquarters, yes.

And the only way in which communications would be
being passed between the ground and Snig Hill would be
through your Control Box, would it not? - A. Through
VHF in the Control Box.

I just wonder, therefore, if you can help me on this.
Could I just show you 315A and B.

      THE CORONER: VHF, in fact, is not hi s wavelength,
you   had better establish that.

      MR   KING: Sir, if I have got the wrong man -—

     THE CORONER: You have, it is Mr. Bichard.
That is right, is it not? - A. I did not use VHF at
all, sir, no.

     MR. KING: So be it, but I can still ask him
whether he heard anything in the Control Room about it
certainly.

     THE CORONER: Yes, but he was not the operator.
What was the number again?
                                                                 *' ‘38

                                                            M. GODDARD


                 MR. KING:  I got it wrong, sir - 517A and B.
       Q.   Sergeant Goddard, this is a transcript of messages
JJ |        passing from Snig Hill to the Ambulance Service - all
            right? - A. Yes sir.

  J    Q.   It starts on page 1 at 1507 and then I need not take
            you all the way through everything but if you go to
            page 2 you see about a minute or so later at 1508.14
            halfway down the second page? - A. Yes.

       Q.   Clearly a message viras being relayed at 1508 from the
            Force Control to the Ambulance Service to this effect:

                 "A lot injured, apparently one of the gates, has
                 they've been pushing and pushing and shoving I
                 understand and one of the gates has, they've
                 collapsed the gates and there's .... "

            Do you have any knowledge of anything you heard in
            your Control Box as to how it came about that at 8
            minutes past 3 Force Control at Snig Hill were putting
            out a message that what had been happening at the
            Hillsborough Ground which required ambulances and had
            caused injuries was a collapse of the gates - "they've
            collapsed the gates"? - A. I have no knowledge of that
            whatsoever, sir.

       3.   Because one thing is certain.  Your knowledge was that
            Gate C had been opened when it was opened for the long
            time, and a lot of people came through, that had been
            opened on Police authority, had it not? - A. On Police
            orders, yes.

       3.   So you cannot help us with that puzzle? - A. Not at
            all, sir, no.

                 MR. KING:   I have no further questions.

                     Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

       ).   Sergeant Goddard, I want to try and get a clear
            picture if I can. Your position in the Control Room
            was radio operator, was it not? - A. That is correct,
            yes.

       ). You had held that position since    1985? - A. 1986 -
           January 1986 it was.

       ). Mr. Murray's role in the   Control Room was overall
           control of the Control Room? - A. That is correct,
           yes.

       ). And the event itself, an    adviser to Mr. Duckenfield? -
           A. Yes.
                                                           39

                                                  M. GODDARD


Q.   Of course, he would be interested in all
     communications that were taking place in the Control
     Room, would he not? - A. Yes.

Q.   Now Mr. Duckenfield was in overall command of the
     whole operation? - A. Yes, overall command, yes.

Q.   How much ground space approximately is there in the
     Control Room in square metres?

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, we have all been
     there and I do not think we want that.  We know how
     many people were in there.  We have got a plan and you
     can measure it, it is an exhibit.  I do not think we
     need that.
Q.   I think it is fair to say that there is not much room,
     is there? - A. There is not much room, it is small.

          MRS. McBRIEN:  I made a note that you said it was
     crowded in there, so I was trying to compare densities
     really, that is what I was trying to do.

          THE CORONER:  You have got to allow for desks and
     tables.  It is impossible.

Q*        MRS. McBRIEN:  I was just trying to work
     something out, but there were six of you in there
     anyway, were there not, I believe? - A. Yes.

Q.   To you it seemed quite full with that number there? -
     A. It was quite full, yes.

Q.   For working purposes? - A. Yes.

Q.   In fact, I may have this wrong but I think you said
     there really was not any room there for Mr.
     Duckenfield.  Have I got that right? - A. No, that is
     not correct.  You have got the four normal operators
     and with that I include Mr. Murray.  You have got Mr.
     Duckenfield who would make five, and you have
     obviously got people coming in and out at different
     times.  I did not say there was no room for Mr.
     Duckenfield, no.

Q.   I am sorry about that, but I believe Mr. Mole used to
     walk around the whole stadium, did he not, from time
     to time? He was not there continuously, was he, in
     the Control Room? - A. Mr. Mole was not, no.  I do not
     know about walk around, but he would both walk and be
     driven around, yes.

Q.   So M r . Duckenfield could have taken a walk, could he
     not, if he would have wanted to? - A. I cannot answer
     for Mr. Duckenfield.
                                                 M. GODDARD


     THE CORONER: No.   We know he was there, and that
is it.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I did not put that very well.  I
meant to say he could have done a similar thing to
what Mr. Mole had done, that is what I meant to say? -
A. He could have done, but every Commander has his own
ideas on things.

Yes, of course.  It was not your job to make major
decisions, was it? - A. No.

These would include the closure of Leppings Lane to
traffic before a match, the ordering of the opening of
the exit gates to allow fans into the stadium, or the
delaying of the kick-off, they would not be your
decisions, would they? - A. No.  In relation to the
first point you make, that was a request from Mr.
Marshall.  Obviously in Control we cannot decide that
we will close a road.  The man on the spot, the man on
the site, is going to tell us that, yes, but it is not
my area to make major decisions.




                            /Q.   Your job was
                                                M. GODDARD


Your job was to put out the message once the
authorisation had been given? - A. That is correct.

So it would be your voice saying what was to be done?
Somebody else would have given the order? - A. It would
be my voice.

You would be able to make suggestions there if you
thought they seemed like sensible things to do? - A. Yes,
I was allowed to do that.

Did you make any suggestions that day? - A. Well, I am
sure on that day I did, but if we are talking in relation
to the major decisions, no, because certain of those
major decisions...   It was fairly obvious they had got
no alternatives.

Superintendent Marshall made a request for Leppings Lane
to be closed to traffic and this request is recorded in
the log at 2.17, isn't it? - A. That is correct.

     THE CORONER:   I think we had better say in
Mr. Murray's log:

That is where it is recorded, is that right? - A. Yes.

      MRS. MCBRIEN: It did not apply to the time the
request was granted and it did not apply to when the
traffic was actually stopped, it just related to the time
the request was made, the log? - A. It did, yes.    I have
always been of the opinion, and I accept it is 2.17
because it is recorded in log form, but I was always of
the opinion it was later, the request came later than
2.17.

Anyway it was written down? - A. It was written down at
that time, yes.

Now the situation at Leppings Lane changed from a very
normal situation at about 2.15, before the request to
close Leppings Lane to traffic from Superintendent
Marshall, to a chaotic situation at the turnstiles from
2.40 onwards? - A. Yes.

You said the radio became faulty? - A. The radio went
down, yes.

We know that was at 2.42?   There was a record kept of
that.   You said it caused complete disruption in the
Control Room? - A. Very much so, yes.

In fact you said it was devastating at the time? - A.
Yes.
                                                  M. GODDARD


Mr.Murray also when he gave evidence described that time
in a similar way and said he threw the radio down on the
table? - A. I did, yes.

You did that? - A. I did.   I am sorry, it was the
telephone handset that I threw on the table, yes.

Now this disruption, could you compare it with the United
Kingdom when we get a fall of snow?

     THE CORONER:    Say that again.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    I thought I   would put a bit of
humour into it!

     THE CORONER:    Yes, I can see what you say.

     MR. MANNING:    Paralysed!

     THE CORONER:    Yes.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:     I was trying to get the feel of the
disruption.

     THE WITNESS:   I had not considered it on those
lines, but it was - yes, paralysed.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Now the radio was out of action one
minute, or possibly two minutes... - A. No, the radio was
down for one or two minutes, but out of action is another
matter.   If I cannot transmit - at some previous stage
the communication engineer who would be in the gymnasium,
realises I have a fault on my transmission, the radio
therefore is down, out of action, for a much longer
period of time than it being turned off.

You have got a period where it is turned off for a couple
of minutes, yes, but prior to that there is a much longer
period where the radio is basically inoperative.

Would you say it was quite a short time? - A. It seemed
an eternity - absolutely.

You said that the two minute seemed like two hours? - A.
Yes.

Do you think people who are responsible for the safety of
the public should keep calm in a crisis just in case they
are unable to think properly?   This is just a general
question.

     THE CORONER:   No, I do not think that is a...      The
jury will think about that, I'm sure.
                                                M. GODDARD


     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Now the safety of the public was
paramount inside the ground, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

All the people inside that stadium, which was private
property, had been invited there and were entitled after
producing their admission tickets...

     THE CORONER:   Just a minute, Mrs. McBrien.   You
are not allowed to make a speech and I made it perfectly
plain that we can ask this Officers on matters within his
knowledge and competence but not on the laws of licensees
and matters of that nature.   That is not a proper
question for this Officer, in other words.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Sir, would he know that the people
inside the stadium would expect a reasonable amount of
safety in there?   Is that a proper question?

     THE CORONER:   It is not really a fair question, but
I will let you ask that:

Would you have expected...   You yourself, would you have
expected the public to expect that they would be
reasonably safe if they came in? - A. I would, sir.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   That was the intention of the match
going ahead? - A. Of course, yes.

The whole intention as put down in the Operational Order?
- A . It was in the Operational Order.

That the Officers would have read if they had looked at
that page in the Order? - A. Yes.   That just does not
come on a semi-final Order, it comes on every Order.

The club, as owner of the stadium, which they were,
weren't they?   The club was the owner?

     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien.   Why should you
ask this Officer anything regarding the club?   I am
sorry.   You had plenty of opportunity to ask that when
Mr. Mackrell was here and Mr. Lock was here.   If you did
not take it then I am sorry, but this is not the right
person.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    So I cannot mention the Safety
Certificate?

     THE CORONER:    No, not at all.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    Could I ask this question:  that the
Police Officers who were policing the match that day, had
they taken the responsibility that day to ensure the
safety of the public?    Was it their responsibility?
                                                 M. GODDARD


     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien.    We have already
asked all the senior Officers, if you like, and quite a
few others, that question.   What I am interested in from
this Officer is what he can tell us happened within the
Control Room and what is within his knowledge.   You have
asked those questions of others, I am sure you will
remember and there is no need to ask them again.
Anyway, he is not the right person to do so.   I hate
keeping saying no to you but I have got to.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I probably forgot to include all
this and so I thought I was going to slot it in.   I have
said this before.

       THE CORONER:   I know!   Well, I am not going to let
you.     Let's press on.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:  Now the first request by
Superintendent Marshall to open the exit gates to allow
entry of fans came at 2.47, didn't it? - A. Yes.

I believe Superintendent Marshall contacted Hammerton
Road Police Station at 2.44 and that coincided with an
incident on the bridge when a youth went past him and
gave his ankles a sharp push.

     THE CORONER:   Do you know anything about that? - A.
I don't know anything about that, I'm sorry.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:  I was going to ask you:  did you know
about this and the message he put through to Hammerton
Road Police Station? - A. No.

You didn't? - A. No.

It is possible the radio was down then and that is why he
contacted Hammerton Road? - A. I'm sorry, I was totally
unaware of that.

If Mr. Marshall's request was for one gate to be opened,
as you said, Sergeant, it would be a vague request?
Would you know which gate he was talking about if he
said,  Open a gate"? - A. That was my belief.   I do not
know what Mr. Marshall has said before these Inquests,
but I know that was my belief in relation to the gates.
I say that because I know that there are three big gates
on Leppings Lane end;  A Gate, you have got a wall at the
side of it so there is no way people can go there.   The
only one where you can get people out of a crush on to
the South Stand Lane is C Gate, and that is why
presumably, rightly or wrongly, I assumed it was C Gate
that required to be opened because you could pull people
out of a confined space into a larger area and so relieve
the crush at the turnstiles.
                                                  M. GODDARD


Yes, but he made four requests, and would he have said
"Gate" on four occasions? - A. Well, you say four, I can
only remember three.

     THE CORONER:   He can only remember three.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    Well, even three.   Now when I
questioned Mr. Marshall he was not aware of the lettering
of those gates and definitely he categorically said,
"Gates," and it was my understanding that most people
thought it was "Gates   that was the request. - A. He did
say Gates," yes, and I said, "Open the gates," but I
personally believed - and I did say "Gates" and I said
that in the plural - I did honestly believe myself that
it was C Gate that required to be opened, for the reason
I have just outlined to you.

You put the message over, "Open the gates"? - A. I did.

That is clear to me now.   You said you thought Gate C
had burst open.   We have heard that once or twice.    I
suppose it would be difficult to assess things properly
from the Control Box, would not it? - A. If we are
talking about Gate C, to get a picture of Gate C from the
Box, yes it is, because all you have got is a sideways on
view.   You have got no front view, or no view at all.
It is directly in line with the Box or almost in line
with the Box.   From the camera it is at a slight angle,
but as I say, you don't see the full gates at all.

You weren't aware it was to eject a fan?   You had no
record of that? - A. No.

You did not know that that was what was actually
happening at the time because of the view you had? - A.
Yes.

The first request that was made for the opening of the
gates did not refer to crushing outside, did it? - A.
That is something I cannot tell you.   The request was
made to open the gates and obviously it was
Mr. Marshall's reasoning, his decision, as to why he
wanted the gates open and he no doubt would have said
something, but within a very short space of time after
him saying that the gates did open, albeit for a brief
period.

So it was authorised by Mr. Duckenfield, obviously, and
you put the order out.   When you received a request -
well, I have got it down at just before 2.58, I didn't
know the exact time when you got the request to open
Gate A, so I have assumed that it was just before because
you said, "Immediately the request came..."
                                                M. GODDARD


     THE CORONER:   We have had a lot of problems with
that, Mrs. McBrien.  Do not worry about the time.    Ask
the question.   I don't want to go over that again.    We
have explored that.   Mr. King and I   had a good try, I
think it would be fair to say.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   It is just that   you said you
immediately activated that, you see.     I wrote that down,
that once the request came then you said, "Yes, open the
gates"? - A. I immediately responded to it, yes.




         Q. So, from what you
                                                  M. GODDARD


From what you have said today I thought that it could
be that time and that was from Sergeant Higgins to open
gate A? - A. Yes.

That request was the one that was accompanied by the
statement "Somebody is going to get killed”, wasn't it?
That was the request? - A. That was the request from
Sergeant Higgins. He had said, "Can we open gate A?"
It was words to the effect, "Can we open gate A or else
someone is going to get killed?”   In fact you had got
two requests at different periods of time both stating
the same, that someone is going to get killed. One was
from Mr. Marshall andone was from Mr. Higgins.

You said yes to that because you knew Mr. Duckenfield
had already authorised the opening of the gates
earlier, didn't you? - A. Yes.

So it was quite in order for you then to say yes right
away? - A. It would have been, yes.

No doubt you thought it should have been already opened
in any case? - A. No.

You did not? - A. No. As I say, I believed itwas C
gate only but bear in mind I do know, as I outlined to
you, the layout of Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground
and I know that should you open gate A they will not go
on to the concourse. They will go to an area by the
North Stand.

Did you ever receive a request for gate B to be opened?
- A. Not specifically, no.

PC Buxton's request to delay the kick-off, that came
before Sergeant Higgins' request to open gate A, didn't
it? - A. That is something I don't know. I cannot tell
you.

You do not know the time? - A. I just don't know that.

But we do know he was told.   Did you tell him that it
was too late? - A. Yes.

You said, "No, we can't delay it"? - A. Yes.

Did the opening of gate C have something to do with it,
that because the gate had been opened that may be it
was too late? - A. You are looking at a stage where a
team ran out on to the field. The request was made as
they ran out. There were a number of factors but one
factor is that because the gates had been opened the
crush has been relieved outside and you would think
                                                    M. GODDARD


then with a few more minutes that more people would be
in at the start of a game but I did also say that
whether it be a Semi Final or not you would never get
everyone in on time.  You always hope to but if a
person chooses not to come on time I would say that is
something we cannot cater for.

You said it was very difficult to send the players back
in once they had come out.  That would be a very
difficult thing todo? - A. It would be a situation I
had never heard of before certainly.

You would say that was a unique situation, sending the
players back? - A. I am sorry.

Would you say that would be a unique situation, to send
the players back in? - A. I think it would, yes.  I
have never known of an occasion where players have been
out on a field ready to start a match where they have
been taken off.  I could be totally wrong but I have
never known an occasion.

The players were taken off at 3.06, weren't they? - A.
Of course.

They had to go off then? - A. Yes, the match was
stopped.

If it would have been really necessary it could have
been done earlier? - A. It could.  It could have been
done.

So would you agree it is never too late to do the
correct thing and go by the rules of the Safety
Certificate?

     THE CORONER:   You do not have to answer that
question because that may be an incriminating question
but you can do if you wish. - A. I am sorry, I have
lost it.

     THE CORONER:   Repeat the question, Mrs. McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  Would you agree it is never too
late to do the correct thing and keep to the rules of
the Safety Certificate? - A. That is correct, yes, I
would.

It was obvious from what you said yesterday that the
assessment that was made from the Control Room about
the conditions in the pens on Leppings Lane terrace is
totally unsatisfactory.  You cannot get a true picture.
                                                       M. GODDARD


        THE CORONER:    No, Mrs. McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN: I am not being very critical but
what I am trying to say i s ...

        THE CORONER:    It is sounds very critical to me.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  It may have come over like that but
you cannot really get the true sense.

You said you could not even see what was happening in
pen 6 or how many people were really there, could
you? - A. You can see heads in pen 6 but what I do say
to you is that the Control Room is part and parcel of a
larger area in relation to heads.  It is not just one
box that says we have sole responsibility for that,
that and that.  Other people will assist us and that is
why we talked earlier on about a team effort and that
is why I relate to a team effort.

Yes, that is how I understand it and you also have to
look at the whole ground, do you not? - A. Yes.

It is not a case of just looking at pens 1 to 7 on the
West Terrace? - A. It is the total ground.

You have got the stands and you have got the Spion Kop
and so you may not choose to look at that area at a
particular time because you may be concentrating on
another part? - A. You may be but certainly on this
particular date the great concentration was given to
the Leppings Lane end. Very, very little was given to
the Kop at all.

Even if Officers, as you say, were looking at that
particular area that day and there were even Officers
on the perimeter track who were there to do that as
well in close proximity to the centre pens weren't
there standing on the perimeter track? - A. Yes.

There were also Officers in the West Stand?

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I do not think we need
to go into that.   I think we will stop at this point
for a few minutes.   I am not stopping you but I think
we need a break.   We will stop until twelve o'clock.
How much more have you got?

        MRS. McBRIEN:    I haven't got much at all, half a
page.

        THE CORONER:    We will still Stop.
                                                        M. GODDARD


                        (Short Adjournment)

     MRS. McBRIEN: Sergeant Goddard, it seemed that
the only way that Police Officers could have
satisfactorily assessed the true situation in those
pens was to be in the pens themselves. Would you agree
with that?
     THE CORONER: No. That is not a proper question
of this Officer. I am not saying that is the answer
but I am just saying, it is not a proper question.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Would you say from their positions
though, in the Control Room, the perimeter track and
the West Stand, their reactions - and I am not
criticising them for it - were slower than they might
have been had they been positioned on the terrace?

     THE CORONER: No, I do not think you can ask that
either. You can ask, which you have done, whether the
view from the Control Room had limitations. That is I
think what you are asking, is it not? That is what you
are saying?

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Oh yes, definitely.
        THE CORONER:    That is the point, is it not?

     MRS. McBRIEN: Yes, and also the other views seem
to be having limitations too.
     THE CORONER: Yes, but he cannot give evidence of
that because he was in the Control Room.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Of course.

     THE CORONER:   Is it correct, Sergeant Goddard,
your evidence is that the view of the terraces and
indeed other parts of the ground from the Control Room
is limited because of angle, distance and location? -
A. It does have its limitations, sir, yes.
     THE CORONER: That is right, is it not?        That is
what you are trying to establish?

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, thank you.

        THE CORONER:    That is legitimate and I do not mind
that.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, thank you.
                                                  M. GODDARD


You had seen very large crowds outside the turnstile
area before gate C was opened, hadn't you? - A. Yes.

It appears that no one in the Control Room saw anything
unusual happening when those crowds went into the
ground. They did not notice anything unusual on the
terrace as a result of the opening of the gate? - A.
No, that is correct, nothing untoward, no.

If the Control Room would have noticed something or let
us say if somebody in closer proximity to the things
that were happening in the terrace had alerted the
Control Room before dangerous densities had been
reached then obviously the Control Room would have
taken immediate action, would it not? - A. Immediate,
yes.

Of course, it was realised at some point that there was
a serious situation there when the game was stopped,
was it not? - A. It was realised there was a serious
situation prior to the game being stopped, yes.

So at that stage were you asked to put an emergency
coded message out that day once the situation was
known? - A. No.

Would you agree that would have helped all the people,
the Officers and the fans in the stadium if there would
have been a message? - A. No.

You don't? - A. No. You have just asked about a coded
message. How would the fans know what the coded
message would be about? That would be my first
question. I take it you are talking about the Mr.
Meadows message, is that what you are meaning?

Yes. - A. That is in relation to Police Officers and to
stewards. The crowd, and bear in mind the Sheffield
crowd now know what that is all about, but we are
talking of Nottingham and Liverpool who would not know
what the heck was happening there.

No, I quite understand, but the Police Officers would
go to their various positions once they had been given
an instruction, wouldn't they? - A. Yes, they would.

So they would have been assisting the fans then once
they knew the situation? - A. No, they would have gone
to gates all around the ground. Where the assistance
was required was a specific area on Leppings Lane and
what we would have got was a diversification of Police
Officers all over the ground and so, no, I don't
believe that would have been a correct measure at all.
                                                      M. GODDARD



You could not have put out an emergency message that
day? - A. An emergency message could have been put out,
yes, which would relate to the Police and to the
stewards but what we are doing there is that you are
taking them away from the place they are required to
other areas of the ground, to all the other exits on
the ground.

Could you put a message out asking the fans to move
right out of the tunnel from the back of the pens?

       THE CORONER:   That is a different question.

     MRS. McBRIEN: So that there was a way clear to
get at the injured people? - A. This was done. This
was done on tannoy.

It was? - A. Yes. Repeated messages went from the
tannoy, not from me personally but I know that they
went out asking the fans to move back, yes.

Yes, I know there was a tannoy message put out to ask
people to move back but that would not be enough, would
it? They would not realise perhaps that people were
injured at the front of the pen. They would wonder why
they were being asked to move back?

     THE CORONER: I do not think you should explore
that, Mrs. McBrien. We have to accept the situation as
it is or as it was.

     MRS. McBRIEN: There may have been injuries, and I
stress that word really. I am not being callous in any
way when I say that but we do know that it was only a
possibility of serious injuries and deaths outside.
That was an assumption really, wasn't it?

     THE CORONER: No, I do not think, Mrs. McBrien,
that is a proper question to this witness. No, it is
not a proper question to this witness. I know it is a
point you are anxious about but it is not a proper
question.

       MRS. McBRIEN: Whatever the situation there we
know   that some measures were needed to be taken and
some   were taken, weren't they? Extra Officers were
sent   there and tannoy messages were put out there.
Some   things were done, weren't they? - A. They were,
yes.
                                                 M. GODDARD


We do know that there were lots and lots of Injuries
and 95 deaths after gate C was opened, don't we? Those
are facts? - A. Those are facts, yes.

You were very familiar with the ground, weren't you? -
A. Yes.

You had readily accepted the tried and tested system of
Mr. Mole? - A. Yes.

The 'find your own level' and you had seen it working
very satisfactorily at the 1987 and 1988 Semi Finals? -
A. Yes, plus other matches, yes.

Even without Police control on the terrace the system
did work? - A. Yes, it did work.

It had been proved to work? - A. Yes.




                               /Q. But on both those
                                                 M. GODDARD


But on both those occasions Leppings Lane was not
closed to traffic before the match, and exit gates had
not been opened to allow the entry of fans, had it? -
A. I don't know about the traffic part, I honestly
cannot tell you about the traffic part, but certainly
the exit gates had never been opened, yes.

No. You say you don't know about Leppings Lane.       A lot
of evidence ....

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, no.  He has said he
does not know, that is sufficient.  What is the
question?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   So it would be extremely difficult
for Police Officers to cope that day once those
decisions were made, would you agree with that?

     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien.  It does not
matter whether he agrees with it or not.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    That is all.   Thank you very much.

           Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

Sergeant, I have only got a very few matters Iwant      to
cover with you.  First of all, do you know
Superintendent Greenwood? - A. I do, sir, yes.

Can you please confirm for me   whether this is right,
namely between about 2.30 and   3 o'clock can you confirm
that Superintendent Greenwood   did not visit the Control
Box? - A. What was your first   time, sir?

     THE CORONER:    2.30. - A. No, he didn't.

     MR. RUSSELL:    Are you sure about that? - A. I am
positive, yes.

Yesterday when you were giving your evidence you
described Superintendent Greenwood being behind the
Leppings Lane goal, trying to transmit on the radio, is
that right? - A. Yes, that is correct, sir.

Signalling to the Control Box with his arms? - A. Yes.

And subsequently running onto the field to stop the
match? - A. Yes.

Subsequently in your evidence you described the role
played by Chief Inspector McRobbie? - A. Yes.

I just want to clarify the order of your observation
and try and establish precisely what you saw and when
                                             M. GODDARD


you saw it.  First of all, Mr. McRobbie's role:  as far
as you knew what was the purpose of Mr. McRobbie
leaving the Control Box and going down to the pitch? -
A. It was in relation to the Police lady who was by
Gate 1, that she appeared to be unaware of what was
happening and the fans were coming onto the track, and
so to take them off, open Gate 1 and put them into Pen


So the role assumed by him was to shepherd or direct
fans towards Gate 1? - A. That is correct, sir.

I wonder if you might be helped as to when that
occurred in view of the order you gave your
recollection yesterday, by looking at C534? - A. Yes,
sir.

Can you see Mr. McRobbie in that photograph? - A. I
think he is at the bottom right hand corner.

With his left hand outstretched, pointing to the left?
- A. Yes.

Apparently directing people to the left? - A. Yes.

Is that in accordance with your recollection of what he
set out to do when he left the Control Box? - A. Yes.

That photograph, Sergeant, was taken at exactly 3
o'clock.  Would that be in accordance with your
recollection of when he left the Control Box in order
to do that? - A. Approximately, yes.

Just for completeness you can see, can you not, that
the gate open in the perimeter fence towards the left
hand bottom corner of that photograph is, in fact, Gate
1?- A. That is correct, yes, sir.

That would be almost immediately below the Police
Control Box? - A. Yes.

Can I then move on in time and try and put in order the
events that you described yesterday? You described
Superintendent Greenwood behind the Leppings Lane goal,
making a signal to the Control Box? - A. Yes.

Can you remember what that signal was? - A. He was
crossing his arms.  It was just like an arms crossed
signal.

I wonder if you would be assisted by looking at
photograph C529? - A. Yes.
                                              M. GODDARD


You can see there Superintendent Greenwood, can you
not? - A. I can, yes.

Is that the position he was in when you recall him
making   the signal to Control? - A. No, not at all. He
was on   the ground, he was by the goal, and thatwas my
recollection of Mr. Greenwood, not as on that
photograph.

He does appear in that photograph to be looking at the
Control Box? - A. He does, yes.

And making some movement with his arms, making some
gesture with his arms? - A. Yes.

As I understand your evidence you don't recall seeing
him in that position? - A. I certainly can't remember
seeing  him in that position at all, no, sir.

I see.    Do you have any recollection of seeing
Superintendent Greenwood at that position up on the
fence? - A. No, sir, I don't.

You say you saw him trying to transmit? - A. Yes, it
was fairly obvious he was trying to transmit to us.

I wonder if you could look at another photograph, C530?
This is a photograph taken a minute or so after the
last one you were shown, Sergeant, and in the top left
hand corner can you see Superintendent Greenwood? - A.
Yes, I can.

He appears to be using his radio? - A. Yes.

But as I understand it, your recollection of him trying
to transmit was an effort made by him from a position
other than the one we see him in, in that photograph? -
A. Yes, that is my recollection, yes, sir.

Do you remember, you say you saw him trying to
transmit, whether he had any success? Was there any
message received from Superintendent Greenwood in the
Control Box? - A. There was one message received from
Mr. Greenwood, and that was, "Stop the match".  That
came through loud and clear but it had been fairly
obvious that he had been trying beforehand, we had
received nothing whatsoever, then this came through,
"Stop the match .

But as I understand your evidence, you understood first
of all from the gestures that he was trying to
communicate that to the Control Box? - A. Yes.
                                             M. GODDARD


But then finally his actual radio message came through?
- A. His actual radio came through, "Stop the match",
and then the next thing I saw was he was going on the
field.

His going on the field was to stop the match and you
saw him stop the match? - A. Yes.

Finally, Sergeant, can I ask you whether you received
any message from Inspector Charles in the immediate
aftermath of the match being stopped? - A. I did, yes,
sir.  The message from Mr. Charles was he had got 5 and
50 available for deployment.

Right, pause there.  What did you understand he meant
by 5 and 50? - A. Five Sergeants, 50 men.

That is five serials, would that be right? - A. Five
serials, yes.

Please carry on, what was the rest of the message? - A.
He asked for deployment.

So he was contacting the Control Box, finding out what
he should do with his five serials of men? - A. That is
correct, sir.

Who gave him any instructions as to deployment? - A. I
don't know if it was Mr. Murray or myself, but I know
what the instruction was.

What was it? - A. The instruction was to go down the
tunnel and clear as many fans out of the central pens
as possible.

From the back? - A. From the back, yes.

You were dealing, no doubt, with a series of radio
messages in the Control Box at that time and I wonder
if we can try and fit in when the message came through
and the instruction went out to Inspector Charles in
relation to other messages that you received.  First of
all, can I establish do you remember precisely what
time Inspector Charles radioed to the Control Box? - A.
No, I am sorry, I can't, sir.

Do you remember there being a time when Operational
Support was requested?- A. Yes.

Can you confirm that the message from Inspector Charles
was before the request for Operational Support was
made? - A. I believe Mr. Charles' message, or Mr.
Charles came through before Operational Support.
                                             M. GODDARD

We know, or we have an idea when that was you see,
Sergeant, but I described it as being in the immediate
aftermath of the match being stopped.  Would that be a
fair description of the timing of Inspector Charles'
message?- A. I don't know, sir.  That is something I
don t know.  I didn't see the match stopped at all.  I
was totally unaware of that.

Did you subsequently see Officers arrive at the back of
Pens 3 and 4? - A. I did, yes, sir.

When you saw that did you make any connection between
that sight and the radio conversation with Inspector
Charles? - A. Yes, my first thoughts were, "John
Charles and his blokes".  All I could see really was
helmets.  I couldn't see individuals, but helmets.

So quite clearly the radio conversation with Inspector
Charles preceded your sight of those Officers in the
back of Pens 3 and 4? - A. Yes.

Thank you very much, Sergeant.

     THE   CORONER:   Mr. Maxwell?

     MR.   MAXWELL:   No questions, sir.

     THE CORONER: Just one minute, Mr. Payne.    I have
got a few from the Jury and then I will let you go.

                Further by THE CORONER

These are questions from the Jury, okay? - A. Yes.

On the day of this disaster can you remember Mr. Murray
actually turning down any suggestions which you might
have made to him? - A. No, I can't, sir.

On how many different occasions, if you are able to
say, have you worked with the other Police Officers who
were with you in the Police Control Box, prior to 15th
April, 1989 - as a team, in other words? - A. As a team
certainly for one full season, and with P.C. Ryan - he
was there when I went in the Box.

Would you be there as a regular team when matches were
on? - A. Yes, sir.

Apart from the Coventry and Leeds match where the kick-
off was delayed, which I think you can remember? - A.
Yes.
                                             M. GODDARD


Have you been involved in any other match where kick-
off was, in fact, delayed? - A. No, sir, not pre that
semi-final.

Yes, that is what the question is.  In your time as a
radio operator at the Ground did you previously have
any sort of problems with the radio transmissions? - A.
Yes, I think it was '88 our transmissions again were


Perhaps I ought to say apart from interference from
local radio.  You don't have to explain that, we have
heard of that, but apart from that? - A. Not
particularly.  The radio was not probably as good as it
should be because of the age of it, and a lot of it
again depended on the weather.  Sometimes when the
weather was not very good the radio communications
would not be very good, but on that particular day it
was a very, very fine day and I would have anticipated
the radio frequencies would have been okay.




                          /Q. So no significant
                                                                        60

                                                              M. GODDARD

          Q.    So no significant problems apart from the interference
                in 1988? - A. That is correct, yes.
     B
          Q.    That would be right, would it? - A. Yes.

          Q.   Were you aware of any objects being thrown at the
               Control Box by fans in an attempt to attract your
               attention to the terraces? - A. None whatsoever, sir,
               no.

               Nothing like that? - A. No, not at all, sir.

               You did not hear anybody call or shout into the
               Control Box? - A. No.  One of the things that I have
               never explained is the noise levels within there.  You
               wouldn't hear individual shouts by any stretch of the
               imagination.  It just could not be done.

               But you definitely did not hear coins or objects? - A.
               Not at all, no sir.

               I want to ask you one other question about something
               which I should have done and forgotten, a message.
               Apart from Superintendent Greenwood whom you said you
               could see was having difficulty with his radio and
               then eventually it did come through, can you recollect
               whether any track Officers around that time, by which
               I mean between 2 minutes to 3 and 5 minutes past 3, or
               thereabouts, attempted to communicate with you? - A.
               There was one message, and I don't know who it was
               from, but it was certainly from Leppings Lane track.
               Now who the author was I do not know, because it was
               broken, but we got Leppings Lane track, but who it was
               I don't know.

         Q.    Is that all the message that you can remember? - A.
               That is all I can at this stage remember, yes sir.

    FI   Q.    I am not asking you to give me verbatim what it was,
               but that in itself is meaningless, is it not? - A.
               Yes.

         Q.    Was it any more meaningful on the day? - A. With the
               volumes there, I can only assume, and it is only an
               assumption now ---

         Q.    No, no, I want to know what you heard. - A.    At that
               time, no.

         Q.    I do not want you to reconstruct what it might have
               said.  What I want to know is what you heard. - A. No,
               as I say, all I heard was something about Leppings
               Lane track, but what the gist of the message was, it
               was totally broken, I just didn't know.


H
                                                                61

                                                      M. GODDARD


                     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

B|   Q*   Sergeant Goddard, just one general question, please,
          prefaced with this.  Can you tell the Jury how long
          you have been a serving Police Officer? - A. I was a
          Cadet for Sheffield City in 1959 and appointed Police
          Officer in 1962.

     Q.   For how long have you been a Sergeant? - A. October
          !976.
CJ   Q.   Without going into detail, as part of your duty you
          have to attend at all manner of events and
          emergencies? - A. Yes sir.

          I want you to put the event when you were in the
          Control Box and you started to receive the calls from
          Mr. Marshall outside to open the gates because
          otherwise someone would be killed, just put that in
          the circumstances in which it happened, put that in
          the context of your experience as a Police Officer.
          How does this rank in terms of emergencies that you
          have been involved in? - A. The most dire emergency
          certainly.   I had never known anything before like
          this at all.

               THE CORONER:  Sergeant Goddard, I am most
          grateful to you for being here.  Thank you very much
          for helping us.

               What we are now going to do is we are going to
          hear Mr. Bichard in a moment.  We are going to press
          on today, but what I want to do is you will remember
          you were asking about the video, and I think we will
          show this video now of the scene as far as we have got
          it at Leppings Lane.  In fact, it was, of course,
          taken by Mr. Bichard so it is a convenient time to
          actually look at it, but I am going to get Mr. Killoch
          who has actually selected the piece out that we need
          to describe it.

                        JOHN KILLOCH Recalled

                           By THE CORONER:

     !.   Give your name so we know who you are. - A. Sergeant
          John Killoch, sir, West Midlands Police.  I have just
          taken a short sequence from one of the South Yorkshire
          Police videos, which shows pictures taken from one of
          the CCTV cameras situated at the ground on 15th April.
          These show scenes inside Leppings Lane of the Leppings
          Lane pens, the West Stand.  I should mention, sir, I
          think the Jury are already aware but some of the
                                            J. KILLOCH


pictures are in what they call time lapse, so that it
will jump.

     THE CORONER:  Yes.  It is not very long, about 10
or 15 minutes.
Before we start, can you remember what time the
sequence begins? - A. It starts, sir, at approximately
15.02 and the first few frames are actually shown on
the concourse area, and then the camera moves into the
West Stand.

              (The video was shown)
     MR. BEECHEY:      That is C.539

     THE CORONER:   Have got an identification number or
something on the tape so that we know?

     MR. KILLOCH:   Yes, sir.   The original
identification is TB.l.   That is the West Midlands
Police reference.

     THE CORONER:      Mr. Maxwell?

     MR. MAXWELL: ..Sir, I am here today as you might
have guessed in order to present to you written
submissions on law of the Sheffield City Council.    I
would normally do that, of course, at the end of the
evidence.   That may yet be possible, but perhaps not
today, but we obviously want to comply with your
timetable.   At the moment it is a bit like Blue Peter,
"Here is one I made earlier"!   Sir, in due course, it
will be presented.

     Sir, there are certain matters I would wish to raise
with you now and which might be better dealt with in the
absence of the Jury, with our leave, sir.

                    (The Jury left Court)

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, I have kept up with the evidence
in these Inquests with my daily dose of transcript and
the comments I make to you now concern the ending of
these Inquests and the ending of the evidence.   They are
intended to be helpful.   I hope they are not taken as
some forensic cri de coeur, but there may be an element
of that in it.

     Sir, you may remember that case where the evidence
that went before an Inquest was likened to the tip of an
iceberg.   Normally, of course, icebergs get smaller but
there is at least a risk, sir, of the evidence here
getting larger in quantum and may be getting unbalanced.
Alternatively it may be that the Jury is about to be
asked to look unnecessarily below the water line.

     I know you have considered this already but there
are reasons why in my respectful submission you could
reconsider the point.   Messrs. Goddard, Bichard and Ryan
have run as a trio, or Goddard and Bichard as a duo, for
a long time in these proceedings.   I know you have
considered already just how far one should go with their
evidence.

     Sir, I comfort myself in asking you to reconsider
the position with two thoughts.   The first is that you
have always shown that as your own man, and as very
clearly master of your own court, you take a flexible
approach where it is necessary and are prepared to
reconsider decisions in the interests of justice and
never so as to produce an injustice.  We are all very
much aware of that and have seen that constantly
throughout these Inquests.

     Sir, the second matter I draw to your attention is
that the Jury has now heard the senior man of the three,
Sergeant Goddard.   The question I raise for you to
consider, sir, is this:  is it necessary now for the Jury
to go further into the evidence of Police Constable
Bichard or, if it was still your intention, Police
Constable Ryan?   I pose the question in the form:  does
justice require that?   It may be there is not now any
dissenting voice that would say that justice does require
further evidence to be called.

     Sir, we have just seen what may be the most moving
end to the evidence that could have been imagined and
that is that video we have just seen.   We all
appreciate, sir, that you have made great efforts and
have succeeded in large measure in producing an orderly
version of the evidence and your determination is quite
clear in producing that.

     I come back, as you know, intermittently.    May I
put it this way, I feel at the moment as though I am a
spectator where I see these finely tuned athletes who
have been competing in some marathon going towards the
finishing line and as I perceive it, going over the
finishing line.   Sir, you may now, with the greatest of
respect, be in overrun.   That is, you may have gone, and
in my perception and I say it with respect, have gone
over the finishing line.   I would invite you to consider
then whether it is necessary to go any further with the
evidence.   I say that with great respect, knowing from
the transcript that you have considered the matter
carefully.   Now you have gone part way with the evidence
of those Officers in the Control Box, it would be
appropriate, I respectfully say, to reconsider that.

     THE CORONER:   Does anybody want to add anything?
As I understand what you are saying, Mr. Maxwell, is that
having heard Mr. Goddard is there really any need to hear
Mr. Bichard?

     MR. MAXWELL:   Exactly.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Ryan I had definitely decided not
to hear.   I can tell you that already, on the basis of
what I have heard and also what I have read, of course.
     It is just really a question of whether we have
Mr. Bichard or not.   Mr. King perhaps you want to say
something?

     MR. KING:   I may need to have my memory refreshed.
The only matters I would want to examine Mr. Bichard on
may have been examined, bar one.   Sir, the position of
the cameras and, sir, my recollection is there is one
camera in the middle of the South Stand which provides a
frontal view of the terraces and that would include the
frontal view of pen 6.   Sir, if that is already in
evidence, then I am.content, but I know I would get that
evidence through Mr. Bichard.

     THE CORONER:   I think we have had it tangentially.
That is in fact the way the camera looks, but that is in
fact the way we have had the evidence as well.

     MR. KING:   Sir, there were two cameras in relation
to the Leppings Lane end, as I understand it.   One which
you could look along - parallel - with the fence and be
inside the terrace if you wish, and one where you can
look frontally.   As long as that is in evidence, sir, I
am content on that aspect.

     Numbers 2 and 3, sir, is a matter for you, because
it raises the issue of the message which left the Control
Box possibly, but certainly left Snig Hill to the
ambulance service, as to what had happened.   There are
two aspects to that, one is the the message we know which
left the Force Room and whether or not any Officer is
prepared to say anything from the Control Room side as to
how that happened.  The second aspect is the direct
question which I raised with Mr. Jackson and raised with
Mr. Duckenfield as to whether Mr. Duckenfield ever said
in their presence, or obviously Mr. Duckenfield said an
explanation which was to the effect the gates had been
stormed, broken down or so forth.   You will know, sir,
from the transcript of Mr. Bichard at the Taylor Inquiry
that he gave evidence that he heard him say words to that
effect.

     It is a matter of ruling for you, sir, whether that
is a matter I can go into.

     There is the cameras matter, sir, which may be dealt
with and the narrow issue which I do not want to abandon,
and I will abide by your ruling.




             THE CORONER:   As you know
     THE CORONER:  As you know we discussed this when
Mr. Jackson was here and it is quite clear in my mind
in so far as the question arises as to whether that
caused any deaths the answer must be no because
whatever Mr. Duckenfield may or may not have said
within the Control Room at whatever time it was, 3.30
or thereabouts - so the only point at issue is the
point as to whether or not it is necessary to explore
them for the purpose of the Inquest from the point of
view of credibility.

       MR. KING:   Absolutely, sir.

       THE CORONER:   You would agree with that, would
you?

       MR. KING:   I agree entirely, sir.

     THE CORONER:  I have got very mixed feelings about
it because my inclination is that it will not be of
very much assistance to us.  I have got no objection I
think - I mean what we are now saying is what I tried
to suggest yesterday, that we pick out from these
gentlemen the bits which we have not yet heard.   We
have taken Mr. Goddard in considerably greater detail
and that makes it a lot easier with regard to Mr.
Bichard.  I am inclined to call Mr. Bichard and
restrict his evidence to what we absolutely essentially
need, namely to sort out the camera angles which is the
point you have raised.  I think we have explored the
message side.  I will think about it over lunch and I
will come back in the absence of the Jury. We will
reconvene without the Jury so that I can tell you what
I think about that definitively, so to speak, on that
point.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Is it possible for you to indicate
what other evidence there may well be called?

     THE CORONER:  The only other evidence there is is
Dr. Slater who we have messed around from pillar to
post and whether we can get him this afternoon I do not
know now because I thought we would not need him.
There is only Dr. Slater which is about a five minute
job, if I can put it like that, just crossing a few Ts.


    Secondly, I did say we would have a look at the BBC
video tape with the sound edited out, if you remember,
from five past to quarter past.  It is Mr. Motson's
commentary in effect and I did say that we would see
that.  In any case I know Mrs. McBrien was very keen to
see it again.  It is very difficult to actually focus
on what is happening when you see the match play.   So I
want to show that.
    The third matter is that I want to deal with about
four sets of documentary evidence.   They are all
totally non-controversial.   I am sorry, there are five
sets of documentary evidence.   One is PC Smith's
statement.  I want to formally declare the post mortem
reports form part and parcel of the Inquest
documentation.  I do not intend to read 95 PM reports.
It is never my habit to do it.   I have done it twice
actually but in this particular case we have heard all
the salient evidence.   I did not in so many words in
each of the interim Inquests and say, "What is more the
document on which this evidence is based forms part and
parcel of the Inquests".   I want to say that, if you
like, because it fojrms part of the caucus of knowledge.

    I also want to say the same with regard to the
questionnaires.  I had sent out questionnaires to all
the families after the event where they confirm name,
address, age, that sort of thing, and that was all
referred to in the interim Inquests as well but again I
merely referred to it and I want to say that this
constitutes part and parcel of the documentation so
that we have got it right, so to speak.  Unless
somebody raises a specific point I do not intend to
read it again because we will hear it all during the
summing up, all the relevant bits, or during the
conclusion.

    We had to send out a few more questionnaires to a
few families were there were youngsters where we needed
to know something about the mothers and matters like
that.  That is it.  So there is not really very much
left evidentially.  Certainly 95 per cent of it is
totally non-controversial and is merely a matter of
tidying up.  Can I take it nobody is going to want me
to read again every single PM report because I do not
think there is any benefit in that?

     MR. KING:  I always hesitate to say anything
without receiving instructions but my initial
inclination is that I do not.  Sir, can I just draw
your attention to the transcript of Mr. Bichard at the
Taylor Inquiry, page 68, the afternoon cross-
examination by Mr. Gibson-Watt which is the
conversation I would want to have a look at in
examination with him and at pages 75-56, sir, where
matters are put to him by Mr. Kalipetis about the
messages which were emanating from various sources
round about eight minutes past three to thirteen
minutes past three as to the cause being in some way
the gates having been collapsed by spectators.   There
were three sources from which it was being put out and
whether he had any knowledge of how that came about
given his position within the Control Box.
     THE CORONER:  It is the bottom of page 75 and the
top of page 76, is it not?

     MR. KING:   Sir, yes, indeed.

     MR. ISAACS:  It is also on page 54 where he also
gives evidence about those matters saying that he
believed they could have been through a monitoring of
the personal radio channel No. 25 and, therefore, not
emanating from the Control Box.  It is page 54E-G.

     MR. KING:  It is obviously a matter for
investigation, sir, and you will see his reply at page
76B of the transcript.

     THE CORONER:  May I just look at page 75 of the
transcript?  I did look at these last night but I need
to refresh my memory.  It is fair, Mr. King, that on
page 76 he denies sending that message.

     MR. KING:  Undoubtedly, sir.  The difficulty I am
in, sir, is that it is a matter for assessment by the
Jury when they have heard - there is no...

     THE CORONER:   There is no Jury here.

     MR. KING:   Is the witness here, sir?

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Bichard has gone.

     MR. KING:  It is a matter for the Jury to assess
whether, given all these denials from a Control Box
which on one view of the evidence was instrumental -
take the calling for ambulances and so forth - that
those are denials which they can accept and if they
cannot accept them then that reflects on the general
credibility of the witnesses from the Control Box on
every issue they have been asked about and that is why
it is important, sir.  That is what I would ask you to
consider.

     THE CORONER:   Did you want to say something, Mr.
Payne?

     MR. PAYNE:  While you are considering the matter
over the adjournment, our submission is that the
question is, in what respect is this relevant to the
question of how the disaster occurred? That is really
what we think might be helpful.

     THE CORONER:  I can see both sides of the coin.
Clearly if you say to me, did this disaster occur
because something was said to somebody whcih was
incorrect, let us assume that for a minute that that is
the case, did that cause the disaster? The answer must
be definitely not.  The point that Mr. King is making -
and you would accept that, would you not - is that if
somebody cannot be believed on (a) then can you believe
him on (b )?

     MR. PAYNE: Actually on this point there is an
explanation for it because it was I who introduced this
transcript and the witness who was dealing with it said
that he thought it might have been overheard by the
radio operator at Snigg Hill on the general chatter
that was going on with the talk through.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Bichard says at page 55...

     MR. KING:  This, is all a matter for argument but
it all has to tie in with evidence, if it comes out, on
what Mr. Bichard may say if you allow me to ask him the
question as to what Mr. Duckenfield said in the passage
I have referred you to.

     MR. ISAACS:  One of the things that concerns me
with the approach which may well be adopted and which
is being suggested by Mr. King, that is taking snippets
here and there and asking Mr. Bichard just about this,
is that contrary to what was being suggested, if I may
say so with respect by my learned friend, Mr. Maxwell,
it starts to take things out of context again.  I
hesitate to say it but as we had with Mr. Crawford
(sic) there was something there for everybody if I
could put it that way and only to take those little
bits of Mr. Bichard's evidence where there may be
something in it for Mr. King again seems to me to be,
with respect, unfair.

     THE CORONER:   You mean Sergeant Goddard but you
said Crawford.

     MR. ISAACS:   Yes, I do apologise, I meant Mr.
Goddard.  It does appear to me, sir, to echo what Mr.
Maxwell was saying, you have to start thinking very
carefully where are some of these issues leading us.
How far do they help us with the question how? How far
do even these question of 'credibility' help the Jury
in relation to the how? We have got no issue between,
as I understand it, anybody saying one thing and
anybody else saying another so that the Jury if they do
not like Mr. A's credibility can choose Mr. B's.    That
is not the situation we have here and this is not a
criminal trial.   I do ask you to think very seriously,
sir, before we start going down the paths which have
been suggested.   That is really all I want to say.   We
could just put an end to it, to echo my learned friend,
Mr. Maxwell, now.    There was something for everybody
with Mr. Goddard quite clearly having regard to the
length of time he was giving evidence.
     MR. KING: Believe it or not, sir, I was only
trying to be helpful to identify the issues which we
have not been over and I was mindful of your words
yesterday that you did not want repetition in going
over old ground that had been exhausted.  I accepted
that, sir, and I have merely identified because you
invited me to whether any additional points which I
considered had not already been dealt with and I did.

     THE CORONER:  Indeed and I have understood you.  I
have also understood Mr. Isaacs.  Let us have lunch and
I will come back at two o'clock and hopefully by then I
will have got something inside me and will have
clarified my mind. ..

                 LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
            (In the absence of the Jury)

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Maxwell, I always listen to you
with the greatest of attention, as I hope I do to you
all, because I know that your interventions, which are
infrequent, are always thoughtful and done with a view
to assisting me in coining to a decision, but I think in
this particular instance I will call Mr. Bichard.
There is no point in repeating what we already know and
I therefore intend to take him as shortly as is
possible.

     The second point is the issue which you have
raised, Mr. King, with regard to the overheard
conversation.  I have been reflecting on this and ray
position basically is exactly the same as it was when
this issue came up with Mr. Jackson, so ray ruling on
this is that I think it will be proper to ask - indeed
I may well do it myself with a view to establishing
what, in fact, happened in the Control Room - what I
would consider to be improper and going beyond the
scope of the Inquest is to draw the conclusions from
it, because that is a matter in the end for the Jury.
So I will accept that we can explore what he said
happened in the Control Room within his hearing.   We
don t know what he is going to say but if need be we
can show him the transcripts, and if need be we will
show him all three pages.

     With regard to the order, I think it would be
right in the circumstances if Mr. Isaacs goes last and
you immediately precede him, if that is satisfactory.
So I will start, Mr. Manning can follow --- Mr.
Maxwell, if he has any questions.

     Mr. Maxwell, I am very conscious, of course, that
you are sitting here and you may feel that you don't
want to be here, but it is to do with the legal
submission.  I don't know what to say to you on that
point.  It seems to me we will not finish all the
evidence today whatever happens, because Dr. Slater has
disappeared, if I can use that word, for the weekend,
so I cannot get him here this afternoon, so whatever
happens we have got to run into Monday on his evidence,
which is brief and not controversial.  Depending on how
long we take with Mr. Bichard, if it is quick then I
might read Mr. Smith's evidence today because then we
have finished for all practical purposes matters which
are likely to cause contention, and Mr. Smith's won't
cause contention - if I thought it did I would not be
able to read it.  So it is up to you whether you feel
you want to stay, whether you feel you want to give me
your submission with the reservation that you might
want to amend it in the light of anything that is said,
                                                      72



I don't know.  I want to be as reasonable and as
helpful as I can be.

     MR. MAXWELL:   I will hand it in today with that
reservation, which is highly unlikely to be taken
advantage of, thank you.

     THE CORONER:  Are we clear as to what we are
doing? Jury and then Mr. Bichard.

     MR. ISAACS:    I was going to say one thing, sir,
only because it appeared to me, and this is really in
deference to you, that when Mr. Goddard gave evidence
yesterday, I know we were all keen to get through the
matter as quickly as possible, but it certainly did
appear to me that you were going very, very quickly
indeed.  I know that you would not want to give that
impression to the Jury, and when I say going very
quickly indeed, the questions were coming and the
answers were coming thick and fast.  It was something
that was very obvious to us.

     THE CORONER:   You are probably right, I was going
a bit faster than usual.  I will try and slow down a
bit.

     MR. ISAACS:    I am not concerned about taking the
note, I am only concerned about the impression that you
were creating, and I don't think that you appreciated
that in your desire to get on.

     THE CORONER:   I am grateful to you, Mr. Isaacs,
thank you.  Mr. King, can I ask you something?   There
is another documentary statement which needs to be
read, by Patricia Owens.  It is another correction.
Can you make sure that I do not forget about it,
because it is one that has come from your side of the
table and I might overlook it.

      MR. KING:      I will, sir.

      THE CORONER:    There is nothing controversial in
it.

     MR. MANNING:   What time do you have in mind
generally to finish today?

     THE CORONER:   I want to finish not later than A
today, whatever happens.
                                              T. BICHARD

            (In the presence of the Jury)

                TREVOR BICHARD Sworn

                   By THE CORONER

You are Trevor Bichard, aren't you? - A. That is
correct, sir.

P.C. 1370, I believe? - A. Yes, sir.

You are one of the Control Room staff - that is not
your only job - but you are one of the Control Room
staff at Hillsborough Football Ground? - A. Yes, sir.

In 1989 how many years had you been there? - A. I
commenced those duties September, 1987.

So quite a few years, and is it right that you are a
regular team with Sergeant Goddard and P.C. Ryan and
yourself? - A. Yes, sir.

You were the video operator and the VHF radio man, is
that right? - A. Yes, sir.

On this particular match we are talking about.  It is
not necessary, I think, to take every single event that
happened in the Control Room because we have heard the
various people, but there are some items which you will
be able to help us on.  The first one is this - were
you in Court when we showed the video just before
lunch? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you recognise that as one of your videos or not? -
A. No.

You didn't recognise   it? - A. No.

But would I be right in saying those are the sort of
shots one could get with your equipment if one were to
aim it at Leppings Lane? - A. The pictures that you
have seen this morning are greatly enhanced.   What you
must consider is that the screen we are looking at is
only 12 inch.

You are saying that that screen is very much larger? -
A. It gave you a false impression about the accuracy of
the picture you were seeing.

Are you saying that the video, not the  screen but the
video itself is not -- put it another   way, if we had
shown that video on a 12 inch screen would it have been
the sort of picture we would have seen with your
cameras? - A. That is correct, yes.
                                               T. BICHARD


In other words you are saying it is infinitely clearer,
you can see more detail, when you look at it on a huge
screen like this? - A. Yes and obviously it is running
at a slower speed as well    so you have a chance to take
in what you    are seeing in that picture.

I don't think we slowed it down.    I think it was played
at the standard rate.- A. It is a little bit difficult
to explain.    Itwas taken on a time lapse system
whereby basically a single photograph is taken, or a
single frame is done every half second, rather than at
normal speed.

So you can focus onto each frame because you have got a
little .... - A. The actual speed of that has been
altered, yes.  It is not running at the right speed as
we would have seen it on the camera.

Are you saying that the time lapsing is different, what
we have seen, as to what you would have seen? - A. Yes.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, perhaps I can assist? The
view from the Control Box is of the normal film so they
would see it at normal speed.  When one records it
there is a facility to record it in time lapse which
could then be used to get photographic evidence.   They
obviously don't see what is actually recorded, they see
the film running at normal speed then after the event
you see it at the slower rate.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.

Is that a correct explanation of what you are telling
me? - A. That is perfect.

So you are not saying that we had messed around with
this film? - A. No.

You are merely saying that the recording facility that
happened to have been used was time lapse, but what you
were seeing would have been different because it was
continuous? - A. Yes.

In the first instance, and on a very much smaller
screen? - A. Yes.

Tell me about the cameras which can look at Leppings
Lane terracing? - A. The terracing one?

Yes. - A. There were three cameras actually inside the
Ground which could get a picture of Leppings Lane.   If
we were to deal with the camera that is at 90 degrees
to the terracing area, that was the latest one to be
installed and it was positioned there actually not to
                                                            75

     ft                                            T. BICHARD


      take general shots of the terracing, but to the
      uncovered seats area where the away fans were adjacent
      to home supporters and we had had some trouble there.

Q. Where was that camera located?   Show us on the model.
   (The witness uses the model to illustrate his
   evidence) - A. The camera was under slung from the
   notice board next to the Control Box.

Q.   Is that the one, the video which we saw? - A. Yes,
     definitely that camera.

Q.   So we will call that camera number one, just for the
     sake of the record. That is the one which looks along
     Leppings Lane from the Control Box, is that right? - A.
     It can take that picture but its purpose was to take
     general shots of this area.   It was the uncovered seats
     and where away supporters were next to them.

Q. So that was why that location was chosen? - A. That is
   right, yes.

Q. Where is the second one? - A. The second one moving
   further along, is in fact almost central in the South
   Stand.  It is a colour system and again the object
   behind the camera was to give a general picture round
   the Ground, an overall internal scene.  The colour
   system was chosen to try and assist in the
   identification of people within the Ground should any
   incident occur.




                                /Q. Just complete it
                                               T. BICHARD


Just complete it by telling me where the third one
was. - A. The third camera which was at the far side
of the South Stand was set up to take pictures within
the Spion Xop area.  It was a black and white system
and that was its main purpose, for that area.  You
could use it to take pictures inside the South Stand,
but that was its main purpose, for the Kop.

Come back.  So what we have got is we have got camera
No.l by the Police Control Box whose objective was
actually to look the opposite way than Leppings Lane?
- A. Yes sir.

But you could swivel it round? - A. Yes sir.

That gives you a sort of slightly tangential
longitudinal view along the terrace if you did swivel
it round, is that right? - A. It would give you a view
straight along the terrace.

The one in the middle, camera 2, the colour system,
that was designed to take all the ground apart from,
of course, the South Stand.  Presumably you could not
take that because it was behind it? - A. You could get
part of the South Stand.  It w a s n !t 360 degrees, but
it was certainly high - 270 maybe.

Then the last one was at the far end of the South
Stand and that was really designed for the Spion Kop?
- A. Yes, that is right.

Just to exclude that one, did you use that one at all
to look at Leppings Lane on the day, 15th April 1989?
- A. Not as I recall.

We saw, of course, accepting everything you have said
about screen size, and so on, that all the cameras had
zoom facilities, is that right? - A. They did, yes.

So you could, if you wanted to, select bits to zoom in
on? - A. You could get closer, yes.

You needed that, of course, if you wanted to identify
anybody in particular? - A. The system as it was set
up was not able to create a reasonable enough picture
for identification purposes, and this had been
established when a survey had been carried out by the
Home Office.

Does that include the colour cameras as well? - A.
That is right, yes.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I am sorry, was that it could
not produce --
                                            T. BICHARD


     THE CORONER:  I think he said it could not.
You are quite sure about that? - A. I am quite sure.
Taking the colour camera as an example, if you were to
take pictures of people below that camera in the
uncovered seating area, you would get identification
because they are so close to the camera, but once you
get to the end of the South Stand area, Leppings Lane,
the magnification available on that zoom was
insufficient to create identification.

So what was the purpose of the cameras? - A. To
generally oversee inside the ground.  That part of the
system was installed as an original instrument for
command and control, rather than for evidence
gathering.  Obviously identification is part of
evidence gathering.

So it was actually designed to try and help people to
see around the ground? - A. Yes.

But it was inadequate for, shall we say, prosecution
purposes, that is what you are saying? - A. That is
right, yes.  But in combination with still photographs
the video action would create an ideal picture.  It
would give you an overall scene of what took place and
then we had systems of still photographers who would
be able to use quality cameras to take close-ups of
groups of the crowd that could be magnified.

So it was part of an overall system? - A. A small cog
in a big system.

The camera in the middle, the colour one, what sort of
a view did that get of Leppings Lane?  It obviously
was not 90 degrees, because to get 90 degrees it would
have had to be in the centre of the pitch, but how
good a picture could one get using maximum zoom of
Pens 3 and 4? - A. You would get a reasonable view of
Pens 3 and 4.

Could it get a view of the people at the front of the
pen so that you could distinguish them or not? - A.
Not to distinguish them, no.  You would get a view,
but obviously it is obscured by the fence and
hoardings, etc.

I think I am right in saying that you did not train
that camera with maximum zoom facilities onto Leppings
Lane terracing? - A. No, an incident had taken place
on the Spion Kop where some Liverpool fans who had got
tickets for that end of the ground had been segregated
and several arrests had been made, etc., and the
camera had been set there.
                                               T. BICHARD

 Did it remain set on that location? - A. As far as I
 can recall, yes.

But if you had been asked - I say no more - to train
it onto Leppings Lane terracing at about just after 3,
when we know that problems were developing, would one
have been able to obtain a picture on your screens,
not on this screen but on your screens, which would
have enabled identification of individuals at the
front to be made from your experience of the quality
of that camera? - A. No, it would give you an over
picture only.

So you are saying that it would not have been possible
to distinguish individuals? - A. No.

I know that was not done. - A. I think actually it
was, but it was not recorded.  There are five cameras
but only two recorders.

We will come to that. - A. I could explain if you wish
about why it did not become part of the recording.

Yes, tell me that. - A. The system operated whereby at
2.30 I should have replaced both tapes.  Because of
what was taking place on the Leppings Lane end I
didn't replace those tapes, and eventually I think it
ran out just after 3 o'clock.  The camera was used,
but it was not taping.

I see, but you said a moment ago that the camera was
actually trained on the Spion Kop.  Are you saying
that it was re-trained onto Leppings Lane? - A. It was
on the Spion Kop, but it was not recording and it was
watching that area until later on.  When things that
had developed outside the ground had, in fact, moved
inside, obviously then we moved to looking at a
different camera, we were wanting a different view,
and that was the one we would have used.

You have not understood my question.  I am either
confusing you, or you are confusing me, one or the
other.  Let us talk about the colour camera.  You had
loaded a tape for that - right - into the recorder? -
A. Yes.

You had trained the camera onto the Spion Kop? - A.
Yes.

What time? - A. I think it would be around 2
o'clock/2.15.

Were you recording those scenes at that time, as far
as you can remember? - A. Yes.
                                                T. BICHARD


 LenrJna*3? any tlme re-train that camera onto the
 Leppings Lane terracing? - A. Yes.


 anerl^.ciock?" d° that? ' *' “ W°Uld be s0"e
Do you know how much after 3 o'clock? - A. No.

You are saying there is no film of it because the tape
had run out and in the heat of the moment you did no?
replace it   I am not blaming you for that in any way.
  A. No. When the colour camera came into use, the
tape had expired.

Y?u had ®cenes in the Control Room but we cannot look
at that today from that camera, that is right, is it
not? - A. Yes, that is it, sir.

The other camera, the one where we do have scenes, in
tact the tape did not run out because it was on time
lapse? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

And it gave an extra life, so to speak? - A. Yes, it
did.

You have already told me - I am still on the colour
camera - that the scenes that you could see in your
Control Room on the monitor were (a) less good than
what we would have seen because it was smaller’ - A.
Yes sir.

And (b) in any event in the Control Box it would not
have enabled you to distinguish individuals? - A. No,
the quality of the reproduction on the screens, the
monitors you have got, is far substandard in
comparison with what you have seen there.




                        /Q.   The film we saw
                                                  T. BICHARD

The film we saw this afternoon of the Leppings Lane end,
which came from what I have called camera 1, I don't know
the camera number. - A. I would know it as camera 5.

The one beneath or near the Police Box? -A. Yes.

That scene began at about 15.02? - A. Yes, sir.

Where was that camera looking before 15.02 as far as you
can recollect? - A. My recollections are that the
particular camera had been faulty and in fact you saw
some of the problems that occurred.   You were getting
what is called flare.   It is reflection of light
coloured objects and you lose the picture.   The camera
was not really being used as much as it would normally be
because of the sub-standard picture.   It was just left
in position.   That is why the picture never really moved
at all because it was set and left in that position.

That is what I am coming to.   Given that it started at
15.02, let us assume I am right on that time, was that
the time you moved it and located it and then left it to
take that shot? - A. No, that probably would have been
done before that.

Would it have been recording before that? - A. Yes.

So there ought to be a film of it, prior to that? - A. I
would have thought so, yes.

Of that same scene? - A. Yes.

If I tell you we cannot find it would that make any
difference to your answer? - A. I have no idea at all
where it could have gone to.   It was part of the tape
and the tapes were all sealed up at the end of the day.

You saw the beginning of the tape? -A. Yes.

We deliberately started it with a few   frames before it
flicked.   The recording on that tape   was of scenes
outside the ground.   Do you remember    that? - A. Yes,
that is right, it showed the external   view.

That did not come from that camera, did it? - A. It could
be that that shot before...   They system - I haven't the
word to describe it.   It can move from camera to camera.
If I am not viewing a particular shot it can be set so
that it will flick through cameras 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, at
set periods.   At that particular time it is quite
possible that I was operating the external camera on
Leppings Lane and that had been on time lapse mode.    The
scene you saw outside at first was part of that sequence.
                                                   T. BICHARD


I do not know for sure.   Without seen the whole original
tape I cannot really explain how it has got where it is.

You cannot be recording from two cameras at once on to
one tape, can you? - A. No, there are two tapes and you
are getting one scene at a time.

From one camera? - A. Yes, either the one you select if
you want a particular view to be recorded, or if you wish
for it to flick round the other cameras.

Let's leave the cameras for the time being and let's get
back into the Control Room.   Can you recollect that at
some point or other a radio man came   into the Control
Room to try and fix the radios? - A.   Yes, sir.

Can you recollect any request at that time to you to make
sure that scenes outside the ground were being recorded?
-A. I believe that was made by Mr. Duckenfield.

You would have recorded that off a black and white
camera? - A. It was a black and white camera that was
situated on the external side of Leppings Lane.

In fact that is what was being done?   - A. Yes.

At some point or other did you see a   gate open? -A. Yes,
C Gate, initially.

You saw that.   Did you see that gate being opened for a
short period of time and then being closed by what looked
like a mounted Officer to you? - A. Initially I thought
the gates had been forced open and that Police Officers,
including a mounted Officer, had managed to close the
gates.

Can you actually see the gate or is it just the movement
of people, which you can see? - A. The thing that drew my
attention to it was the sudden influx of people.

You saw that and in fact did you draw people's attention
to it? - A. I did.   I said that the gate had been forced
open.

Then the position appeared to be retrieved by the
Officer, as far as you were concerned? - A. That is how I
saw it, yes.

Did you subsequent to that hear a request from
Mr. Marshall couched in strong terms that the gates
should be opened? - A. I think it was three requests, as
I call, the initial one being more of a suggested idea to
relieve a problem that was beginning to build up in
                                                   T. BICHARD


Leppings Lane, building up to his final request which was
very, very insistent.

Did the final request come after the retrieval of the
situation with that gate, as far as you remember? - A.
Yes.

Did the first request come before? - A. Yes, before that.

We have heard about the gates opening and people coming
in.   I do not think I need to take you through that.
Just thinking about .Leppings Lane terracing now.   At
what point did you first notice, either visually or by
monitor, anything that warranted comment, if that is the
right word? - A. I saw some people climbing over the
fence and a situation similar to that, people climbing to
the stand, had occurred the year earlier.    If you like,
those would have been my first thoughts that there was
anything unusual about what was happening on Leppings
Lane terrace, that people were climbing on to the
perimeter track over the fence.

That is the first time your attention was drawn to that
part of the ground in a significant sort of way? -A. Yes.

Did you see it through a window    or    did you see iton a
monitor? - A. It is very difficult to remember.    The
view is partially obscured of what is happening out on
the terrace because of people walking across the front of
my position.   I am not sure.

At that point in time your impression was that this was a
repeat of the previous year's... -A. I thought it was
some sort of pitch invasion.

Was the previous year at the same time or at the end of
the game or in the middle, or when was it, as far as you
remember? - A. I recall it   was at the end  ofthe game,
actually.   Quite a lot of   people came on  tothe pitch.

So it was different in that respect - timing-wise? - A.
Yes.   It was the same scene but a different time.

But you   connected the two in   your mind? - A. I did, yes.

Did you   see the match stopped? - A. No.

Did you know it had stopped? How did you find out   it
had stopped? - A. By the volume of supporters who had
gone on to the pitch and then I realised the players had
actually been taken off or been asked to leave.

We have heard from several   people that Superintendent
Greenwood was seen to signal and,   indeed,   he radioed in.
                                               T. BICHARD


Did you hear that?   You may not have done. - A. I did
not hear the radio message but I remember seeing him
waving his arms across.

Where do you remember seeing him, as a matter of
interest? - A. On the pitch near to the goalposts.

Can you remember the ACC coming in, Mr. Jackson? - A. On
more than one occasion, yes.




      Q. I am not interested
I am not interested in the first occasion which was
early on.  I am interested in the occasion around and
after kick-off? - A. Shortly after three o'clock?

Yes.   Do you remember him coming in? - A. I do, yes.

You may not have done but did you speak to him at
all? - A. Not directly.  I was having conversations
with other people and I think the first comment I
recall is when operation support was called for and
that was directed to me to use VHF radio to ask the
Operations Room to instigate that plan.

That was your second function, was it not, the VHF
radio? - A. Yes.

I think you decided at some point that that was more
important than the cameras and you may well have been
right.  Had you decided that before or after the
request for operation support? - A. I would say it was
roughly about the same time.

I want you to just think hard about this question of
operation support for a moment.  When was it first
requested? - A. Very early on after the ACC had come
into the Control Box.

So it was something that happened after the ACC came
into the Control Box but pretty quickly after that? -
A. Yes.

The second question I want to ask you is, I know you
were the transmitter, you were the voice? - A. Yes.

But it was not your decision, was it? - A. No.

Who gave you the order? - A. It was the ACC.     It
required his authority anyway.

That is the reason why I am asking you this because, as
I understand it, a response came back some time later
from Headquarters saying, "This has to be authorised by
the ACC".  Why was that necessary? - A. Possibly the
first message that I passed was just a request for
operation support and perhaps I did not explain to them
that the request had been made by the ACC.  Obviously
that would be recorded on tape.

Do you remember this request coming back saying,
"Authority required" or words to that effect? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. I immediately told them that
the authority had been given by the ACC who was present
in the Control Room.
They accept his word? They do not want to hear his
voice if you say it. Control will accept it, is that
right? - A. That is the only time it has ever happened
to me.  I would assume the initial request will be
sufficient.  Obviously it is a major thing to be asking
for and they would want confirmation to cover
themselves.

Was it you who contacted the Operations Room for
ambulances? - A. Yes, sir.

How did that happen? What happened? - A. As I recall,
things seemed to have gone on quite a way.  Again time
is very difficult to pin down but it seemed quite a way
into things when we realised that people had in fact
been injured and it was not just a pitch invasion or
the movement of people around the ground.

Turn to 517A in the bundle of documents.     Have you
found it? - A. 517A.

You can   see this looks like a transcript   of a log or
part of   a log? -A. Yes.

Is this  anything to do with you? Would these be
messages that you would be transmitting? - A. This
looks like a transcript of a telephone conversation
between Ambulance Control and Force Headquarters.

In other words, not your conversations? - A. Not my
doing, no.

If you turn the page to 517B you will see at 1508.14,
can you see that? - A. Yes.

I accept this is not your voice which is speaking but
there is a comment there? - A. Yes.

On what was required and why.  Can you see it? - A. "A
lot injured, apparently one of the gates, they've been
pushing and pushing", that conversation.

Yes.  Have you any explanation as the VHF operator as
to how that information got to Snigg Hill for them to
pass it on? - A. No, sir.

Pardon? - A. No idea at all, sir.

You cannot recollect passing that type of information
on to Snigg Hill? - A. No, if I had passed that
information on to Snigg Hill it would have been part of
the tape recording of VHF transmissions.  I think that
has been documented and transcribed.
                                                             86


Q. You have no recollection of passing anything like this
   on? - A. No, sir.

Q. The timing of that is 1508 or thereabouts? - A. Yes.

Q. You do not know but are you able to say when you would
   have sent the message to Snigg Hill for ambulances? -
   A. Not exactly but that would be on the transcript from
   the tape.

Q. What about later on? You were in the Control Room, Mr.
   Duckenfield was there and I think various other people
   came into the Control Room, is that right? - A. Indeed,
   sir.

Q. Did you hear any conversations or explanations being
   given as to what caused the problems with which
   everybody was grappling with at the time? - A. Various
   people came to the Control Room and all wanted
   information about what had taken place.  Is there any
   one particular individual?

Q. Yes, when Mr. Kelly came to the Control Room was
   anything said? - A. The Chief Superintendent did have a
   conversation with Mr. Kelly.

Q. That is Chief Superintendent Duckenfield so that we
   know? - A. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

Q. Do you recollect what was said in that conversation? -
   A. Not the whole of the conversation but certain
   reference was made to the initial thought about the
   gates being forced open.

Q. You recollect that that was said? - A. Yes.

Q. What you are saying is that you cannot remember the
   full extent? - A. That was only part of the
   conversation he was having.

Q. Would you be able to confirm that the main opening of
   the gates had been authorised from the Control Room? -
   A. Yes, that is right.

Q. At what point did you yourself, never mind what anybody
   else said or did, realise that there was a major
   disaster developing in front of your eyes? - A. I think
   that is really a matter of record again on the tape
   when I passed a transmission to Headquarters saying
   that we now realised there was in fact fatalities.   It
   wasn't just a series of people who were injured.   I
   seem to recollect that would be around 3.15. Again it
   is difficult to tie things exactly down but it would be
   recorded on tape the time that conversation occurred.
             Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING

Mr. Bichard, can I first of all deal with the message
whilst it is clear in everybody's mind, that 517B?
What you are saying about that is that you had a
recorder on the VHF transmitter including all the
messages being sent out over that medium? - A. All
messages that go into Force Operations Room by radio or
by telephone are recorded.

Therefore, you can confirm by that that was not a
message which was sent out by you? - A. Yes, the
transcript that is there appears to be one of a
telephone conversation.

Whatever source it may have come from did not come from
within the Control Box? - A. Not as I recollect, no.

I think that so far as the substance is concerned, the
collapsing of the gate, that too you have checked on
the tape.  Is that right? - A. I have never had access
to the tapes.  It was seized by West Midlands.

You are having to work from recollection on that part
as opposed to the actual record on the other one.   Your
recollection is that that was not said from the Control
Room? - A. I don't ever remember saying anything of
that nature.   If the tape was to be presented and said
that I did....

That is as much as you can say, Officer.  Your
recollection is that you do not remember that at all? -
A. No.

We have established and I am not going to establish all
over again that the Control Room was very much a team
effort? - A. Yes, sir.

We have established also and I am sure you have sat in
and heard the questions to Sergeant Goddard that
although there were obvious differences in rank it was
something of each person doing a particular job and
drawing the attention of another person to that
particular situation? - A. Yes, when things happened
that I saw on screen, if they had not been seen by
other people I would bring it to their attention.   Very
often if a message came in over the radio that made
reference to a particular area of the ground or an
incident I would direct the camera may be to record
that particular incident if it seemed to be that
important.
                                                              88

Q. These words really, "If I see an incident or notice
   something on the monitors I will bring it to the
   attention of the Control Room staff.  Vice versa if
   they see something they would mention it to m e " . - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. In fact when the call came in from Mr. Marshall who was
   out in Leppings Lane to close Leppings Lane, did you
   take a look at the monitors at that time into Leppings
   Lane and see what it was that precipitated that request
   from him? - A. As I recollect I took a general view
   along Leppings Lane.

Q. Would it be fair to.say, PC Bichard, from that general
   view as shown up on your monitor there was nothing you
   could identify which could have necessitated Mr.
   Marshall making that request? - A. Nothing untoward at
   that stage.

Q. Of course, he was the man on the spot.  He was the
   senior Officer who was well versed and able to make
   that sort of response? - A. He would have a better view
   obviously being on the ground.

Q. Can you help us please as to the view your cameras have
   so far as the wall line of the turnstiles is concerned
   at the Leppings Lane end? Are you able to see people
   at the front of the queues waiting to go into the
   turnstiles? - A. No, you cannot see the external side
   of the turnstiles.

Q. Again when a message was received from Superintendent
   Marshall as to the crushing at the Leppings Lane
   turnstiles, did you move your cameras then to have a
   look at Leppings Lane and see if you could see
   anything? - A. I think once the first request came in
   it was a continual effort of looking at Leppings Lane
   to see what was actually taking place.

Q. Can you give us any indication of when it was, having
   had the cameras lined up initially on the Spion Kop
   end, when you moved the cameras so as to take a look at
   what was going on in Leppings Lane? - A. The camera
   would have remained on the Kop obviously but my
   attention would have been brought round to Leppings
   Lane probably when the first request came in from Mr.
   Marshall regarding the closing of the road.

Q. So there is the closing of the road but the problems
   with the crowd manifested themselves over a period of
   time.  There were requests for extra serials or
   reinforcement.  There were requests for horsemen to go
   over. Were you watching the Leppings Lane crowd at
   that time or were you still having to focus on other
   things inside the ground and also, of course, on this
   monitor on the Kop? - A. My attention was purely on
                                                   T. BICHARD


Leppings Lane.   That is where everything seemed to be
happening.

Would it be fair to say in round terms that that would
be from about five past two onwards? - A. That is about
right, sir.

At that stage how many cameras are giving you a view of
Leppings Lane? - A. One.

That is on to one of. these monitors and without going
over it all again, nothing like what we have seen, just
a small screen and not a very easy picture to
distinguish and differentiate? - A. That is correct,
sir.




                                 /Q. When you looked.
                                               T. BICHARD


When you looked out at half-past-2 and saw the crowd
outside, you are an Officer experienced in looking at
crowds outside football matches? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you form any view yourself as to whether in your
view that crowd would not get into the Ground by kick-
off time? - A. I was quite happy that the crowd would
get inside the Ground within the time that we had left.

Thank you.  I will try to pass fairly quickly through
that succeeding period because I have already touched
upon the various events that were happening within the
Control Room, and we know that the Control Room was an
extremely busy place, at all times but particularly
during this period, wasn't it? - A. Indeed.

Mr. Marshall made three radio messages that you
remember? - A. Yes, sir.

The third of those radio messages has been described as
almost a commands  open the gates or someone will get
killed? - A. Yes, it was very positive and insistent.

Were you able to give any assistance to the senior
Officers in the Control Box as to what was going on
then, from your camera's eye view? - A. No, because the
view that we are getting is not of what is happening in
front of the turnstiles, it is beyond, further back
into the crowd beyond that point.

When the decision was made that the gate should be
opened, Mr. Marshall having asked for the gate to be
opened, did you re-train the camera then? - A. Yes.  My
initial thoughts were, again talking about gate, as has
been said earlier I was thinking about Gate C. Because
of the position of the camera the actual angle of Gate
2 does not give you a view of it, it is looking
directly over the top of it, and I did not realise that
the gate was there.

When you trained on Gate 3 you then saw it opened? - A.
Yes.

But your thought, I think, was that it had not opened
voluntarily but that it had either gone or burst? - A.
The initial opening?

Yes. - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   I think you said Gate 3.

     MR. MANNING:   Did I say 3, sorry:
                                              T. BICHARD


Gate C? - A. Yes, the initial opening I thought the
gate had been forced open.

Then you saw what appeared to be a recovery of that
gate by a mounted Officer? - A. Yes.

Was it after that apparent recovery that the command
message from Mr. Marshall came over the air? - A. There
was another message and then shortly after that the
insistent, the positive demand.

Is it right to say that when the gate, in your mind, in
your view as to whait you could see on the monitor,
burst or gave way, that you actually used words like
that within the Control Room, in other words that you
alerted everybody in the Control Room with words like,
"The gate's burst"? - A. I did, yes, "The gate has been
forced".

In view of Mr. Marshall saying that he wanted the gates
opened, did you keep your camera trained on Gate C? -
A. I can't recall whether it was just an over view of
the area or specifically Gate C.

Did a time come when the camera was not trained on Gate
C but moved to another gate? - A. Yes, shortly after
the order had been given to open the gate a further
request came from the C and V Serial, Sergeant Higgins,
regarding Gate A, and he too was very insistent that it
was necessary to open the gate because of the danger to
people outside.

You said a very short time, let me just try and press
you a little if I may as to that, can you give us any
idea what sort of time it appeared to you there was?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I think to be fair he said,
"shortly after".

     MR. MANNING:   Shortly after, P.C. Bichard, can
you give us any idea how much in time, shortly after
the opening of Gate C, you heard the request so far as
Gate A is concerned and moved your camera? - A. I can't
answer that question correctly again, to look at the
video tape, my reactions were to that request and I
moved the video tape across to Gate A.  If somebody
knew the time difference between that, that is an
accurate timing of the occurrence.

Thank you very much.   I certainly won't press you any
further than that.   In all of this did you get a chance
at all to see what was happening on the Leppings Lane
Terraces? - A. No.
                                             T. BICHARD


The first time that you got any signal that there was
any problem so far as that is concerned was when people
were climbing over the fence? - A. That is the first
time that I realised that there was something untoward.

You are not sure whether you saw that on the camera, or
the monitor from the camera, or whether it was through
the window? - A. I am not 100 per cent sure on that
one.

But you formed that view instantaneously, that at that
time there was a pitch invasion? - A. Yes.

That was the view that you took then? - A. Yes.

And you had been present, I think, the year before when
that had, in fact, been the invasion that the learned
Coroner referred to, at the end of the match? A. Yes, I
had.

Is it possible to have a close up view of the centre
pens from any of the cameras? - A. You really have to
be careful on the definition of a close up view.

I am looking to you, Officer, with probably the best
knowledge in the Court to help us as to what you can
see and what you can't see, and how clearly you can see
it.  It is all right getting up close to somebody but
if the whole image is blurred it is useless being
there, isn't it, so if you can help us in that sort of
context? - A. My idea of a close up view would be no
more than six heads and shoulders on the picture, for
identification.  That camera was not good enough to
give that sort of picture.

So it was not good enough to give six heads and
shoulders, and it is obvious therefore it was not
capable of giving one head and shoulders either? - A.
Most definitely not.

What do you say, Officer, so far as the ability of a
camera, trained from the South Stand, to give you an
idea in your terms of overcrowding within that area? -
A. It would not give you a view of overcrowding.

Would you agree that it would not be a sound judgment
to make any decision about overcrowding from the
monitor that you would have in front of you? - A. I
don t think it would be a sound judgment.

In fact, part of the problem is that the position and
angle of the camera in the South Stand, instead of
ideally, if you like, being on the centre of the pitch,
gives you a difficulty because of the angle itself? -
                                             T. BICHARD


A. That combined with the inadequacy of the camera*
yes.

What you have got is a camera starting off with an
inherent disadvantage in that it is straining its lens
over a distance of what, perhaps 100 yards, before it
even reaches the subject matter it wants to focus on? -
A. That is correct, that yardage is effectively wasted.

And it would need a very expensive, sophisticated piece
of equipment to be able to do that sort of thing? - A.
That is the principle:  you either move the camera or
pay more money out for a more powerful lens.

I think it is right to say that there had been
discussions between you, and I am not quite sure who it
was but somebody - can you help us with regard to the
purchase of other equipment or different equipment? -
A. Yes.  A review had taken place with the Home Office,
and Mr. Holdsworth, who was in charge of the
installation of the CCTV system, and Mr. Mackrell,
regarding updating the whole of the system all round
the Ground.  Perhaps if I could qualify that, the
system could be improved just by actually moving things
around, re-positioning, we could achieve a far better
standard of picture for what we required.

We have talked about what the camera can see and the
camera can't see.  Just help me with regard to this, it
is right, isn't it, that the camera can t see the
tunnel off the concourse leading into the terraces
themselves? - A. The camera can see the front side of
the tunnel on the terracing when no people are there,
but you cannot see the rear entrance of the tunnel on
the concourse.

Yes, you can see it from the pitch side? - A. Yes.

But you can't see it from the concourse side? - A. That
is right.

You were watching Gate C on your monitor.  You saw what
you have described as the first opening and closure and
then the second opening under orders from Mr.
Duckenfield.  Did you as an Officer experienced in
working in that Ground draw any connection between the
people coming in Gate C and the tunnel? - A. None
whatsoever.

Had you done so, Officer, is that something, if nobody
else had mentioned it, that you would have mentioned?-
A. I would, yes.

Thank you very much indeed.
                                             T. BICHARD


     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, let's pause for about ten
minutes and then we stop at 4 o'clock whatever happens.

                (Short Adjournment)
                                                   T. BICHARD

 , )..fIR; KING: Sir, the position is this.  I am
 loathe to give my learned friend Mr. Isaacs any
             ?£ ?°W X?ng 1 Wil1 b e ’ but 1 a m mindful of
             that my learned friend cannot come on Monday.

         THE CORONER: Yes, I had forgotten that.

     >M R * KfNGZ 1 am (3uite willing to start, but I do
      ? ? V h6ther my learned friend wants to interpose
 himself to ensure that he can complete his cross-
 examination.

         THE CORONER: Mr. Isaacs, what do you say?

     MR. ISAACS:   What I say is I am very grateful to
 y learned friend.   If he will go on for, say, half-
an-hour, he may finish in half-an-hour, and if he
stops then I could perhaps take the last 5 or 10
minutes.  I will not be any more than that.

      THE CORONER:    Yes, okay Mr. King.    He may not be
 as long as that.                                  7



     MR. KING:  I     have never seen such looks of hope
from everybody in     all my life!

               Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Constable, one thing that does concern me.  Your
evidence is that two of the cameras which could have a
view of the Leppings Lane end have a zoom facility, is
that right? - A. Yes.

That is the camera which is at an angle to the
terracing, 90 degrees or so and looks along it? - A.
X6 S •


And the one which is on the South Stand which can
look, as best one can, at the front of it? - A. Yes
that is correct.                         ’    *     *

     evidence is that it is not possible to zoom in in
such a way as to identify the facial features of
         on the terrace? - A. It is certainly not good
enough for Court purposes, yes.

This is what puzzles me.  The cameras, as far as you
know, are they still in the same position today in
1991 as they were in 1989? - A. They are, yes.

     MR. KING:  Sir, it is at this point that I need
to ask a request of yourself.  I have been to the
ground and I do not intend to give evidence, but has
                                               T. BICHARD

 the zoom facility been demonstrated to the Jury in
 this case?                                    7


       THE CORONER: No.

       MEMBERS OF THE JURY:   Yes.

      THE CORONER:  I was not with them, of course.    I
 did not know that.

      MR. KING:  I say that.  It is difficult for me to
 put questions in the light of this evidence because it
 was demonstrated to me, sir.

       THE CORONER: In that case it has, if the Jury say
 so.   I was not with them.

     MR. KING:  I just want you to think carefully,
Constable.  Do you maintain the view that the zoom
facility is such that it is not possible to zoom in so
that one can clearly identify a given individual if
one so wishes to do so? - A. I am quite happy with
that comment, yes.

You maintain that? - A. Yes.

I cannot take that any further with you.  That is your
view of that and I assume, therefore, that you are
equally confident about your assertions as to what you
can or cannot see on the terraces generally, the way
you have described about not being able to pick out
overcrowding and so forth? - A. Yes.

        £a c t »  *s t^ie case that the zoom can pick out
racial features, does that mean really that —      Well
you could have no explanation, you just stick by what
you say, that is right? - A. It could be a matter of
opinion.    If you were to go and stand on that terrace
on your own and people knew you were there and took a
photograph with that camera, I am quite sure they
could identify you, but when there is a group, a large
      there, to pick out an individual would be very
difficult.                                            7



But you can zoom in so that you can clearly see facial
features, can you not? - A. I don't think so, sir.

     THE CORONER:  Can we just clear one point.   Are
you saying that you cannot pick out facial features on
the screens? You are not saying that it is not
possible to take a frame of the video and blow it up
as we have done? - A. You certainly can enlarge the
picture, but what you have to do is you stop motion
the video tape, take a photograph of a television
                                                              T. BICHARD


                 !        enlar3e the Photograph.            You cannot
 o h v V n ^ ^ enlarge the video tape picture itself, and
 obviously    ^ when
                  ----- you
                        J    take aa pphotograph       of
                                       u u t u g l ayn o x aa ttelevision
                                                                e
 screen
 screen vou             i incc and
             you get lines     a-nA -j
                                    interference ____ ___on it.
      MR.
      MR. KIS
           KING:  Sir, I was clearly putting to the
 witness
 witness what
          what one could see on the screens in the
 Control Box.

      THE CORONER: That is what I thought.  I just
 wanted to be quite sure that we are talking about the
 same thing.

      MR. KING:  I cannot take that any further with
 you, Officer.  Tell me was it ever part of your
 briefing in your position and role in that Control
 Room to monitor the terrace for overcrowding? - A. No


So would that perhaps help us to understand why you
yourself were not, if I can put it this way, on the
day looking out for overcrowding, would that be right?
You were not briefed so to do, you did not regard that
as part of your duties, did you? - A. As far as I was
concerned I didn't see any overcrowding.

But it was not part of your duties to monitor for it,
was it? - A. If I had seen it, I would have done
something about it.

I understand that, but it was never in your mind, was
it, to watch out for possible overcrowding on the
terraces during the build-up before the disaster
occurred? - A. I was watching what was happening
outside on Leppings Lane, that is correct.

But it was not in your mind that you had to watch out
tor it on the terraces then, was it, at any stage’ -
A. I was concerned about the action that was taking
place on Leppings Lane, the comments that were bein®
made over the radio, and that was where my attention
was.

I understand that.  I just want to concentrate for the
moment on the terraces and what your attitude of mind
was, and can I say, Constable, you were not the senior
uiiicer in the Control Room, were you? — A. No.

You, without being rude about it, were one of the
junior Officers? - A. Yes sir.

So no one is blaming you for not looking out for
       ^ ^ WaS no*" Par^     your briefing, you see,
and it is the fact, is it not, that it was never in
                                             T. BICHARD

 your mind that you had to watch out for overcrowding
 on the terraces when you were in the Control Box that
 day.   A. I think I would like to reverse that and say
 what was in my mind was the fact that I was watchin®
 what was taking place on Leppings Lane, the incidents
 that were occurring there.I do realise what sort of
 tack you are getting on to, but that is how I would
 like to answer that question.

Mr. Bichard, I want, if I may for the moment, to
remove you from the events of Leppings Lane and just
look to what you as someone in the Control Room was
expecting to have to do when you went in there on 15th
April.  It was not part of your briefing that your
function was to monitor the terracing for
overcrowding, that is right, is it not? - A. I wasn't
given a specific instruction that that was what I was
to do.

I will not take that any further with you, but I can
put this to you, can I not, in the same context? You
did have a number of briefings, did you not, relating
to, if I can put it this way, law and order, that is
to say preventing pitch invasions and matters like
that? - A. Generally speaking the Control staff did
not attend briefings.

When very late on in the events you have described to
the Coroner you saw people coming over the fence, your
immediate reaction was as to a pitch invasion, was it
not? - A. It was, yes.

Your mind, if I can put it that way, was switched into
a public order situation, was it not? - A. That is
what I consider was happening, yes.

To be fair to you, you had never, as part of your
         or instructions, been invited at any stage,
had you, to look upon your role in that Control Box to
monitor that terracing for signs of overcrowding, that
is right, is it not? - A. That is correct.

That may explain or it may not explain it.  When you
were being questioned by the learned Coroner, or it
may have been my learned friend Mr. Manning - it was
my learned friend Mr. Manning - and you were asked
whether during the time the Gate C request was made
and when the decision was being made whether to open
it and when it was opened, you got an opportunity to
check to see what was happening on the Leppings Lane
terraces, your answer you said was no because you were
directing your mind to what was happening in Leppings
Lane itself? - A. That is correct, sir.
                                              T. BICHARD

 So I taxe it from that, and again I do not criticise
 you as a junior Officer, that you yourself did not
 turn your mind to the question of what was going to
 happen to the people, the large group of people who
 were going to be let in through the gates, because
 that was not part of your function, was it? - A. No.
 I think the circumstances would have been different
 had the ground been full and there were a lot of
 people outside and we were considering opening the
 gates.  Then I think my mind may well have been
 switched to what would happen to the people coming in,
 but the circumstances were that the people outside
 were coming into the spaces that were available in the
 Leppings Lane.

Of course.  The people inside could only go where
there was space on the terrace, that is right, is it
not? - A. That is right, yes.

What you told my learned friend Mr. Manning was, "I
drew no connection between the people coming into Gate
C and the tunnel, but I would have mentioned it if I
had noticed it".  That is what you said? - A. Yes.

tfhy, if you had noticed a connection between people
coming in through Gate C and the central tunnel, would
you have mentioned it? - A. It would be part of an
access to the terrace.

But why would you have mentioned it? - A. For the same
reason that I might mention anything else that was
taking place within the Control Box, if somebody else
hadn't put their mind to it.

But what was it, what would it be, if you had
connected the people coming in through Gate C and the
central tunnel at that time, that if you had noticed
Ini ^°U y ould have felt concerned enough to mention it?
why would you have wanted to mention it? - A. I think
the easy answer to that is that at the end of the day
that was one of the things that brought about this
disaster, but it wasn't something that was in my mind
when those gates were opened.

I understand that, but what you told my learned friend
Mr. Manning was that if you had drawn a connection
between people coming in through Gate C and the tunnel
you would have mentioned it, that is what you told us?
- A. Yes.

I want to explore with you why that would have been
the case because it was simply the tunnel going onto
the terraces, why would you have mentioned it, and you
expected the people to go on the terraces, why would
                                             T. BICHARD

you have mentioned it? - A. Because I think that
comment is made with hindsight, that was the result of
what happened when the gates opened because a lot of
people went down that tunnel.

Yes, but so what?

     THE CORONER:   He has just said that the comment
was with hindsight.

     MR. KING:  But you have told us that the people
outside could only go to the spaces on the terraces,
that is right? - A. That is where they would go, yes.

Is this the case then, leaving aside that you drew no
connection between people going to Gate C and the
tunnel, if you had noticed it, the reason why you
would have mentioned it would be you would not have
wanted people to go down that tunnel because the
central pens staring everybody in the face looking at
the terrace, if one did, was that those central pens
were full.

     THE CORONER: I have got to give a warning if you
are going to ask that question.

     MR. ISAACS:  With respect, he has already said
that the comment he made was with hindsight.  We all
know now, and Mr. Duckenfield accepts and indeed other
witnesses have accepted, that at the time
unfortunately the central pens had so many people in
that there was insufficient room for the people who
did eventually go in, and I think that is what he was
saying, with respect.




                        MR. KING:   With respect ....
                                                T. BICHARD


               MR. KING:   With respect, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Let me give him the warning.   You
don't have to answer this question because it may tend to
incriminate you.   It is your privilege to say you don't
want to say anything in reply to it.   Now can you
remember what the questions was?

     MR. KING:   I will go in stages in view of my
learned friend's intervention, which, with respect, isn't
correct:

You were being asked not whether you knew that the centre
pens were full.   You weren't asked that question.  What
you were being asked about was whether you drew a
connection between people coming through Gate C and the
tunnel, all right? You told my learned friend
Mr. Manning that you had not noticed it, but if you had
noticed it you would have mentioned it.   All right? - A.
Right.
  ,,w .. • /                                       #
Now what I am putting to you is in two stages.   First of
all, for you to give us that answer it follows that you
must have had a view at the time that down the tunnel was
not somewhere where you wanted that flow of people to go?
- A. That is something that with hindsight I know.   The
circumstances that presented themselves on that day, that
we all know about, if the people had been stopped going
down the tunnel the majority of this disaster would not
have occurred.

All right.   I will not take it any further with
yourself, but you see there are two quite separate
matters here which I was putting to you quite separately.
One was the connection between people going through
Gate C and the tunnel and number two was whether or not
it could be seen that the terrace was full in the centre?
All right? -A. Being a football supporter over a number
of years, there is a tendency in football culture to go
to the back of the centre of the goal.   There are a
number of occasions when the terraces have been
completely empty at either sides, but the centre pens
have been reasonably full because people like to stand
there and that is why the pens fill up earlier.

You are telling us that you yourself at the time of the
opening of the gates did not get a chance to see what was
happening on the Leppings Lane terrace?   That is what
you told us? - A. Yes, that is right.

You are telling us, therefore, that no-one in the Control
Box asked you about what was happening on the terraces or
asked you to look to see what was happening on the
                                                T. BICHARD


terraces?   That must be right? -A. My attention was on
Leppings Lane and what was taking place there.

You received no requests from anybody senior in the
Control Box to draw your attention, to ask you about what
was happening on the terraces?   That is right, isn't it?
- A. Yes.

Let me go back to the events at about half past two.    At
about half past two you actually switched on the video
system to record the scene outside, didn't you? - A. On
Leppings Lane?

Yes. - A. Yes.

What was it that had caught your eye at half past two? -
A. It was the radio request regarding the closing of
Leppings Lane.

Your attention was drawn to a build-up of the crowd
outside at half past two? - A. Yes, that was part of the
request.

I think you told us, did you not, that it was at half
past two that you should have changed one of your tapes?
- A . Yes, that is correct.

And you were distracted? - A. Yes.

What was it that was distracting you? - A. The events as
they were building up outside in Leppings Lane.

Around that time do you recall any discussion going on in
the Control Box about delaying the kick-off? - A. I
cannot give you the time but there were certain comments
made regarding policy.

That would be around this time at 2.30 when you had
videoed in on Leppings Lane and you noticed this build­
up? - A. I cannot give you the time accurately.

Wouldn't it be around that time? - A. No, I am not sure I
can answer that at this point in time.

All right.    Let me try and jog your memory about what
was said.   What do you recall was said about delaying
kick-off, whenever this conversation took place? - A. You
would like me to tell you the context of the
conversation?

Yes. - A. I believe Superintendent Murray, a conversation
did take place whereby the words were mentioned that it
was not policy to delay the kick-off unless it was some
                                               T. BICHARD


outside intervening factor which had affected the fans'
arrival at the ground.

The word you have used is "policy".   That is what was
being discussed? - A. That is what I remember, yes.

If there wasn't a reason justifying late arrival, do you
remember Mr. Murray saying what the policy was then? - A.
Not specifically.   I could tell you the causes or
reasons for considering delaying kick-off.

     THE CORONER:   Tell us that. - A. Outside factors
such as road accidents, delays, road works etc., or just
by the pure volume of traffic that was coming to the
event and it would mean that a large number of people
were going to be delayed.

     MR. KING:   Wasn't Mr. Murray saying that it wasn't
"our" policy to delay kick-off for people who had just
arrived late at the ground? - A. That would be the
reversal of that, yes.

He was saying that? - A. Yes, I am quite confident that
that is what was being said.

Do you recall where Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was
when you had directed your camera at 2.30 onwards at the
Leppings Lane end? - A. Whereabouts in the Control Box?

Yes. - A. Stood in front of my position.

     THE CORONER:   In front of your position? - A. In
front of my position, yes.

     MR. KING:   Was he looking at the monitor at the
same time as you? - A. Yes.

Were you discussing the general situation together? - A.
We did, yes.

That would be around the time of this discussion about
policy and delaying kick-off took place?   It could be,
couldn't it? - A. It could be, yes.

All right.   I will not take that any further.   Just to
deal with the opening of the gates, that is Gate C, you
can confirm that you yourself were concentrating solely
on Leppings Lane itself? -A. Yes.

No-one in the Control Box asked you the question as to
where Gate C, which you had your monitor on, led?   Is
that right? - A* Yes, that's right.
                                                T. BICHARD


Is it right you directed the attention of Mr. Duckenfield
to Gate C? - A. Yes, when it opened originally.

Then you had the camera zoomed in on it? - A. I did, yes.

No-one turned your mind to what the state of the Leppings
Lane terraces were?   That is right? - A. The events on
Leppings Lane outside were obviously getting quite
serious.

But no-one turned your mind?   No-one asked you a
question about it? r> A. No.

The first time you say   that you turned your mind to the
Leppings Lane terrace was when you saw people coming over
the top? - A. Yes, that is right.

Before that Gate A had been opened, hadn't it? - A. Yes.

I don't want to deal with your recollections as to the
gap of time any further than what you have been able to
tell us, but I do want to ask you this:   do you remember
an instruction being given for Serials to be sent
somewhere to await what   washappening at Gate A after it
had happened? - A. Yes,Serials   were sent to the North
Stand area.

That was at the time the order for Gate A was given, was
it? - A. I think that would be after Gate A had been
opened.   Two Serials were despatched earlier to Leppings
Lane.   I know one of the Serials to be C&V,
Sergeant Higgins, who then appeared at the back of
Gate A.

Yes. - A. Again, thinking about in relation to when the
gate was opened, I certainly know that Officers were
directed to the North Stand area.

Do you remember who gave that order? - A. No.

Wasn't it Mr. Duckenfield himself? - A. I am not sure
about that.

Can I just remind you of what was suggested and your
answer given to Lord Justice Taylor on that matter, just
to help you? - A. Certainly.

     MR. KING:   Sir, could he be shown page 62 of his
transcript please, just above letter D, sir?

     THE CORONER:   Can you find it?   Just above D? - A.
Yes, sir.   That is right.   Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield gave that order.
                                                T. BICHARD


     MR. KING:   That order was given to stop the crowd
going on to the pitch by the North Stand? - A. Yes,
that s right.

So it is right that at that stage someone in the Control
Box, and it looks as if Mr. Duckenfield gave the order,
it would have been him...

     MR. ISAACS:   That is totally unfair, sir, with
respect.

     MR. KING:   Mr.* Duckenfield gave the order, you have
told us? - A. Yes.

That order was directed to sending Officers to the North
Stand? - A. Yes.

Gate A was entry point to the North Stand, wasn't it? -
A. Yes.

So that order was directed to the likely destination of
the people coming in through Gate A? - A. Yes.

So it is right that at that stage clearly some thought
had been given to where the people going through Gate A
were going to end up? - A. I think the concern would be
that Gate A led to a seating area where everybody had
tickets and if people entered the ground without tickets
they would be occupying places that either were already
occupied or that they should not occupy, whereas the
terraced area was a free standing area.

Yes, the thought as regards the order in relation to
Gate A was directed to a possible public order problem,
wasn't it? - A. It was to deal with the people who had
gone into that area who may not have tickets for that
stand.

Yes.   It was immediately after that that you saw that
which you regarded as a pitch invasion? -A. Yes.

Can I just investigate slightly further this matter, and
I will do it very briefly, the matter as regards the
message which apparently was being sent out from the Snig
Hill Operation Force Room at eight minutes past three to
the ambulance service to the effect that apparently the
cause was the collapse of the gates?   You have no
knowledge of that?   That is right?    That is what you
tell us? - A. That's right.

It would in fact from your knowledge not be correct,
because from your knowledge the major opening of any gate
when the large number of people came through, was not as
a result of any gate being pushed open or broken open, it
                                                            106

                                                  T. BICHARD


   was as a result of deliberate opening on Police
   authority?   That is right? - A. Certainly the second
   opening of Gate C was on authority.

Q. That is when the majority of people came through? - A.
   Yes.

Q. The first opening, whatever you thought about it, was for
   a very short period, some twenty seconds? - A. I thought
   it was a bit longer than that.




          Q. It was a very short
                                                                107



                                                         T. BICHARD


Q. It was a very short period, was it not? - A. Probably
   40 seconds which is twice as long as that.

Q. Tell me, when you did witness the conversation you have
   told us about in relation to Mr. Duckenfield with Mr.
   Kelly, this was in the Control Box, was it not? - A.
   That is right.  Mr. Kelly came to the doorway of the
   Control Box.

Q. Who was Mr. Kelly, do you know? - A. He was connected
   with the FA.  That is my knowledge of him.

Q. How close to the Control Box door were you
   positioned? - A. Perhaps three or four feet.

Q. You clearly do have a recollection of Mr. Duckenfield
   telling Mr. Kelly about a gate having been forced? - A.
   I remember a conversation taking place and that was
   part of the conversation, yes.

Q. You do not remember any other part of the conversation?
   - A. No.

Q. So certainly you do not remember anything along the
   lines of, "And we, the Police, opened a gate to let a
   lot of people in"? - A. No.

Q. Just tell us again then your recollection of exactly
   what you heard Mr. Duckenfield tell Mr. Kelly? - A. Mr.
   Kelly came to the doorway.  There was a conversation
   taking place between him and Mr. Duckenfield and part
   of that conversation included comments regarding the
   gate that we believed had been forced, which was gate
   C.

Q. And what happened? - A. After the Police had regained
   control of the gates?

Q.   No, no, what did Mr. Duckenfield tell Mr. Kelly apart
     from saying that a gate had been forced? - A. I d o n ’t
     remember, sir.

Q. Did he not say that there had been an inrush of
   supporters into the ground? - A. If that is part of the
   transcript from Lord Justice Taylor then that is what I
   said and that is what I remember at that time, yes.

Q.    Mr. Bichard, there is no ifs and buts about it, is
     there? The impression you gained at that time was that
     Mr. Duckenfield was telling Mr. Kelly of the FA that
     the cause of what had gone wrong was that the gate had
     been forced with the result that a lot of supporters
     had rushed into the ground.   That is the effect of what
                                                       T. BICHARD


he was saying as the cause? - A. I d o n ’t know what
other things were being said at the time, that the two
people there were having a conversation and there were
other things happening in the Control Room.

     MR. KING: All right, I will not take that any
further. Thank y o u .

               Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS

Mr. King is trying to suggest to you that the snippet
of conversation that you heard was all that was said
about this matter and there in that snippet was Mr.
Duckenfield's whole assessment a number of minutes
after the event of the cause of what was going on.
That I think is what is being suggested.  Let me just
try and put all this in context.  First of all, the
conversation that you did hear was just a snippet of
the total conversation between the men? - A. Yes, that
is right.

As I understand it, it was not a conversation that
concerned you? - A. No, it was not connected with me.

Would it be fair to say that you had a good deal on
your plate at that time? - A. Yes, sir.

Therefore, it is fair to say you would not have been
concentrating terribly on that conversation? - A. I
w o u l d n ’t have been concerned of somebody coming to the
door wanting further information.

You have fairly told Mr. King that you do not know what
else was said? - A. No, I d o n ’t.

So far as what you heard was concerned that so far as
your own recollection was concerned was absolutely
true.  You had believed that fans had forced the gate
and that there had been an inrush of fans into the
ground? - A. Yes, when gate C opened for the first time
there was no doubt.  I d i d n ’t feel any doubt in my mind
that the gate had been forced.

In so far as you heard Mr. Duckenfield say that, what
he was saying so far as you were concerned was
absolutely right? - A. Yes.

As you told Mr. King, you do not know whether what Mr.
Duckenfield was saying had a continuation namely "And
after that the gate was opened on our authority"? - A.
He may well have qualified that with further
conversation.
                                                                 109


                                                           T. BICHARD


    Q. So far as the Snigg Hill message is concerned, as I
       understand it, Snigg Hill could have picked up
       information that did not come from the Control Box by
B      listening into Channel 25, is it? - A. That is right.
       The Control Room at Snigg Hill were monitoring a
       personal radio system as well as the normal VHF
       channels.

    Q. Did you understand that little snippet that you read on
       our Exhibit 517B was intended by the Snigg Hill
       operator to be an in-depth analysis of what had taken
       place and the causes of what had taken place? - A. It
       seems an informed comment that somebody has made but I
       do not know how they have got the information which
       they have.

    Q. Again it is difficult to understand but it could have
       come over Channel 25? - A. Yes, I know they were
       monitoring Channel 25 because when I was using VHF I
       could hear that Channel 25 in the background, messages
       that were coming from the ground in effect.

    Q. Possibly from someone who had been in the concourse
       area at the time when the fans did appear to burst open
       the gate? - A. That is right.  The system being on talk
       through any one person on the ground could have been
       speaking and we may not have been receiving that.   If
       we had been transmitting on our hand set it blocks us
       receiving messages.  So they could be transmitting as
       well.

    Q. Police Constable Bichard, two matters about the opening
       of the gates and what was happening at the time.  It is
       fair to say the atmosphere in the Control Box at that
       time was one of great tension? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Quite clearly a crisis? - A. Certainly, yes.

    Q.   Unprecedented    inyour experience of being in the
         Control Box at a football game? - A. Yes, definitely.

    Q. You have told Mr. Manning and indeed Mr. King that you
       did not link the entry of fans through gate C with the
       tunnel.  That is right, is it not? - A. That is right.

    Q.   You are someone, as I understand it, who has a good
         knowledge of the layout of the ground not only as a
         Police Officer but as a supporter? - A. Yes.

    Q. Would it be fair to say that you did not notice if
       there was any connection between the entry through gate
       C and the tunnel because your attention was directed on
       the crisis and the risk to the people you had been told
                                                                 110


                                                             T. BICHARD


         about over the radio by Mr. Marshall? - A. The things
         that were occurring outside in Leppings Lane, yes.

B   Q. At that particular moment when the gate was opened
       surely the risk you had been told about of death to
       people by crushing outside? - A. Yes, outside.

    Q. Of course, in your mind to alleviate that risk of death
       by crushing outside the fans outside would be able to
       go through gate C on to the concourse area? - A. In my
       mind by opening the gates we had made safe the
       situation outside.

    Q. Whereas, of course, when gate A came to be opened there
       was not a concourse area.  There would be somewhere
       where they would go? - A. That is right.  It is a
       narrow walkway straight down to the rear of the seated
       area.

    Q.   Do you recollect this at that time that somebody in the
         Control Room, not Mr. Duckenfield, said words to the
         effect, "When they come through gate A it leads to the
         North Stand.  Better do something about it"? - A. Not
         that I recollect, no.

    Q.   You cannot recollect it? - A. No.

    Q.   You cannot say it did not happen. You just do not
         recollect it? - A. I do not recollect it, no.

    Q. Is the position this; when these events were taking
       place you were not thinking, "I had better remember
       this, that and the other in detail because I am going
       to have to be giving evidence about it almost two years
       later"? - A. No, I thought the events would settle
       themselves when we opened the gates.

    Q. Just one further point then on the opening of gate C.
       Is it right that your initial recollection was that it
       was just after gate C was opened that you heard the
       message from Sergeant Higgins and seeing this funnel of
       Officers? - A. Yes, that is right.

    Q. We are not talking about minutes.  We are talking about
       a period of seconds? - A. Yes, I think that is fair.

    Q. You are not saying that initial recollection was either
       right or not right but that was what it was at the
       time? - A. Yes.

              MR. ISAACS:   Thank you very much indeed.   I am
         very grateful.
                                                T. BICHARD


     MR. KING:      There is a very short matter, sir.

     THE CORONER:      Yes.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Your recollection as to the opening of Gate A is aided
by the fact you tell us that as soon as the request
came you directed your camera on it? - A. Yes, that is
right.

And it began to record it? - A. It was recording ....

As you were doing it? - A. It was recording what was
taking place and I moved across to Gate A and in fact
zoomed in on the back of that gate.

So if we are able to find on the video when you began
recording Gate A, it was roughly around that time that
you had just received the request? - A. Yes.

Thank you.


        Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

In case this should become a point, P.C. Bichard is
there some question mark over the timing mechanism on
that particular camera or at that particular time? - A.
Yes.  When the Justice Taylor Inquiry was instigated,
or when we were coming down here, I was led to believe
that the timing and date set on the pictures we had
been taking was, in fact, incorrect with the actual
time on the day, and the actual time on the day, or the
inconsistency was spotted because of footage from the
BBC.

So we have obviously got to be cautious about that ....

     THE CORONER:   Do you know what the error was? -
A. Again, my recollections are that it was about six
minutes.  It was quite an extensive difference.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

     MR. KING:   I am not concerned with timings now,
Mr. Bichard, just relationship of events.  Pretend for
the moment that we have not got any timings on the
video .... - A. Oh, no, if you want to get a stop watch
and see what time Gate C was opened, and time the time
that Gate A opened you will find the exact period, the
difference.
                                              T. BICHARD


Yes, all we have to do is look at the video? -   A. The
video is running at normal time, yes.

See when Gate C is opened on that video? - A. Yes.

And we can just time it from then onwards, as to when
we next see Gate A, and you are telling us that when we
see Gate A it is just then that you have received the
request that Gate A be opened? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   I will make a few enquiries about
times, but my understanding is that all the times which
were given to us by Inspector Layton at the beginning -
that is why I did it that way - are as accurate as we
can get them.

     We are not finishing today, I am afraid.    We have
got to stop because we have had a long day. Back    on
Monday, 10.30.

Mr. Bichard, we will conclude your evidence.  Remember
not to discuss the evidence over the weekend because
you are technically sitting in that Box until Monday
when you come back, and we will see you at 10.30.  You
may leave us if you wish.

            (The Witness left the Court)

     THE CORONER:    (Addressing the Members of the
Jury) There are two things I want to say.    First of
all in a sense the worst is over.   We have got a little
bit of evidence, but it will be much lighter.   I am not
making any promises - every time I have said we will do
something I have not managed it - but I am hoping that
we will probably finish most of the evidence, if not
all, on Monday.   The rest of the week will then be
spent in legal submissions and my summing-up to you,
and the present plan, I am telling you this now so you
can do a little pre-planning, is for you to retire, if
all goes well, Monday week.

     Now, first of all I am not sure what time I will
finish my summing-up on Monday, and the other thing I
have no idea on is how long you are going to take, so
it would be wise - this is not an invitation that you
should take more than a day - but if it were to be,
once you are empanelled you cannot go home in the
evening, you have got to stay secluded, so it would be
wise if on Monday week you brought an overnight bag
with you.  If it does become necessary for you to stay
overnight we will arrange for accommodation.  I am
telling you now because you might need to make some
provisional arrangements in case, because once you have
gone out you stay out until you come back with an
                                               T. BICHARD


answer.   I will tell you a bit more about that - you
can come back and ask questions but in principle that
is what it is.   Next week should be a lot lighter for
you, not necessarily for us.

             (In the absence of the Jury)

     MR.   CATCHPOLE:   Sir, would it be your intention
to begin   legal submissions on Tuesday morning?

     THE CORONER:    Yes please, if that is convenient.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   In that case, would you think it
a discourtesy if I did not attend on Monday but was
legally represented by Mr. Shaw, who is sitting behind
me today?

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Catchpole, we will miss you but
it is certainly not a discourtesy.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, may I now lodge our written
submissions on the law, subject to that reservation
that if anything yet emerges in the further evidence
they have to be amended and, sir, I would hope to be
present, if it is possible, on the day that you receive
the oral submissions but that may not be possible.

     The only other thing I say, sir, is usually juries
are told that they may be locked up together by way of
a threat, to make them come to a decision quickly.  I
am sure that wasn't in your mind.

      THE CORONER:   No, I hope I did not put it like
that.   That was one of the things that concerned me but
I did not want to make it either a threat or a promise.
On the other hand, a lot of them have got family
commitments and it is not fair to tell them at the last
minute.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, may I also hand in our written
submissions, subject to the same qualification that we
may amend or alter it in the course of oral
submissions.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, and I have already got a
volume of yours with cases.   Most of those Ihave seen,
I am pleased to say, not all but most.

     MR. KING:   Sir, this is a public hearing.  All I
am concerned about is, and I don t object to written
submissions going in because you gave the option, but
sir, if they are not to be voiced in public, by which I
mean read out in public, they will not therefore have
been part of the public submissions to you, and in
                                                   T. BICHARD


those circumstances, sir, are you minded to allow those
of us who would not therefore have an opportunity to
hear those submissions to see what is written?

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, may I say we have copies of
our submissions for each of the representatives.

        MR. KING:      I am obliged.

        MR. MAXWELL:      They will be distributed when you
rise.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, that would be fine, if you
could do that.   I would not be prepared to read all the
cases and you would not expect me to do that, but if
need be one could read the written submissions out if
that was deemed necessary.   If, on the other hand,
let's face it, these are the legal submissions and
provided you know what is being said that is the
important thing.

        MR. KING:      Absolutely.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, we have copies of our
submissions which we will distribute when we make our
oral submissions.

     MR. KING:   Sir, lest those along there think I am
trying to gain an unfair advantage, I am not seeking to
gain access to their submissions before they would have
given them orally.

        THE CORONER:      But you do need to see them.

     MR. KING:   But as they are on their feet and you,
sir, are inviting them to say what they will, it is
impossible for anybody in my position or indeed anybody
to my left, to know what is being said if part of it is
in writing, that is the point.

        THE CORONER:      I quite agree.

     MR. PAYNE:   Perhaps I might say that we would, of
course, be quite prepared now to exchange written
submissions on the basis of reciprocity with anybody
else, but otherwise what we intend to do is to
circulate copies when we make our oral submissions.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, the only thing is, Mr. Payne,
it is only fair that if for instance you had been
submitting this orally, Mr. King would have had the
opportunity to hear it, wouldn't he?

        MR. PAYNE:      Certainly.
                                             T. BICHARD


     THE CORONER:   So it is not entirely fair to hand
it to him at the same point in time as you stand up.   I
think that what should happen is that on Tuesday when
we begin our submissions, that Mr. King and all the
other lawyers who are in that position should be given
these and should be allowed 20 minutes or half an hour
or however long it would have taken for it to be said
orally, to read them through before you begin, because
otherwise they have got to take in two things at the
same time.  That seems to be entirely fair.

     MR. PAYNE:   Quite.  Sir, the only point that I
was making was that I am quite willing now, never mind
about next Monday, Tuesday or whenever it is, now to
exchange my written submissions now with Mr. King, in
exchange for his.  I am perfectly happy to do that and
likewise on Monday or Tuesday I am perfectly happy at
any time to exchange my written submissions with
anybody who will exchange theirs with me, that is all I
am saying.

     THE CORONER:   I think Mr. King had made it plain
to me on the previous occasion that he preferred to do
his submissions orally and therefore I deduce that he
has not got any written submissions to exchange.  He
may have notes.

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes, he has got some notes so perhaps
we might have those instead.  Sir, I am slightly
surprised by your indication that we should circulate
our submissions without receiving anything in exchange,
that is all.

     THE CORONER:   No, Mr. Payne, I think you have
misunderstood me.  I entirely agree that it would be
inappropriate, if I can use that word, for you to hand
over your submissions to Mr. King now without
reciprocity.  There I am with you, but it is equally
unfair, I think, that if you merely were, for example,
to stand up on Tuesday and say, "I have nothing more to
add other than what I have written down and here, Mr.
King, are five pages of submissions", and you sat down
and I then turned to Mr. King and said, "Well, let's
hear yours", he hasn't had a chance to look at them.
He would have to ask for an adjournment, and that is
all I am saying.




                      /MR. PAYNE:   I am sorry
          PA™  : 1 am sorry to have to disappoint
 everybody, but unfortunately I will actually orally go
 through my submissions.

      THE CORONER: In that case, it may solve the
 problem, but obviously it would be of some benefit to
 me to have a chance to absorb some of the law.

      MR. KING:  If, when I have completed my notes,
 they are in a coherent fashion, I would be more than
 happy to give a copy to my learned friend if he can
 understand my writing.

      THE CORONER: Hopefully, you see, these are
 supposed to be legal points, are they not?

        MR. KING:   Absolutely.

     THE CORONER: If the law is plain at the end of
the day we should all be saying the same thing on the
law.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, one final point.  Is it your
intention to sit at 9.30 on Tuesday, or at 10 o'clock,
just in case I drive up from London, so that I know
when to arrive?

     THE CORONER: Judging from what you said about the
length of time that you were going to take, it is
probably sufficient if we start at 10.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   I am very grateful for that.

     THE CORONER: Are we still of the mind that we
w    finish by Wednesday with legal submissions at the
very latest, if we start on the Tuesday that is?

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   Yes.

        MR. PAYNE:  There is just one further point in my
mind.     I am sorry, I realise I am holding you up.

        THE CORONER: No, you are not holding me up.

     MR. PAYNE:  You will remember that I have been
signalling for quite some time now my anxiety to avoid
any breach of Rule 40.  You will see in the
submissions which we have put in that I have made
reference to schedules, about 18 schedules in fact,
and I have quite deliberately not put the schedules
into you now, and I have restricted it only to our
submissions so far as we think they are relevant and
are related to our submissions of law.  But you will
see in fact that we do have available, and this point
 Will come up when we take them, 18 schedules which, in
 tact, comprise an analysis of the case under topics
 and identified by causation.  I do not know to what
 extent it is going to be contentious that that may
 stray into a submission on fact, but you will see at
 the moment that we have not put those in deliberately
 in order not to breach Rule 40.

      THE CORONER: I am glad you have done that because
 it is obviously easier to sort it out viva voce.

     MR. KING: We have prepared schedules under
certain topic headings of evidence on certain points
which are similar.  I am very happy at any stage to
allow my learned friend to see it, or yourself to see
it, when it becomes relevant because obviously you
have to intertwine a legal submission with any
arguments about is there evidence to support that
point of view.  I agree with my learned friend that
one should do it carefully step by step.

      THE CORONER: I think that is right.   It is
exceedingly difficult to distinguish where an address
on law strays into an address on facts, and I will do
my best.   We will see how we go, I will not say too
much.   Have you any views, Mr. Maxwell, on that?

      MR. MAXWELL:   I would urge you to stay within the
s£ ric*" limits of Rule 40 because if you allow any of
these an inch .... I need not complete that, sir.

     THE CORONER: Anybody else any views or comments?

     MR. M A M I N G : _ Not on that, but on something as to
time-table for this Monday coming.        Not bavin® an
instructing solicitor, it falls to me to consider
anything that might be vaguely within my ambit of the
knowledge of the law.        I had hoped to do some of that
at least this afternoon, anticipating or hoping that
this would have been an ordinary time-table.        As I
understand it, you have this witness to complete as to
those who still have to examine, and you have no more
than the statement of the Officer whose statement is
to be read, the two, three, four other bits of pieces
of statements that are to be read, or the formal part,
plus one very short witness who you describe as being
5 or 10 minutes.

     THE CORONER:   Dr. Slater, yes.

     MR. MANNING:  There is nothing else, sir, up your
sleeve, or anywhere else, that may surprise us for
Monday.
    ^ THE CORONER: I will ask Mr. Beechey if he can
think of anything else, because that is what happens,
1 walk out and then remember something, but no.    It is
this witness, however long that may be, Dr. Slater,
who I am confident will be minutes, and then Mr.
Smith, who will be 20 minutes, I would have thought,
to read the bits.   It is not a very long statement,
and then the rest is really formality, and the video.

     MR. MANNING:     The length of which is about 10
minutes?

     THE CORONER: No, it is longer than that.  It is
about at least 30 minutes, because it starts at about
20-to, I think, and we are taking it until about
quarter—past, something of that order, but you have
seen most of it, of course, already.

     MR. MANNING:     Thank you very much, sir.

     THE CORONER: On this witness, can we estimate how
long we are going to take on Monday? Mrs. McBrien, do
you know how many questions you are likely to have?

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I am not at all sure at this
moment.  I have started making notes.

     THE CORONER: You have got the weekend to think
about it.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     I should not be very long.

     MR. RUSSELL:     Three questions.

     MR. PAYNE:     Probably none.

     THE CORONER: In other words, not overly long.    I
think we should be all right on Monday barring
accidents.   Ladies and gentlemen, I think that is it
for tonight.   Have a good weekend.  I am sorry it has
been a longer day, but I think it has been worth it in
the end.

        (The Inquests were adjourned until
      Monday, 18th March 1991 at l O . W ' a T m . )
