HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             CHEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                    At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

            11th March, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham» Lt d .,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
             INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




MURRAY Recalled

By The Coroner
Cross-Examined   by Mr. Payne
Cross-Examined   by Mr. Isaacs
Cross-Examined   by Mr. King
Further by The   Coroner
               SIXTY SEVENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                  MONDAY, 11th MARCH, 1991


                BERNARD DEAN MURRAY Recalled

                       By THE CORONER

Q. Now, Mr. Murray, you remember that I did not quite finish
   on Friday.   I think we had got to the stage where you
   had described Mr. Marshall's requests which came, I think
   you said, in two bursts, so to speak, two of two? - A.
   Yes, sir, that is the way I would describe it.

0. I think you had just described that a decision was taken
   that the gates should be opened, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. I was asking you if you knew who actually implemented it
   and you explained that to me? -A. Yes.

Q. Are you back where we were, so to speak? - A. Yes, I am.

Q. I want to remind you again before we carry on that a lot
   of the questions which I may ask and, indeed, which
   others may ask, may well tend to incriminate you and you
   therefore have the privilege not to answer them if that
   be the case? - A. Yes.

Q. Although I normally try and warn you of the question, it
   is possible I may miss one.   If you were to think that
   one was of that nature you can say you don't want to
   answer it and we will sort it out from there. - A. I
   understand, sir.

Q. I think I am right in saying that the best view of the
   respective gates which you had from the Control Room was
   the view of Gate C? - A. Yes, that was the best view we
   could get on the cameras.

Q. The first two requests which came through, they weren't
   actioned, is that right, in the sense they weren't
   authorised?   The openings were not authorised at that
   stage? - A. That is correct.

Q. One of the things that puzzles me a little bit and
   perhaps you could just explain this to me and to the
   jury, when those requests came through you, of course,
   were in the Control Room, Mr. Duckenfield also was in the
   Control Room at the time? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What actually happened?    Did you hear them and turn to
   him and say, f'We have had a request"?   Or did both of
   you hear them?    Was there any discussion about them at
                                              D. B. MURRAY


that point.   The first two?   I am not talking the
second... - A. I am sure that everybody in the Control
Room heard them.   They came through clearly and it was a
question of doing whatever we were doing.   I was trying
to raise more Serials from the gymnasium.

Are you saying by that that when that request first came
through your primary reaction was to see whether one
could contain the situation by putting more manpower... -
A. I just think it was an extremely important action to
take.   It was one which would destroy the whole plan
that we had.   It was unprecedented and it was a very
serious step to take.   One always hopes in a situation
like that that it may be retrievable.

Would it be right to say that if your Commander is
standing next to you that was the sort of decision which
you would want him to take rather than you? - A. I think
that is fair, yes.

Obviously you would not expect him to take every decision
which you were dealing with? - A. Absolutely, no.

Was that the reason why you turned to him subsequently
and asked him what his decision would be? - A. Yes, I
think it was Mr. Duckenfield's decision to authorise
Mr. Marshall's request.

Having done it, and said the gates are open, what
happened next? - A. It was a question of seeing if it was
going to ease the situation.    We could not see what was
happening outside.    We could see over the tops of the
turnstiles through the monitor and the people towards the
back.   We could not see the front of the turnstiles, the
wall, and of course we could see that people were
climbing over the turnstiles at that stage.    It was just
that requests were coming in, that people were going to
be killed and injured.    It was a question of trying to
save that situation.    I had got to a stage where it was
not retrievable.   As far as I was concerned it was not
retrievable.   Something had to be done.    The gates had
got to be opened.    We were acting on information of
others.   We could not see it ourselves.   It was then a
question of seeing whether it was going to relieve those
injuries outside.

I think you did have some sort of view of the people
coming into the concourse because there were cameras? -
A. Yes.

Having opened the gates, by definition that ought to have
relieved the situation? - A. It should have relieved the
pressure outside, yes.
                                                             3
                                                                *   %



                                                  D. B. MURRAY


Q. What was the next thing that happened in the Control
   Room?   Did you turn your attention to something else at
   that point or did you leave your attention on the gates?
   -A. I seemed to hope and wait for the people to be
   relieved outside.   I seemed to think that the next thing
   we were overcome with a request for Gate A to be opened.

Q. Did you know what that request came from? - A. I
   recognised Sergeant Higgins' voice, the request for
   Gate A.

Q. Did it surprise you that that request came through from
   him at that point? - A. I was a bit surprised.    I think
   I said I was a bit surprised.   I expected the gates to
   be opened on to the concourse, which I think were
   probably B and C. I did not know the lettering of the
   gates.   I knew there were three main gates at that end
   of Leppings Lane.   I didn't know whether there were any
   smaller ones because around the stadium there are small
   gates and large gates.   I was a bit surprised.    I
   actually asked Sergeant Goddard which was Gate A and he
   said the North Stand.

Q. Who authorised the opening of that gate?    Was that you
   or... - A. Mr. Duckenfield.    Mr. Duckenfield said
   almost straight away, "Open the gate," and Sergeant
   Goddard passed a radio message to open the gate.    I was
   concerned about that gate because I knew that that led
   only to the seating area in the North Stand and I had
   this vision of people getting into the North Stand who
   did not have tickets for that area and chaos in that
   particular stand.

Q. I think you took some remedial steps with regard to that.
   Was it you... - A. It was not me, sir.    I cannot
   recall...   I have heard that Serials were sent down but
   it was not me who asked for them.

Q. You at the time did not know who did it.    You may have
   found out since.   What I am trying to find out is: did
   you know at the time that that was happening? - A. No, I
   did not, sir.

Q. It is very difficult to keep apart what you knew at the
   time from what you and everybody else knows now.   So
   that was the second thingthat happened? - A. Yes.

Q. There was another request   for another gate to be opened?
   - A. Yes, indeed.

Q. Your recollection is that it was authorised and you heard
   no more about it? - A. No.   The camera then moved to A
   Gate.   I thimk PC Bichard must have reacted immediately
   the request came in and taken the camera across from
                                                            A
                                                            «   *



                                                 D. B. MURRAY


   C Gate to A Gate and I could see Officers behind that
   gate.

         THE CORONER:   Can I just interrupt one minute and
   say something to the jury?    I know you have asked about
   this.    We are trying to find the clip, if that is the
   right word, of what there is of this A Gate.    If we can
   find it, but hopefully we will.    There is not much on
   the clip anyway.    That is the problem.

Q. What was the time interval between the request from
   Sergeant Higgins and the earlier authorisation to open
   the gates?   Can you recollect that? - A. I seemed to
   think it came very quickly afterwards. At the time they
   seemed to be on top of one another.   The gates were
   opened and it seemed almost straight afterwards, the
   request from Sergeant Higgins.

Q. It was not logged, or tape recorded, or recorded, that
   request? - A. No, sir.

Q. One of the problems is that these radio messages between
   the Control Box and yourselves, there is no hard copy of
   those? - A. None at all.

Q. Apart from the ones that went through Snigg Hill or one
   of the main police stations? - A. I think the only things
   they would pick up is when we were operating on VHF.
   They might have heard what was happening in the Control
   Box in the background.




      Q. In the meantime what was

               r
                                                             5

                                                  B. D. MURRAY

. In the meantime what was happening within the
  stadium? - A . I don't recall anything particular
  happening within the stadium. There was nothing that I
  really noticed except shortly after the request for A
  Gate, I think that probably focussed my attention on
  the North Stand. The next thing I became aware of was
  something happening behind the goals on the pitch.   It
  looked to me, I noticed that one of the Officers so far
  as I can recall opened one of the gates and a handful
  of people came out, not very many, and they were just
  stood there. They were just stood on the track. I
  formed the opinion that it was a bit crowded in there.
  It must have been crowded in there and they were taking
  people out of those gates to relocate them which seemed
  to make sense because there was room at the front of
  the wing pen.   I was anxious that these people walked
  along the track and got into the pen in front of the
  Control Box.

     There was a Policewoman down by that gate, by Gate
 2 I think, and she could not see what was happening
 even though she was stood on the track. She seemed to
 be looking along the line of the touchline towards the
 South Stand. We tried calling her several times on the
 radio and then realised that she was not one of the
 normal track Officers. She was one of the
 reinforcements who did not have a radio but there was
 an Officer in civilian clothes who was in the Control
 Room and he said he would go down and tell her and help
 her and he went down and she did in fact open the gate
 and those people started to be relocated in that
 particular pen.

 Do you know when this happened in your recollection,
 never mind about what we can see on videos, was the
 match in play by then already or not? - A. I can't
 recall, sir. I can't recall the match kicking off.   I
 didn't, and didn't notice anything on the field at all
 until it was actually stopped.

You are saying in fact that the first time you became
aware of the match was when it was coming to an end? -
A. That was the first time.  I realised that the match
was taking place.  I realised obviously that it had
started but my own impression was that it had only been
playing for about two minutes when it stopped.   I did
not take any notice of it at all.

From what you have said it sounds, and perhaps if I
have got this wrong correct me, would you, that your
attention was first attracted after the opening of the
gates to the Centre pens when you noticed people coming
                                                          s
                                                              6

                                                B. D. MURRAY


out through the little gates in the front, is that
right? - A. Yes, sir.

When you were looking at that scene at that point in
time, whatever time that may have been, did you notice
anything else about the centre pens at that stage - and
this is clearly a question which may tend to
incriminate you? - A. I didn't.   I didn't notice but I
knew it was not unusual at matches sometimes to
relocate people who might be in some discomfort.

Did you see Superintendent Greenwood? - A. It was when
the activity was taking place behind the goal that Mr.
Duckenfield said, "Get Mr. Greenwood to go round there
and have a look". Sergeant Goddard actually called him
on the radio and when I looked he was walking from the
tunnel.  I assumed at the time that Sergeant Goddard
had got hold of him and told him to go round.

So far as you know that call was not acknowledged? - A.
I didn't hear it acknowledged, no, sir.

Not every acknowledgement would be reported to you, of
course, would it? - A. No, but I would normally hear
them. I would normally hear the messages.

I understand. Did you yourself then go down to have a
look at what was happening? - A. I did. I went down
first of all to try and stop the game.

At what point was that? - A. I saw___

Let us just get this right. You saw the gate open and
people coming and standing around? - A. Yes, I did.

On the perimeter track? - A. On the perimeter track,
yes.

You noticed the lady Police Officer who appeared to
need some help? - A. Not to know what was going on,
yes.

You sent the Officer who was definitely in civilian
clothes, is that right? - A. Yes, he was.

Down to go and sort her out? - A. To give her a hand
and to draw attention to what was happening.

You then heard a message passed to Mr. Greenwood and in
any event saw him walking towards the Leppings Lane
end? - A. Yes, I did.
             r
    A
                                                                       7

                                                            B. D. MURRAY


        Q. You were still in the Control Box at this point? - A.
           Yes, I was.
    B   Q. How long after that did you go down? What happened to
           make you decide to go and stop the match? - A. By this
           time more and more people were coming on to the track,
           were climbing over the fence, and the track was
           becoming quite thick with people. They were actually
           encroaching on to the grass and   up to the touchline. I
           saw Mr. Greenwood and I saw him   stood head and
           shoulders above the people that were there and he
           clearly waved to the Control Box, a signal which to me
           meant, stop the game. I said, "Mr. Greenwood wants the
           game stopping” and I heard Sergeant Goddard, again who
           is very reactive, pass a message over theradio saying,
           "Stop the game, stop the game".I looked    immediately
           towards the players' tunnel which is where there is
           always an Inspector or Sergeant standing for such a
           situation.  I could see no movement from there at all.
           It was clear that whoever was there was not receiving
           our message and I wanted the match stopping at that
           stage and I wanted the players off the field and out of
           the way.

        Q. At that point had you already seen any casualties as
           far as you can remember? - A. No, sir.  It was just the
           number of people that were going on to the grass and
           actually on to the pitch.

        Q. At that point the only people left in the Control Room,
           would it be right, would be you, Mr. Duckenfield,
           Sergeant Goddard, Ryan and Bichard? - A. That is right,
           yes.

        Q. Because everybody else had been cleared out, so to
           speak, for various reasons? - A. Yes.

        Q. In any event did you go of your own volition to stop
           the gate? - A. I started to put my coat on and grab my
           hat and Mr. Duckenfield suggested "Go down and stop it"
           and I went down. It is not very far from the Control
           Room to the pitch. I went down there and the linesman
           was running towards me as I got on to the track and I
           actually got hold of him and he just ran, he sort of
           shrugged me off. He was a big chap and ran straight
           passed me. I think he must have been intent on his
           duties. He obviously didn't realise who had got hold
           of him and as I turned round to follow him and did for
           a few paces I then saw Mr. Greenwood going on to the
           pitch and he actually went up to the referee and I went
           straight back to the Control Box.




H
                                                               8

                                                    B. D. MURRAY


Q. So what you are saying is that you realised that your
   objective was being achieved? - A. Yes, it was.

Q . By Superintendent Greenwood and you turned round and
    decided to go back to the Control Box. Did you mean
    anybody en route so far as you remember? - A. Not that
    I can remember, no, sir.

Q. Back up the stairs? - A. I went back up the stairs.     I
   hadn't got undressed.

Q. I am sorry? - A. I didn't take my coat off or my hat
   off. I went up. I cannot recall whether Mr. Jackson
   came in immediately behind me or whether he was in
   front of me but he was certainly there.  I was only
   there for a few seconds and Mr. Duckenfield said - by
   this time people were up to the edge of the penalty
   area and a bit further - "Go down there and see if you
   can clear the people to the wings and let us find out
   what is happening".

Q. You went? - A. I went back down.

Q. Did you on the way down pause on the steps at all? - A.
   I don't know, sir, but I wouldn't have thought so. I
   just went straight back down and went on to the pitch.

Q. Where did you   place yourself? - A. I went on to the
   pitch and I started looking for Officers. As I was
   walking I was   telling people to sort of go downto the
   wings. As it    got further on to the pitch I realised
   that a lot of people were stunned and appeared dazed.
   They obviously were not out there to spoil the match or
   anything like that. They just were standing around and
   appeared shocked.  I made my way closer towards the
   goals and as I approached the fence I could then see, I
   got the full realisation, that we had a serious
   problem.  I could see that the gate was covered in
   Police Officers around the gates but I could see that
   away from the gates that some people were trapped and
   they were jammed hard against the fence.   It appeared
   to me that it was pressure behind them that was holding
   them there.

      As I had left the Control Room I had heard PC
  Bichard on VHF asking for an ambulance to be put on
  standby and I realised that we had a very serious
  situation and possibly a lot of casualties*   I hadn't
  got my radio.   I had taken it out of my pocket to set
  when the radio went down. I wanted a radio. I wanted
  to get back to the Control Room to tell them what was
  happening, to- tell them that we wanted some ambulances.
  I saw a couple of PCs. Neither of them had radios.     I
                                                B. D. MURRAY

then saw a Sergeant and went to him.  I don't know who
he was.  I took his radio off him. I asked Control.
They acknowledged. Sergeant Goddard acknowledged my
message.  I asked him for a fleet of ambulances down to
the ground.  I could also see that the people at the
back of the Leppings Lane terrace were just standing
looking out on to the field. They obviously had no
idea of what was happening.  It was my impression if we
could get them to move back it might take the pressure
off the front because I thought it was just crowd
pressure that was causing these people to be jammed
against the fence. I asked for tannoy messages to be
passed on to Leppings Lane to ask the people to move
back.

    I also asked for some bolt croppers because the
fact that the people were hard against the fence I
thought that if we had bolt croppers we might have had
a chance to cut the fence.  I think that the Sergeant
whose radio I had taken said, "We have already asked
for croppers” but I can't be sure.  I know I asked for
bolt croppers but afterwards I found out that someone
else had made the request as well.




                            /I sort of stood.
                                                        10
                                              B. D. MURRAY'


   I stood there for a few moments and watched.  I saw
   that people were being treated on the pitch.  I gave
   what help I could to one or two, made sure that
   everyone I could see was getting some help from either
   Police Officers or the fans themselves who were also
   doing what they could for the people who were injured.

   I could see that there was no movement at all still at
   Leppings Lane.  I asked again on the radio, "Will you
   pass tannoy messages to the rear of Leppings Lane?
   Tell people to move back up the terrace and just
   keeping passing them". Again, I did what I could on
   the pitch and I realised that people were not moving
   back and no one was taking any notice, so I decided
   that I would have to go round the back and see if we
   could get them to move from the back of the terrace
   itself.

Q. You have told me you asked for the tannoy messages.
   Can you recollect actually hearing them yourself? - A.
   I can't, sir.  I can't recollect that.

Q. You decided to go round the back? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Which way did you go round the back? Which route did
   you use? - A. I went up the steps by the Control Box,
   on the South Stand.

Q. So you came back and then went round by the south side?
   - A. Yes, and round the south side.

Q. That takes you, of course, into the concourse area in
   the first instance? - A. Yes.

Q. When you got into the concourse area, at that point,
   anything happening in there as far as you can remember?
   - A. I don't recall seeing anything in the concourse
   area, apart from a few people. Nothing at all stuck in
   my mind.  I made my way into the tunnel and there was
   an Inspector and one or two Officers there and a number
   of people in the tunnel, just standing there.  I spoke
   to the Inspector and he said, "We've got them all out".
   I don't know what he meant but he said, "We've got them
   all out", but together we cleared the remaining people
   who were in the tunnel out of the way and I then got to
   the terraces and I have this picture that I looked
   down, although I have been a bit confused on this
   because of the video I have seen, I looked down and I
   could see that Officers were working, a lot of Officers
   were inside the pen and were working and it was clear
   at the front.  I then realised that there was no
   pressure; if there had been pressure it had been
   removed, ahd there was no necessity to try and get that
   terrace to empty.
                                           B. D. MURRAY


Have you been able to identify the Inspector you spoke
to, can you remember that? - A. No, sir.

We have heard of at least two Inspectors who told us
they were in the tunnel and if I name them to you can
you just tell me whether you would know them, never
mind whether these were the ones that you saw? - A.
Yes.

Do you know Inspector Sykes? - A. Yes, I know Inspector
Sykes.

You would recognise him if you saw him? - A. Yes, I
know him very well.

What about Inspector Bullas? - A. I did not know
Inspector Bullas. When I say I don't know which
Inspector it was, I don't mean it was an Inspector I
did not know, I just cannot recall which Inspector it
was.

The purpose of my enquiry is to try and establish
approximately what time that might have been because
sometimes you can link it up, but you are saying there
is no way in which you can say which Inspector it was
that you saw? - A. I don't know which Inspector it was.

Have I understood you correctly to say that by the time
you actually got onto the terracing, whatever might
have been happening in the tunnel, your recollection
seems to be that there was already space in the front?
- A. There was.

Are we talking about pen 3 or pen 4? - A. I don't know
which pen it was. The picture I had was of people hard
against the fence. There was no realisation in my mind
at that time of the terrible consequences in pen 3. I
had a picture of people trapped, and trapped because
there was something behind that was holding them
against the fence. As soon as I saw that the fence
itself was reasonably clear and that there were
Officers behind it, I then ....

When you say behind it, you mean on the pitch side? -
A. No, I mean on the terrace side.

This is when you were viewing it from the tunnel end,
you are talking about? - A. Yes.

So this is really the point I am trying to get at: are
you saying that by the time you got to the tunnel exit,
when you were looking at the pen from the back, that
however th$y had got there, and whoever had taken them
in, there were Officers already within .... - A.
                                              B. D. MURRAY'


Officers were already on the terrace within the pen and
were working on the pen side of the fence.

So it is right that what you are saying is that you
were definitely not the first Officer at the back
there? - A. No, sir.

Having seen that you   then retraced your steps, I
believe? - A. Yes, I did.

Did you then go back to the Control Room? - A.
Eventually I went back.   I went onto the pitch first of
all; I eventually went back to the Control Room.

What did you do on the pitch? - A. I wanted to make
some contact points for the Chief Superintendent
upstairs and I established someone at the Kop end, the
North Stand end, and   actually sent a serial overto the
South Stand end.

When you were standing looking at the terraces from the
rear do you remember whether you could see the
ambulance on the track? - A. I don't think so.

When you got back onto the pitch, was it there bythen
or not? - A. I don't recall seeing the ambulance until
I was back in the Control Room.

In fact, you then did go back to the Control Room.
What time did you get back   to the Control  Room, asfar
as you know? - A. I would think it would be after half-
past-3.

After half-past-3? - A. After half-past-3, yes.

So it is right then, isn't it, that from the moment
when you left the Control Box to stop the match, apart
from a very short interval, you were not in it at all?
- A. No, sir.

That is right, isn't it? -   A. Yes, it is.

Until after half-past-3? -   A. Until after    I went back,
yes.




              Q. If you could just help
                                              B. D. HURRAY


 tha?   Sh            JP me * there 18 one final point on
 that. When you got back at about half-past 3 or
 whatever it was, apart from yourself who else was
 ®         £he Control Box at that time? - A. Mr.
  uckenfield was there with the three regular Control
             I thinJ M r * Jackson was the*e - Almost
 immediateiy I got in Mr. Duckenfield said he was going
 to see the Directors and I took over in there, and Mr.
 Jackson went out shortly afterwards.    I do not think
 n ™ i J did
 people  ^ / ny°ne 4 el!e ln there at that tlme» although
             come in   from time to time after.

 Can you just have a look at this. Can we put up the
 Bov?3 t k T f 1 thlnk, has been prepared of the Control
 Box? This is not a photograph.    I will pass you my
 copy because it will be easier for you to look at.
 Can you just look at it. Take your time.    I do not
 know whether you have ever seen this, have you’ - A
 No, I have not.

All it is supposed to be is a drawing of the Control
Box, as opposed to a photograph of it. Does that more
or less represent it? - A. Yes, it looks about right.

      THE CORONER: We will give it a C number then.

      MR. BEECHEY:   The C number, sir, is C532.

     -^E WITNESS: The map is in front of Sergeant
Goddard usually and not where it is shown there.

     THE CORONER: Where is the map? You have got my
copy^and my eyes are not good enough to read the word
elevation^    U      ShOWn on the top left of the Plan

     THE CORONER: Hand these out. We will give you a
copy of these.                                  J
On the drawing it is shown opposite you? - A. It is
normally in front of the Sergeant because he actually
uses little indicators for the serials and pushes them
about on the map in front of him as he deploys them.

The TV screens are above you, are they not? - A. Yes
they are, sir.

How many are there? - A. There are five monitors and
then there are two which record.

   «- THEltC0R0NER-* Mr. Payne, this is just simply so
tnat we have a drawing as opposed to a photograph.
Just leave it by you in case we need it.
                                             B. D. MURRAY

             Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE;

 Superintendent Murray, the Jury last week asked a
          ?bout.t5e de-briefing following the 1988
       J   * a     would like to start just by
 following up that point a little, please. Following
 ™           Yhich took Place on 9th April 1988, did
 you liaise with those who were responsible for the
 various aspects of the event? - A. Yes.

 Did you obtain reports from a large number of sources?
      iss sir•

You read all those reports and eventually did you
!£2?are..y02,r?elI a summary    the main points that
came out of it for you to deliver to Chief
Superintendent Mole? - A. Yes sir. There was very
were mv own     brleflng sheets- The main observations


JnB^ ^ llke 7°i to, look at the document, please, then
in which you made that report.  (Handed) Can von
identify your signature? - A. Yes“ sir."

        a ® ® ™ randum from yourself to Mr. Mole dated
14th May 1988? - A. Yes it is, sir.

Summarising the results of the various de-briefine
exercises? - A. Yes it is.                       8

                 1 wonder if copies of this can be
distributed, please. (Handed)

Cj2 3 MR* BEECHEY:   The C number for this document is


™                Mr* Murray, I am just going to ask
you to go through this, so that the Jury have the
picture, but can I just preface it by asking you these
  o    questions. Of course, this document was prepared
before you had any idea of the disaster which was
going to take place the following year? - A. Of
course.

Obviously and the second obvious point is that it was
prepared for Chief Superintendent Mole as a report
certainly not with any view to it being used in
subsequent proceedings? - A. No sir. I think these
are points which were relevant to other Departments
outside the Division,
        r
So it was not intended for publication beyond Mr.
Mole? - A. No sir.
                                            B. D. MURRAY

?. think periiaps it would be more convenient if I read
      Did you say:

     "I refer to the enclosed correspondence regarding
     the above event"?

If necessary, we have got the enclosed correspondence
here and it consists of a batch of memoranda passing
between various Officers, summarising their
observations on the event? - A. Yes.

That is what you were referring to? - A. Yes.
Did you say:

      I have liaised with the Officers concerned with
     the preparation, control and supervision of the
     above event and we have noted locally the lessons
     that were learned and the improvements that can
     be made for any similar future event"?

   f ° ^ se» at that time, interposing, you did not know
tnat there was going to be another event next year? -
A. No sir.

     "Generally I was well satisfied with the event
     and I will confine this report to matters which
     affect the Force Operations Room and Road Traffic
     Department.

    COMMUNICATIONS

    On the day more use than normal was made of the
    radio link between ground control at Hillsborough
    and the Operations Room in attempting to contact
    those units equipped with both ground control and
    UHF radio. This was entirely due to difficulties
    in personal radio transmissions which were
    affected for most of the event by breakthrough
    from local radio. The Superintendent
    (Communications) is aware of this and an
    inunediate survey of the equipment was made after
    the event, but the fault could not be traced.
    TRAFFIC FLOW AND CONTROL

    Transmissions in relation to problems with
    traffic, from mobile units and the spotter plane
    were being received at Operations Room and were
    not monitored at ground control.  It seems
    sensible to me that for future 'semis' all
    matters relating to the control and movement of
    traffic should be supervised by Operations Room,
    with the exception of the local arrangements made
                                          B. D. MURRAY

     immediately outside the ground when the final
     whistle is blown.

     FOOTBALL TRAFFIC SIGNS

     Purpose made signs have been requested in the
     past, but for financial reasons have not been
     approved. Such signs are extremely beneficial
     and it is pleasing to note that Superintendent
     Brougham is looking into this aspect.

     SEARCHING OF COACHES FOR ALCOHOL ABUSE ETC.

     The effect of alcohol on football supporters is
     well known and I would not wish to see any
     relaxation of enforcement of the laws relating to
     the carriage of alcohol on coaches etc.  It is
     appreciated that this can cause some traffic
     congestion, but surveys are being carried out on
     the major roads approaching the city to establish
     where this can be carried out to cause minimum
     inconvenience to traffic flows.

     CLOSE CIRCUIT TV LINK WITH WADSLEY BRIDGE STATION

     A TV monitor was sited in the control room giving
     pictures from Wadsley Bridge Railway Station.
     This monitor took up valuable room in the control
     area and was of little use and I would not wish
     such a system to be implemented in the future."

That is your signature, is it, Mr. Murray, at the
bottom? - A. Yes sir.




                              /Q. Are those the
                                                          17

                                                 B. D.MURRAY


Q. Are those the matters which you felt worthy of recording
   after the event and after the briefings which you had
   received from other Officers? - A. They were the matters
   that really affected other departments, other than the
   sub-division.   I think I have already said there that
   apart from the local lessons, there were also these we
   should address our minds to.

Q. I want to ask you a series of questions.   First as to
   the state of mind of yourself before the disaster.   Do
   you follow?   We are going back now to put yourself in
   the frame of mind you were immediately before the
   terrible event took place. Did you believe at that time
   that the ground was safe to be used for its full
   certified capacity? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you believe that in the event of an emergency on the
   Leppings Lane terrace, that terrace could be safely
   evacuated? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Following the 1987 semi-final and the 1988 semi-final,
   were you aware of any report having been made by anyone,
   meaning from the Officer Working Party or the ground
   safety engineer, or either of the football clubs who
   attended, or their management, were you aware of any
   report from those people to warn you of the risk of
   serious overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
   No, sir.

Q. Did anyone from that group of people or the Football
   Association or anyone else, make any adverse comment
   about the system of policing which was used in 1987 and
   1988? - A. Not that I am aware of, sir.

Q. Likewise, after those semi-finals or at any time before
   the disaster were you aware of any criticism being made
   by any of those people to the effect that the layout of
   the ground was not safe? - A. No, sir.

Q. Did you yourself believe that the policing system which
   had been used in 1987 and 1988 had produced a successful
   result? - A. I had certainly seen it in 1988 and yes, it
   was successful.

Q. Did you believe it was safe to follow the same system in
   1989? - A. I think it was obvious to follow the same
   system because of the authors of it.

Q. Now come to the event itself please.    At the time of the
   first order of the opening of the gates, which included
   the opening of Gate C, at that time was it obvious to you
   there was a risk of injury by crushing to people in pens
   3 and 4? - A : I think what I had to do was rely on the
   experience of the Officers who were out there.    There
                                                                 18

                                                      B. D.MURRAY


     was Superintendent Marshall.   There were also Officers
     who policed that area of Leppings Lane every week, every
     match.   I could not see what was happening.   I had to
     take heed of their demands, their advice and their
     requirements and that is what I did.

Q. From your position in the Control Room, with the view you
   had from the Control Room, and the television screens you
   had within the room, was it obvious to you there was a
   risk of injury to people  in those pens at that time? - A.
   In pens 3 and 4?

Q.   Yes, at the time of the opening of the    gates? - A. No.

Q.   Here is a question which I have to ask you: were you
     indifferent to the risk of injury to people in pens 3 and
     4? - A. Absolutely not, sir, no.

Q. One last matter of fact, please.   Within the Control Box
   one of the screens showed you a view of the Leppings Lane
   approach and Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You have been asked about whether you saw certain
   Inspectors at a later stage when, after the disaster had
   taken place, you went round to the back of the stand to
   try and help relieve the pressure from the back.   I want
   to ask you about those Inspectors at a slightly earlier
   stage, at a time before the gates were ordered to be
   opened.   Did you see at that time outside the ground a
   number of Inspectors who were attempting to deal with the
   congestion that had built up? -A. I do not think I saw
   any particular Officer who I could identify outside the
   ground.

          MR. ISAACS:     Do you want to pause now, sir, before
     I start?

          THE CORONERS     Yes, very well.

                         (Short adjournment)

                 Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Q. Mr. Murray, I would like to ask you questions and split
   up the questions I am going to ask you into a number of
   sections in the way that Mr. Payne has been doing
   throughout the course of these Inquests.   If I could
   start off with your experience, please, and particularly
   your experience of controlling football games at
   Hillsborough.   You told us you started a few weeks
   before the 1988 semi-final? -A. That is correct.

Q. You started there in the Control Box? - A. Yes, I did.
                                                            19

                                                    B. D.MURRAY


Q. You did not have many games before the 1988 final? - A.
   Two.

Q. Was anybody in the Control Box with you on those
   occasions? - A. Apart from the regular Control Room staff
   I don't think so, sir.

Q. For the semi-final itself you tell us that Mr. Calvert
   was there? - A. Yes, he was.

Q. Why was that? - A. I presume Mr. Mole had asked Inspector
   Calvert to work with me because he knew the ground and
   the system and had been there many years.

Q. So to give you some assistance, recognising that you were
   perhaps at that stage somewhat short on experience? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Was Mr. Calvert on that occasion of some assistance to
   you? - A. As far as I can recall, yes.

Q. We know that was an all-ticket game? - A. Yes.

Q. Between then and the 1989 semi-final were there other
   all-ticket games, as far as you can recall? - A. There
   were none.

Q. However, there were, I assume, a number of large capacity
   games? - A. There were games, I think, with 30,000-plus.

Q. Could you help us approximately how many games there may
   have been with 30,000-plus that you were in the Control
   Room for? - A. It is purely a guess but I would think
   perhaps three or four.

Q. On every game that you were in the Control Room for,
   between 1988 and 1989 semi-finals, it would be unlikely
   that Mr. Mole would be in the Control Room on those
   occasions when he was in fact overall Commander? - A. He
   did not take up a position permanently.   He always came
   up from time to time.

Q. But not in the textbook position as you have described
   Mr. Duckenfield*s position in 1989? - A. No, sir.

Q. We know there were a number of games when he did not
   attend the match at all?   He left it entirely to you? -
   A* I think there were about three or four, perhaps.

Q. So far as the role you were playing was concerned,
   according to Mr. Mole it did not change even when he was
   there because you would still have the responsibility for
   making various operational decisions? - A. Yes, that is
   correct.
                                                                 20

                                                       B. D. MURRAY


 I Q. As long as your decisions were within your operational
 I   responsibility you would not need, even if he was
>I   there, to go back to him to ask his permission to do
'I   something? - A. No.

•I Q- One of the things that you would have responsibility
 I   for doing and the ability to do without asking his
 I   permission was to move men from one place to another as
 I   you felt fit? - A. Yes.

I Q. I think Mr. Mole in his evidence, in answer to the
I   Coroner, described what he took to be your relative
j   responsibilities in the context of a major decision
I   which if he was there you would not be able to make
I   yourself and which you would have to defer to him, for
I   example, an evacuation on a bomb scare? - A. Yes.

I   Q. Were you here when he gave that evidence? - A. I can't
I      recall it.

    Q. Let me try and remind you of it. What he said
       effectively was this; "I, Mr. Mole, would be the one to
       make the decision as to whether to evacuate, the major
       decision, but then I would leave it up to Mr. Murray or
I      whoever was taking Mr. Murray's job at that time who
       would then take consequential decisions".  Do you
       follow what I mean? - A. Yes, I do.

    Q. Do you agree with that? - A. Yes, I do.

    Q. That is something that he would expect to be able to
       do? - A. Yes.

    Q. Come 1989 you were involved in the Operational Order
       and the preparation of it? - A. Yes.

    Q. We have seen today the memo that was produced C.533? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. The one that Mr. Payne has just put to you. Can you
       help me, Mr. Murray, why was it you who prepared this
       memo to Mr. Mole? - A. I don't recall preparing it
       actually but I did. It has obviously got my signature
       on. It was just problems that I had identified in this
       particular memo that were not addressed to Officers of
       my Subdivision working the match but were addressed to
       other agencies such as the Road Traffic Division, the
       Operations Room, the Communications Officer.

    Q. I am sorry, the question was a poor one. I did not
       really mean what was the purpose of the memo but why
       was it you who was the Officer who was actually sending
       this memo? Why you as opposed to one of the other
A
                                                                   21
                                                         B. D. MURRAY


         Officers, for example, Mr. Greenwood, Mr. Marshall, or
         Mr. Chapman, or whoever other Officer was on duty as a
         Superintendent on the day in 1988? - A. The ground was
B        on my Subdivision. The Liaison Officer was one of my
         Officers. The debrief sheets and the information would
         come into our central office.

    Q. So you had this role which was, as it were, directly
       responsible to Mr. Mole, would that be fair, for these
       matters? - A. For ordinary matches, yes. For ordinary
       matches I would look on myself as Mr. Mole's deputy.
       For a Semi Final I think it was somewhat different.

    Q. You say I think in this memo that you were satisfied:

             "Generally I was well satisfied with the
             event."

         and you go on under traffic flow and control:

             "It seemed sensible to me."
D
         Here you were giving advice to Mr. Mole as to your
         findings following the observations that had been made
         to you and your view of the event? - A. Yes, that is
         fair.

    Q. Superintendent, when Mr. Mole effectively agreed to the
       carrying out of the 1989 game, he asked you to liaise
       once again with the planning team? - A. Yes.

    Q. Why was that? - A. When I say he asked us, he saw us
       altogether. He saw us altogether and said, "We will go
       ahead as last year".

    Q.   So what part did you play in the planning of the event?
         - A. I overlooked the order. I sort ofexamined it
         when it had been prepared.

    Q. You examined it in the light of your experience of
       1988, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. And your experience of controlling football games at
       Hillsborough from 1988 through to 1989? - A. Yes.

    Q. Both those where Mr. Mole had been on the scene and
       those where you had been controlling the game
       completely by yourself? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You were happy with it? - A. Yes.
                                                                 22

                                                        B. D. MURRAY


    Q. You were aware, I assume, or you became aware that Mr.
       Duckenfield was going to take Mr. Mole's job on the
       Division? - A. Yes, I did.
B
    Q. One of the consequences of that meant that he would be
       the Chief Superintendent in overall control on the date
       of the Semi Final? - A. Yes.

    Q. It is important not to forget that, of course, being
       the Chief Superintendent for the Division it means a
       lot more than merely being in control for a football
       game? - A. Very much so, yes.

    Q. You were also aware at that time that unlike Mr. Mole
       he did not have years of experience of policing
       Hillsborough? - A. He certainly didn't have the recent
       experience that Mr. Mole had.

    Q. And certainly not as an overall Commander? - A. No.

    Q. You were aware that the expertise of yourself, Mr.
D      Greenwood, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Chapman, and indeed the
       Inspectors under you were so far as Mr. Mole were
       concerned, a very important part of the operational
       plan. That is right, is it not? - A. Yes, I am sure.
       It is very much a team effort.

    Q. Anything that Mr. Duckenfield lacked in experience
       could hopefully be made up for by the exceptional
       experience in the team that he had working with him? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. In 1989 you were the Control Room Commander, if I can
       put it that way? - A. Yes.

    Q. How would you describe your role so far as your
       relationship with Mr. Duckenfield was concerned then? -
       A. I saw my role as being sort of monitoring the event
       as a whole, being responsible for the reception and the
       transmission of all radio communications and saw myself
       as adviser to Mr. Duckenfield.

    Q. Because there would from time to time no doubt be
       decisions that he might have to make which would
       require your advice based on your experience? - A. I
       feel that is fair, yes.

    Q. Just as with Mr. Mole you would and could make
       decisions which were within your responsibility without
       referring them to Mr. Duckenfield, if there came a
       decision that Mr. Duckenfield had to make which was not
       within your responsibility you, once again, would be
       able to make consequential decisions. Do you follow
                                                         B. D. MURRAY

     what I mean by that? - A. Yes, from time to time.
     Decisions are being made all of the time. Some of them
     it would be necessary perhaps to refer afterwards to
     the match Commander for his information. Occasionally
     a decision would be necessary to refer to before it was
     made to the match Commander.

 Q. Those sort of decisions, for example, would be a
    decision to delay the kick-off? - A. I think so.

Q. One where you would expect to have considerable input’
   - A. Yes.

Q. You would expect your view to be listened to very
   carefully indeed? - A. Yes.

Q. Similarly any other decision which went outside the
   terms of the Operational Order? - A. I think those
   decisions and those that obviously were coming from a
   Sector Commander, if a Superintendent on the ground,
       o f whom were senior to me and were more experienced
   than I was probably, were to ask for a particular
   course of action to be taken, I don't think it would be
   my decision to overrule them or to agree with them.

Q. Save for this; let us just take the closure of
   Leppings Lane to traffic? - A. Yes.

Q.    That was one that was    taken effectively by Mr.
     Marshall. He was not     asking for permission to do that,
     as I understand it? -    A. No, he was saying, "We have
     got to close Leppings    Lane".

Q.    As a result he puts the message through to Control and
     you take the necessary steps? - A. That is right.

Q.    Because that was something that was within his sphere
     of operational responsibility? - A. Yes.

Q. Can I ask you about the event? We have heard you tell
   us where Mr. Duckenfield was. From your recollection,
   and if we look at the plan that was produced, 532, the
   only sensible available space to him would be where you
   said that you recall him being which was alongside
   Police Constable Bichard? - A. Yes, I cannot recall
   where he was for different times, I have no idea, but
   it would be reasonable for him to be, if I can look at
   this plan, from time to time where it says "bins and
   buckets", where it says "a fire extinguisher" and
   actually behind that standing next to PC Bichard.

Q. Around that aSrea? - A. Yes.
                                                       B. D. MURRAY

 Q* At half past two, Mr. Murray, there was conversation
    between the two of you as to whether you would get the
    crowd in? - A. Yes.

Q.    Would it   be fair to say that that was a     conversation
     that was very largely one of routine? - A. I think so.

Q.    The sort of thing that would be said at most games,
     "Well, Bernard" - and I do not know whether he called
     you Bernard - A. Yes.

Q. Perhaps in front of the other men he called you
   Superintendent Murray, I do not know? - A. No, he would
   call me by my Christian name.

Q. "Do you think we are going to get   them   in?" -      A. Yes.

Q. That sort of question would not suggest to you, would
   it, that there was Mr. Duckenfield concerned at that
   time as to whether he would get them in but it would be
   a routine sort of matter that would be discussed? - A.
   Yes, I think I was looking at thecrowd and I could see
   the size of the crowd. I think I said to him as a
   matter of course, "There is a good crowd out there but
   we will get them in for three o'clock".

Q. In fairness, Mr. Murray, as between the two of you, you
   were the man who had the experience over a year or so
   of the likelihood or the speed at which you would get a
   crowd in for three o'clock? - A. Yes.

Q. In those circumstances Mr. Duckenfield would have been
   very foolish, would he not, to be saying to you,
   "Despite your experience I think you are wrong"? - A.
   Possibly.

Q. In any event, you certainly did not see any reason to
   be concerned at about the time that conversation took
   place? - A. No, I didn't.

Q. Similarly there was a conversation about delaying the
   kick-off? - A. Yes.




                                     /Q. Again the sort of..
                 r
                                               B. D. MURRAY'


 Q. Again, the sort of conversation as between Controller
    and overall Commander which may well be regarded as
    routine? - A. Yes.

Q. Especially in circumstances where the overall Commander
   has not been doing the job very long? - A. Yes.

Q. "Just remind me, Bernard, of the way we do these sort
   of things"? - A. That is right.

Q. It was not a case, was it, of there being any real
   consideration at that time towards delaying the kick-
   off at about half-past-2? It just wasn't arising? - A.
   I don't think the question had arisen then.  I think it
   was probably a mind crossing exercise of getting it
   right in his mind as to what we had said.

Q. What you were saying was no different from what you
   understood the position would be under Mr. Mole? - A.
   It was the criteria, if you like, that I had inherited
   from Mr. Mole or asked Mr. Mole about.

Q. But there was no doubt between the two of you that if
   those criteria required safety to be taken into
   account, the safety of people either within or outwith
   the Ground, then that would play a very important part
   in any decision that was going to be made? - A. There
   were not any rules. There was nothing written down, or
   nothing that had to be adhered to; it was just what we
   had discussed and what we had agreed.

Q. Just so that there is no misunderstanding about this,
   so that no one thinks there was any rigid rule, what
   you seemed to have been discussing at that stage was a
   situation where, forgetting any questions of safety,
   the only matter was whether people would be able to get
   in on time to see the game, and in those circumstances,
   if it was their own fault, then in a way tough luck.
   If it wasn't then other considerations may apply
   towards delaying the kick-off, but considerations of
   safety weren't entering into that particular balance,
   were they, at that stage? - A. Not at that stage.   It
   seemed sensible that if people could not get to the
   event the kick-off would be delayed.

Q. Certainly at that stage there was nothing that was
   being reported to you, and therefore to Mr.
   Duckenfield, from outside which suggested that there
   would be any risk to any fan or member of the public,
   so far as safety was concerned? - A. No.

Q. It became very clear if I may say so, Mr. Murray,
   during thefcourse of your evidence, that the crisis
                                                         26

                                              B. D. MURRAY'


   situation came upon the Control Box very suddenly.    Now
   would that be right? - A. I am sure it was, yes.

Q. Had Mr. Marshall, before he made the request for
   reinforcements, so to speak, made clear to you what
   difficulties he was experiencing, or did that come out
   of the blue? - A. We couldsee obviously from the
   Control Room that there was a large crowd of people in
   the Leppings Lane.

Q. Yes, but that is what you would expect? - A. But the
   fact that people were in great distress did come as a
   surprise.

Q. Yes. There is all the difference in the world between,
   let us call it a public order situation where you
   expect the Commander outside to be dealing with it, and
   a situation where he is telling you, "People are going
   to die out here". Would you agree with that? - A.
   Absolutely.

Q. Between his first request for reinforcements and the
   first request that the gates be opened, there was this,
   I was going to say difficulty, more than difficulty - I
   am not sure how you described it first of all, but the
   problem with the radios? - A. Yes, the problem with the
   radio, I think I described it as devastating, which it
   was.

Q. That was the word I was looking for. Could we just go
   through why it was devastating? First of all, radio
   traffic was disrupted for a period? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. That meant that people who just had normal messages to
   pass to you, never mind emergency messages, could not
   get through? - A. Well, certainly we couldn't answer
   anybody. The main one was that we could not answer
   anyone and anyone who called up would get no
   acknowledgments, and so would probably call again and
   again, and the air would very quickly become congested.

Q. And what was happening when the air became congested -
   so five or six Officers were sending messages through
   at the same time? - A. Yes.

Q. What sort of noise would that create within the Control
   Room? - A. It is not so much the noise, it is the
   distortion.  It is bits of a message would get through
   and bits of another message would get through.

Q. That is what you meant, so you are getting bits and
   pieces which make no sense at all? - A. Yes.
             r
                                           B. D. MURRAY‘


This, of course, is distracting to those inside the
Control Room, but in addition there was a disruption in
the facility to actually send messages out once the
thing had been halfway fixed, as I understand it? - A.
Yes. It was fixed, was the idea, but it wasn't.   It
still didn't work after it had been fixed the first
time.

So we then move from being able to use the proper
equipment. You have got the standby equipment and then
that has to be rejected, and you are on a hand held
radio, the same as any of the ordinary PCs who may have
had one? - A. That is correct.  I think one cannot
under-estimate the actual physical effect in the
Control Room when everyone has to move, and the radio
operator has to get under the desk.  In fact, I think
that Sergeant Goddard finished up in my chair and I
finished up standing behind P.C. Ryan, as a result of
the disruption.

What is the disadvantage - it may be obvious- of the
Control Box only being able to use the same hand held
radio as the ordinary serial? - A. When we have the
proper powered set, we can override, in theory, anyone
else who is transmitting a message, so if we want to
send an urgent message out and someone else is
transmitting in, our signal will override their signal
to the person that we want to receive it. If we are in
the situation of using the hand held radios, then
everyone is competing for the same signal; we may lose
out to other stations.

We then, as I understand it, get a message coming
through from Mr. Marshall, the first set, for the gates
to be opened? - A. Yes.

You told the Coroner, albeit that it was out of
sequence, that at that time Mr. Bichard saw that the
gate had, in fact, been opened. Let's not worry about
how it was opened for the moment, but just at the time
when Mr. Marshall's message - request - was coming
through, he saw on the video, on the screen, the gate
opening? - A. It was after.  It must have been after.
I can only assume, and I don't want to assume, but for
some reason P.C. Bichard zeroed in, if you like, on
that particular gate.  It was after the first request
had come in and I heard him say, "The gate's gone", or
"The gate's burst".

I think that was it, "The gate's burst".  So what we
have is this, there is a request from Mr. Marshall
asking for the gate to open which came out of the blue?
- A. Yes. r
                                              B. D. MURRAY


Because that was a request which was wholly contrary to
the policy or the practice of policing a football game?
- A. It was a unique request. We had made tannoy
messages and sent resources round and extra horses, but
the request for the gate to be opened was unheard of.

It had changed from a public order situation outside to
something completely different? - A. It had changed to
a life or death situation outside.

A short time thereafter, and it would appear to be a
matter of seconds more than anything else from what you
are saying, P.C. Bichard sees the gates burst open? -
A. I honestly don't know the timescale, sir, but after
the first request had come in.

Up to the time when the gate is seen to burst open no
decision has been made, that is quite right, that is
correct, isn't it? - A. That is correct, yes.

After the gate burst open the   situation seems to be
retrieved in that, as we have   seen on the video, a
mounted Police Officer comes,   closes off the inflow of
people, and the gate is shut?   - A. Yes, that is
correct.

May I ask you this, at that stage did it go through
your mind, "Well, at least we don't have to make the
decision as to whether to open the gate or not now,
because it is quite clear that the gate doesn't need
opening, otherwise the situation would not have been
retrieved in the way it has. Mr. Marshall wouldn't
have organised the closure of the gate". Did anything
like that go through your mind? - A. I don't know, sir.

Certainly that may well have appeared to be the case,
may it not? Request to open the gate, gate opens, but
Officer on the spot actually causes the gate to be
closed, suggesting that whatever had required the gate
to be opened in the first place had passed? - A. That
is a possibility.

But then in the midst of the mayhem that you have been
describing in the Control Room with the radio, Mr.
Marshall's request comes again? - A. Yes.

Would it be fair to say that on this occasion it wasn't
so much of a request as an order? - A. To me the final
one was a demand.

And it sounded desperate? - A. There was no
alternative.
                                                           29

                                              B. D. MURRAY


Q. Did you feel that you had any time to delay? - A. Not
   after that last request.  I felt we had to do something
   there and then.

Q. That was because people, he said, were going to be
   killed unless it was done? - A. Yes.

Q. You said to the Coroner, I think on Friday, "My own
   decision was that we had no more time"? - A. Yes.

Q. But again you were aware that it was a decision which
   was unprecedented so far as policing a football game
   was concerned? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. Mr. Duckenfield did not make a decision immediately,
   did he? A matter of a number of seconds passed - I say
   seconds, as opposed to minutes. - A. Yes, as far as I
   can recall.

Q. Do you recall this, that you asked him on two, perhaps
   three, occasions, Mr. Duckenfield, are we going to
   open the gates?" - something like that? - A. I
   certainly asked him, yes.

Q. And on the third occasion, I suggest, he then agreed
   and said, "We must open the gates", or words to that
   effect? - A. I don't recall asking him several times.

Q. Are you saying only once or are you saying it could be
   two or three times? - A. I feel it was only once.




          Q. Very well.   Had he not

             r
                                                                             D. B. MURRAY


     9 ' h a « made'it’3- 5 * T ° L " ? ? V hat ?eclsl°". you would
                          A. I don t know, I can only speculate.
     Q.    In a way, it was fortunate that it was not Mr. Mole
           w / E L    com;and0on that day because Mr. Mole could
                   k any? her® ? “ A * If the match Ground Commander
           h?rn
           nim to attend there. Contro1 Roo®» I would have asked

 Q.            Y11* the rad*° difficulties? - A. It is very
           likely that we couldn't have got hold of him.

 Q.        Superintendent Murray, I certainly am not going to be
            criticising anybody for the decision to open the
           fniSSI«         Duck*nfield was the one who gave the order
           aetiiflifS «■       ^ S * McBrlen» 1 have not heard anybody
                     VS         Jnquest criticise the opening of the
           b l i !*  Ja d 7 ou» belng there listening to the decision
           ™     5*5   V°    op?5 the gates» considered - and we know
           you did not consider it because you have answered Mr.
           Payne s question - that there was any serious risk to
           Zu 5anf ?n        e LePPings Lane terrace as a result of
                 Ju?     ? to open the 8ates, would you have done
           something about it? - A. I am sorry, I lost you half­
           way through the question.

 Q*        JUS*."8
                 trL 5 nd exPlaln it again. You told Mr. Payne
          tnat you did not consider that there was any risk of
          injury to those in the central pens as a result of
          at Sail8   thS   8atSS?   " A#   Y S S * 1 d l d n ’'t t h l n k   about   that


Q.        You told him, and I accept it unequivocally, that you
          were not indifferent to any risk of injury to those
          people. What I am asking you is this. Had you
                   ? that there was a rlsk to the people on the
          Leppings Lane terrace in Pens 3 and 4 as a result of
          the decision to open the gates, what would you have
          done? - A. Of course I hadn’t considered it.

Q.        You would have done something about it, would you not’
          - A. One moment, sir.

               THE CORONER: Take your time.

               THE WITNESS:         Of course.

                   ISAACS: Of course you would have done
          something about it. - A. Yes.

Q.        Are you afll right? - A.         Yes.
                                                         D. B. MURRAY

                MR. ISAACS: I should have said all these
        d o e f ^ n 118 ?r; Murray ls not obliged: to answer.   He
        does do and I am grateful for doing so.

 Q*         !°?ld haV® had» would y°u not» fuH authority to
           whatever you considered necessary at that stage to
       2 ? < anL rlsk t0 anybody     the ground as a result of
       opening the gates? - A. Yes.                      u 01
 Q.
           56 ?a?e     as Mr* Mole was telling us had he made
       Of « KC h        e,should be an evacuation as a result
       of a bomb scare and you would have taken consequential
                        f situation you had the authority to
       do what you considered to be necessary? - A. Yes I
       would have.                                     *

 Q.    You would not have needed Mr. Duckenfield to tell you
       what to do? - A. No, I wouldn't.                  7

 Q.    Is this the position, Mr. Murray? In the crisis that
       faced the Control Room at that time, everybody was
       d?i?8 » ao f?r as y°? could see, their best to deal
       witn it? - A. Yes sir.

Q*                  wlth,hl?dsl8ht one can put forward things
           «■£    iu?r should» or ®ight have been done, but
       had those things occurred to you at the time in the
       crisis you would have done them? - A. Of course.

            MR* ISAACS: Thank you very much indeed.  Perhaps,
       sir, that is a convenient moment to have a break.

      _    THE CORONER: I think that will be a very good
      idea. We will break for 10 minutes.

                        (Short Adjournment)

                   Cross-Examined by MR. KING;

Q. Mr.     Murray, you were Ground Control? - A. Yes.

      Yes in overa11 con,niand there was Mr. Duckenfield? - A.

Q.    Can I just for the moment deal with the role of
       Commanding Officers generally, rather than
      on            8 *between the two of y°u for the moment
      the two if nt o f que8tlons* I will distinguish between
      I h Z + ZZ  y°U 11? a moment- I Just want to understand
      what you are saying as to the function of Command
      vf £erS      3 footba11 game» or indeed at any event.
      You have beneath you a number of more junior Officers
      do you not? - A. Yes.
                                                         D. B. MURRAY

 Q.    All the way down to people at ground level? - A. Yes.

 Q.    Would you accept that the Command has overall
       responsibility on their shoulders for an event which
       they are In charge of? - A. Yes.

 Q.    You would not expect Command,   If something goes wrone
        simply to say, "Well, It must be down to I h e O f f i l l r V
        at ground level and nothing to do with me"? That
       would not be a correct approach In principle, would
       it.    A. That would not be my approach.

 Q * h J U S 1 w?nJed to 8 ^ that out of the way. We have
              a v °f emphasis put, not only through your
                      through other more senior Officers, on
     what they could expect of more junior Officers. Now
     how does a junior Officer know what is to be expected
     of him in the overall scheme of affairs at an event
     heC£       tbl®» P°llcin8 this football match? How does
     he know what is expected of him? - A. There is a
                am2U!?5^f delegation, a certain amount of
               8different people on their     role. As Police
     all Officers      ®Xpect a hlgh level of initiative from

Q*        initiative comes into play usually when a problem
      ?     f?a 7 arlsen, does it not, that is when
              7? comes into play? - A. I think it comes into
      play dealing with everything as a Police Officer.

Q*            °r?ef t0avert problems arising, you have first
          iJt-f    1° v     a?ead f°r Potential   problems,have
      you not? -    A. Yes, that is right.

Q*    r!lmma«Sy han ^ f 0t t0 make sure ln your own mind, as
                  ?fflcers, that people on the ground know
      where they have to be and what their role is? - A.
      XGS •


Q.    A Commanding Officer, even if he is new in the
      Command, would expect, would he not, to have to
      acquaint himself with what his junior Officers were
      h ? r c1
             t?d,t0 5e dol"«? He woold have to acquaint
      himself in advance with what that was, would he not? -
      a. i would think so.

Q*    ? ^ eflngs ln thls context of the junior Officers are
      are'important: “ * * * * "°t? ‘ *' Y6S’ the

Q*    S H w ? ' doming specifically to the policing of the
      semi-final in 1989, so far, and you may be able to
      disabuse us, we have heard no evidence that any
      specific briefing was given to any Officer as regards              .
                                                              33

                                                     D. B. MURRAY

       a duty to monitor the crowds on the Leppings Lane
       terraces for overcrowding. Can you confirm from your
       knowledge that is the case, is it not? - A. I do not
       kniSJafPeC^i C
                   k        knOW
                                  ZaS
                                 about
                                       8iven to anybody from my
                                        the briefings that were
       carried on below me.

 Q.    You can only speak, as everybody else can, of your
       knowledge? - A. Yes.

             right, is it not, that you were acquainted with
       the Operational Order? - A. Yes, I was.

 Q.    You would, therefore, know from the Operational Order
       what specifically was required of individual serials,
       that is right, is it not? - A. I would have a good
       idea. I don t know what every serial is doing
       probably without reference to the Order.

 Q.    No but you, as I understand it, were part of the
       planning team? - A. Yes, I oversaw the planning team.

 Q.    Did you read through the Operational Order? - A. Yes I
       did.

 Q.    I have got to find somebody who did. - A. Yes I did.

Q.     Did you assess the duties of the individual serials as
       you went through it, to see if they complied with what
       you would expect of them? - A. I would think so, yes.

Q.     Did Mr. Duckenfield have a copy of the Operational
       Order. - A. As far as I am aware, yes.

Q.    Was Mr. Duckenfield at any of these pre-semi-final
      meetings which we have heard of in 1989? - A. I think
      he was at them all apart from the original one on the
      day that the semi-final was announced.
Q.    That is 20th March? - A. The 20th and the 21st, I
      tuinlc •

Q. I think after the 20th there were a number of meetings
    - tell me if I am wrong? There was a meeting on 22nd
    March at Hammerton Road Police Station? - A. Yes
    there was.                                       *

Q.    There was a meeting on 29th March? - A. Yes.

Q.    A meeting on 5th April? - A. As far as I am aware,
      yes.     f                                         *

Q.    I think there was a specific one you have a
      recollection of on 10th April with Mr. Duckenfield in
                                           D. B. MURRAY

 particular when there was discussion as to contingency
 arrangements as regards the end of the game and
 supporters possibly coming together and flash points?
 - A. Probably, sir, yes.

 There was another meeting with the Club and Mr.
 ZuY, » was there not» on 13th April? - A. I don't
 think Mr. Duckenfield would be at that meeting.

Ail right, but you were at the 13th April meeting? -
A. Myself and Inspector Sewell was.

But up to the 13th April meeting, as far as you can
recall, Mr. Duckenfield would be at all those’ - A
Yes, apart from the first one.

It is not a case of the Commanding Officer here being
in blissful ignorance of what the Operational Order
contained? - A. No, I feel he knew, or I assume he
knew what the Order contained.

Very good. You can confirm this, can you not, that as
regards the serial concerning the West Stand serial -
all right? - A. Yes.

They had written into their Order that they had to be
particularly vigilant to prevent people climbing up
into the West Stand from the terrace, did they not7 -
A. Yes, they did.

   it helps, by all means turn to it. - A. Yes they
did, I recall that.

Have you got it in front of you? - A. Yes, I have it
in front of me.

You can be helpful to me because my mind is not
working properly, what serial is that? - A. That is
Serial 13, Sub-Section 6.

I am obliged.  If one just looks at the Operational
Order for a moment - this I think is page 30 to help
the Jury - this is the serial which would be on the
west Stand and Inspector Bullas had overall charge of
them as a serial? - A. That is correct.




                             /Q. The West Stand ....
                                              B. D. MURRAY


The West Stand, of course, looks over down on the
Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes, it does.

Now there is a specific duty directed to that Serial to
prevent, if I can put it this way, law and order problems
arising as between the terraces and the West Stand? - A.
Yes, I think that is fair.

It is preventing missiles being thrown and preventing
people climbing from the terraces to the Stand.   You can
confirm, can't you, that it was not any part of the
specific duties directly imposed upon that Serial to look
during the build-up to kick-off into the terrace down
below to see how they were filling up from the point of
view of distribution? - A. There was nothing in the
Order, no, sir.

You know of no specific briefing to that effect, do you?
-A. No, I do not.

Obviously you would expect any Officer if he happens to
see a sign of distress, as you put it the equivalent of a
fire in a crowd, to do something about it on his own
initiative.   I accept that.   However, as regards
planning ahead specific duties, there was no specific
role for that West Stand terrace, to keep an eye on the
terrace itself down below as regards the filling of it? -
A. There was nothing in the Order to that effect and
nothing in my briefings.

Indeed, we can go further?   There was no specific duty
imposed even on the track officers to look at the
Leppings Lane terrace during the build-up to kick-off as
regards the filling of it and the distribution of it? -
A. There was nothing in the Order to that effect, no,
sir.

Just to confirm that, because it is important to look at
these Orders, which you knew about.   It is Serial 1
which would be the... - A. Yes, they would.

In the context of Serial 1, and we can see it.   I am
sorry I have not got the page for the jury but I hope
everyone has got it in front of them.   We can see that a
number of matters are drawn to the attention of the
perimeter track officers, but one thing is certain.
Keeping an eye on the filling and distribution of the
pens just does not appear, does it? - A. Not in the
Order, sir.

Again you can confirm that as far as you know that was
not part of any specific briefing? - A. It was not part
of my briefing, no.
                                                             36
                                                              *%
                                                 B. D. MURRAY


Q. Therefore, you can confirm that the effect of the
   planning was that there really was no Officer, be it at
   ground level, on the perimeter track, or up in the West
   Stand, or anywhere else, who had a specific duty to be
   concerned to keep a watch on the fillings of pens 3 and
   4?   Is that right? -A. Nothing in the Order which gives
   Officers every little duty they have to carry out
   throughout the event.

Q. Is it just a little duty to be concerned with the filling
   of the terraces? - A. I am sorry - every duty.

Q. No, I can't be sorry, I want to know whether you regard
   that as a little duty? - A. I don't.   I regard it as
   something that Officers do as a matter of course.

Q. Why, as a matter of course, in the context of the penned
   terrace, should junior Officers know what they planning
   was and the system was, if any, devised by senior
   Officers to prevent overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
   terraces?   How would they be privy to that?   How would
   they know about it? - A. I think they know that is a
   large terrace which is, to me, being treated as an open
   terrace because of the fact that gates are opened and
   people can pass from pen to pen.

Q. Is that all you would expect them to know from your
   planning, therefore? - A. I am sorry, sir?

Q. You may not have done.   Would you expect them to be
   alive to the fact that the only way across the terraces
   was by the radial gates at the very back? - A. Well, it
   is not the only way.   It is one way.    The other way is
   going out and going in another entrance.

Q. It is the only way  for anybody who is already in a pen
   who wants to move across?

Q.        THE CORONER:   I don't want to interrupt Mr. King
     every time he asksa question because it is very
     disruptive for him   and it is very disruptive for you.
     It is essential that you should bear in mind that the
     whole series of questions which you are being asked all
     tend to incriminate you. In respect of each and every
     one of those you are entitled to say... - A. I
     understand, sir.

          MR. MANNING:   I appreciate that intervention, sir.
     I am conscious that I do not want to delay the course of
     these Inquests by your stopping on almost each and every
     question that Mr. King, and, indeed, that other people
     put to Mr. Murray.  I think you can see his attitude at
     this moment in time is that he is going to do his best to
     answer the questions that are put to him.   There may be
                                                B. D. MURRAY


occasions when you will feel, even having said that and
even with the acknowledgement from Mr. Murray and myself
that we understand the position, that nonetheless you
will feel you want to interject, but I certainly do not
need you, and I do not think Mr. Murray needs you on each
occasion to say, "You may exercise that which the law
proves to you.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is right.   I think you
will understand, Mr. King, that notwithstanding what I
have said, if there is a particular question - and that
is the reason I intervened because I thought we were
getting to a point where I really had to remind him of
that need, and I will do it because it is only right and
proper that it should be done.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am sure everyone will appreciate
that in a sense I have a difficult role because clearly
most of my questions, and not all of them, will be
incriminating in some way or another;  if not of this
Officer himself but of someone else.   It is difficult
sometimes for him to know which way.   I preface,
therefore, everything I say now by inviting you and,
indeed, the witness to take on board that particularly
the witness should think carefully about whether he wants
to answer any of my questions.

     THE CORONER:   I am glad because I think we are all
agreed on this point.   There is no problem.   It is just
that I want you to be fully aware of that and conscious
of it. - A. I fully understand, sir.

And think.   We are more than happy to hear your answers.
I am not trying to stop you, but I do not want you to
answer in error.

     MR. MANNING:   I simply want to make this point, and
again I hope we are all on common ground, that the
question may possibly be incriminating.   The answer, of
course, may only be possibly incriminating.   One must
not draw the conclusion that because the question itself
is possibly incriminating, that the answer will
necessarily be possibly incriminating.

        THE CORONER:   Indeed, I quite understand that as
well.

     MR. KING:   Let me approach the same question in a
slightly different way in view of the interruption - I am
not complaining - because it is more helpful.   Were you
give your position as, in fact, second in command,
almost, at the semi-final? - A. I do not see it as second
in command at the semi-final.
                                                              38
                                                                  *   \



                                                  B. D. MURRAY


Q. Overall you had Mr. Duckenfield? - A. I see
   Mr. Duckenfield being in command of the event and the
   four Superintendents having their own individual spheres
   of responsibility.

Q. So be it.   I accept that for the moment.   Were you
   aware of the existence of something called a Green Guide?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Did you have a copy of it? - A. I did not have a copy of
   it, no.

Q.   Have you ever been provided with a copy of it?   - A. I
     have not been provided with a copy of it but I   have read
     it.

Q.   This is nothing to do with these Inquests because I am
     looking to the future for the moment, but just very
     quickly, since the disaster have you still been involved
     in policing football matches? - A. I policed three
     football matches following.

Q. You have not even been supplied with a Green Guide since
   then?

          MR. MANNING:   I do not know whether that is a
     question that is going to help us.

          MR. KING:      So be it:

Q. Did you nonetheless consider it important before taking
   part even in the planning meetings to acquaint yourself
   with the Green Guide? - A. I read the Green Guide about
   twelve or eighteen months before that semi-final.

Q. And not again? - A. I do not think so, sir.

Q. Did Mr. Duckenfield, to your knowledge, have a copy of
   the Green Guide? -A. I do not know.

Q. Nonetheless let me show you a copy of the Green Guide for
   the moment to see if I can jog your memory about its
   contents.

          MR. BEECHEY:      That is C.382, sir.

Q.        MR. KING:   Just out of interest, how was it you
     came into possession of the Green Guide when you did look
     at it some twelve months or so before 1989? - A. I read
     it when I was at Barnsley as Chief Inspector.

Q. It was March, 1988 when you came into your senior
   position, if ?I can put it that way, with regard to the
                                              B. D. MURRAY


footballing at Hillsborough.   Who was it who appointed
you to that? - A. The Chief Constable.

Then you would no doubt meet up with Superintendent Mole
and others? - A. Yes.

Did no-one on that occasion invite you to look at the
Green Guide, given your important role in policing
football matches? - A. Not that I can recall.

So be it.    Let me go to a page I want to direct your
attention to which is Chapter 8, page 31 of the Green
Guide.    Mr. Murray, that is the chapter headed "Terraces
and Viewing Slopes." - A. Yes.

You are not reading this page for the first time today,
are you? -A. No.

You certainly had read it before the 1989 semi-final? -A.
Yes, certainly.

You did not regard the Green Guide as something you could
just read once and put it out of your mind after that,
put it in a cupboard and lock it away?   It was an
important document, wasn't it? - A. When I read the Green
Guide I formed the opinion that the vast majority was
aimed at football management rather than Police Officers.

Here we may have the root of the approach to this game, I
don't know.   Are you saying that the matters as regards
controlling crowds at a football match, and a lot of this
is directed to the control of crowds at football matches
in various parts of the ground, was simply a matter for
the club management? - A. No, I am not saying that.    I
am saying having read the Green Guide, the contents and
the way it is set out, to me it seemed to be aimed more
at club management and engineers than Police Officers.

Isn't the history of the West Terraces, the Leppings Lane
terraces, and there is a whole body of evidence to this
effect, Mr. Murray, that as regards the West Terraces,
whether it be a league game or a semi-final, it was a
policing matter as regards the crowds going on to that
West Terrace, not a club matter?   That is the body of
evidence we have heard. - A. I think the club and the
Police Officers worked together.

Did you yourself, as this senior Officer, one of four
immediately below Mr. Duckenfield, consider that the
Police had a particular role to play in relation to the
Leppings Lane terrace, as opposed to the other terrace,
such as the Kop? - A. I do not feel there was a great
deal of difference in the policing of the Kop and the
Leppings Lane terraces.
                                             B. D. MURKAY


I don't want to take too long over this cross-
examination, let me just go straight to the point.   Page
31:

     "Arrangements should be made to encourage the even
     distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide
     ease of access and egress, to control and facilitate
     movement, particularly if a local emergency should
     arise during the event and to contain pressures
     before they reach dangerous proportions."

That is a piece of wisdom which I am sure you agree with?
- A. Yes.




            Q. And something you agreed
                                                    B. D. MURRAY

Q. Something which you agreed with before the 1989 Semi
   Final? - A. Yes.

Q. Help us, therefore, to explain it. What is the
   connection between arranging to encourage even
   distribution across a terrace and containing pressures
   before they reach dangerous proportions? Explain it to
   us. What is that all about? - A. So far as I was
   concerned I had seen it operate successfully and known
   it operate successfully in the past. When the gates of
   the individual pens were locked in the open position
   the crowd would pass through those pens along from pen
   to pen and distribute.

Q. Mr. Murray, you did not really understand my question
   and I 9® sorry for that. I am not going to ask you yet
   what arrangements there were, if any, for the 1989 Semi
   Final. I am asking you to help us as the senior
   Officer in charge of policing at Hillsborough in 1989
   to explain your understanding of the wisdom of this
   guide line. In other words, why is it important that
   arrangements be made to encourage even distribution in
   order to contain pressures before they reach dangerous
   proportions? - A. By safety.

Q. On the one hand, you have distribution and you have
   pressure before they reach dangerous proportions. What
   is pressure before they reach dangerous proportions all
   about? What are we talking about? - A. We are talking
   about crushing.

Q. Containing pressures before they reach dangerous
   crushing proportions.  Is that what it is meaning? - A.
   That is the way. I suppose that is my interpretation
   of it, yes, sir.

Q. You would say you knew in 1989 before the disaster that
   it was important to have an arrangement on the terrace
   to contain pressures before they reached dangerous
   crushing proportions? - A. I am not saying that. You
   took me through a series of questions based upon
   reading this here and now and you asked me certain
   aspects of it and I said, yes, after listening to you,
   that is the way I look at it.

Q. I am sorry, Mr. Murray, you agreed with me, before I
   asked you any questions, you would in 1989 have agreed
   with the wisdom of the guide line which I have read
   out? - A . I said I had read the guide, yes.

Q. You would agree with the wisdom of that particular
   guide line? -fA. Yes.
                                                    B. D. MURRAY

Q. I just want you to help everybody, the Jury, the
   Coroner, myself, as to what is the link between
   encouraging even distribution of crowd on terraces and
   seeking to contain pressures before they reach
   dangerous proportions? How does the one lead to the
   other? - A. I don't know whether it does actually,
   reading this.

       THE CORONER: M r . King, I can see what you are
  getting at but I can also read the Green Guide and if
  you look at it, you have picked what I would call the
  introduction. The witness has said that when he looked
  at it, it appeared to him that the Green Guide was more
  addressed to others than the Police.   I will just flick
  through paragraphs 89 to 109 and unless I have missed
  it, the whole thrust of the chapter is to do with
  structure.  I do not want to get into an argument about
  this but if you pick the introduction then I think, and
  he has given you a reason as to how he interpreted the
  Green Guide, then you need to look at the subsections
  which actually deal with the detail.

       MR. CATCHPOLE: With respect, can I agree with
  that? It is not only obvious it is a matter of
  structure but if one looks at even the first three
  paragraphs, paragraph 19, which we can all read for
  ourselves, is actually talking about providing
  spectators with an unobstructed view and is actually
  talking about how you get people on to the terrace.   It
  may be that the matters my learned friend is putting
  are important but I think, sir, with respect, you are
  right.  I had not risen before but you are right in
  this particular chapter, that it is a matter of
  structure rather than anything else.

       THE CORONER:   I am not arguing about your premise,
  Mr. King.

       MR. KING: Sir, I am only interested in what this
  witness understood and I was asking him if he could
  help us.

       THE CORONER: You are picking a section out of the
  Green Guide which he said he had read X months before
  and discarded because he did not think it was relevant
  to him and then asking him to draw conclusions which
  the chapter itself does not actually draw.

       MR. KING: Sir, that may or may not be right but I
  am entitled to ask the witness from his wisdom,
  knowledge and experience as a senior Officer of
  policing whatfthe connection is in his mind, if
  anything, between encouraging distribution across a
                                                  B. D. MURRAY


terrace and seeking to contain crowd pressures before
they reach dangerous proportions.  I am entitled to ask
that question, sir.

     THE CORONER: I am not sure whether you are
entitled to ask but you have asked it and I think he
has given an answer. What I am concerned about is that
we should not use a document incorrectly.

     MR. KING: So be it, sir. Let me put the Green
Guide right away. Let me put it to one side.

     THE CORONER:   I think we will do better.   I agree.

     MR. KING:   I may come back to it, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed.

     MR. KING: In the light of this Officer's evidence
as to the way he regarded it I think it is right I
should put it to one side.

Let me be absolutely blunt then because I want to know
how you see the situation. Did you understand that the
Police in charge of policing the Hillsborough Semi
Final of 1989 had any role to play as regards the
distribution of spectators across the Leppings Lane
West terrace? - A. Yes.

What was that job or responsibility? - A. I think there
was a general responsibility to make sure it was
reasonable.

Did any other body apart from the Police at the Semi
Final of 1989 have any direct responsibility for the
filling and distribution of the Leppings Lane terraces,
to your understanding in the 1989 Semi Final? - A. My
understanding that the Police and the Club work
together.

What was, to your understanding as the senior Officer,
the role of the Club in the 1989 Semi Final as regards
the distribution of spectators across the Leppings Lane
terrace and the filling of the pens? - A. The Club
itself?

Yes, what role were they playing on 15th April? - A. I
didn't know what the role of the Club was.

What did you understand? - A. I understood in different
parts of the ground, in all parts of the ground, that
the senior Police Officer in charge of that section of
the ground would brief his Police Officers and he would
                                                  B. D. MURRAY

brief the Club Stewards, and they would work together
to ensure that the event went off properly.

We are near the adjournment.  I do not want to take too
long on this but I am now very puzzled in the light of
this evidence and the light of all the other evidence
we have heard. Are you saying that you did not in that
Control Box regard you, the Police in the Control Box,
as haying a specific responsibility for the
distribution and filling of the West terraces as
opposed to the Kop and the other areas? - A. I am
sorry, I did not know that was the question you asked
me. I thought you asked me about the Police role
generally.

I am asking about the West Terrace? - A. Yes, sir.

     MR. KING:   Sir, that is probably as good a point
to stop.

     THE CORONER:    Do you want me to stop?

    MR. KING:    We are now almost at one o'clock, sir.

                    LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
                                           B. D. MURRAY '


     MR. KING:   Mr. Murray, as I understand your last
answer before the adjournment, you accept that there
was a responsibility upon the Police as regards the
policing at the 1989 semi-final, a responsibility in
respect of the distribution and filling of the Leppings
Lane Terrace, am I right? - A. Yes, there was a
responsibility of the Police.

Do you accept that no other body had specifically
accepted that particular responsibility, and I include
in that, for example, the Club management? - A. I think
the Club management accepted their responsibility
towards it as well.

Well, you would know because you knew the Operational
Order, that there was no stewarding by Club stewards,
was there, of the Leppings Lane Terrace as such, that
is right, isn't it? - A. On the terraces I wouldn't
have expected to see stewards.

No, I don't specifically mean on the terrace. There
was no actual stewarding responsibility on the way it
was organised in 1989, on Club stewards in relation to
the West Terraces, was there? - A. I think the stewards
had a responsibility to show people where to go and
which direction to go but I would not have expected to
see them on the terrace itself.

Did you know what the arrangement was between the
Police and the Club as regards stewards and their
responsibilities? - A. I didn't know what the
responsibilities of the stewards in particular areas
were because they were briefed by the senior Police
Officer there.

You knew surely in your senior capacity the importance
of a pre-arranged agreement between the Police and
management as to the duties of stewards and their
distribution, you would know that? - A. There was a
schedule on the Safety Certificate which was presumably
expanded on depending on the number of supporters that
were there.

Let me take it in stages: you would know in 1989
before the disaster, wouldn't you, of the importance of
a detailed, pre-arranged agreement between Police and
management as to the positions of stewards? - A. I knew
there was a pre-arranged schedule that was attached to
the Safety Certificate.

You would know the importance of having a pre-arranged
agreement, wouldn't you? - A. I am not sure what you
mean by the? importance of having it. I think it is
                                                            46

                                                   B. D. MURRAY'


     very much down to the Officer who is in charge of that
     area to work the Police and the stewards together.

Q. But haven't the Police in their policing and planning
   got to know what their responsibilities are and what
   the Club management responsibilities are? - A. We tried
   to put Officers familiar with that particular part of
   the Ground in that area, and they worked with the
   stewards and decided upon who did what.

Q. Mr. Murray, it wasn't as casual as that, was it? There
   was in fact pre-arranged agreement between Club and
   management as to where stewards were going, and what
   the responsibility of the Police was, wasn t there? -
   A. The only one I know is the one that was attached to
   the Safety Certificate.

Q. Let's take that one if that is the only one you know.
   You would know from there that no Club stewards were
   responsible for the controlling or directing of fans
   onto the Leppings Lane Terrace.  It is obvious by its
   absence if you knew the Safety Certificate? - A. I
   didn't say I knew the Safety Certificate I said there
   would be a schedule on the Safety Certificate.

Q. Had you in your capacity as the senior Officer turned
   your mind at all to the stewarding responsibilities at
   the Leppings Lane Terraces? -

Q.        THE CORONER:      That is one I am going to warn you
     about.

          MR. KING:      Certainly, sir:

Q. That is undoubtedly an incriminating question to you. -
   A. So far as I was concerned the stewards, as I say,
   worked with a senior Police Officer in that particular
   area. The main area of concern with me is that
   stewards manned the exit gates and stayed there
   throughout the event.

Q. You may say yes or no to this: were you aware that as
   regards the Leppings Lane Terraces that the Club - you
   may say no to this - that the Club had taken no
   responsibility as regards the stewarding of the
   Leppings Lane Terraces? Were you aware of that in 1989
   before the semi-final? - A. I didn't know what
   responsibility the Club had accepted or taken.

Q. Would you not consider it important in your capacity as
   senior Officer that you should know in advance what
   responsibility the Club had taken on? - A. We are
   talking about a very small part of the Ground. My
   responsibility was presumably the whole Ground,
                                             B. D. MURRAY


everywhere, all the stewards.  I   did not take a
particular interest in what each   individual steward was
doing. That is why I say it was    important that the
senior Officer there briefed the   Police Officers and
briefed the stewards.

It may have been a small part of the Ground, Mr.
Murray, but you would know, wouldn't you, that at
league matches the Police had taken on a specific
responsibility to control the filling of pens in
sequential order? - A. Yes.

And I think you were responsible sometimes for carrying
out those sequential orders? - A. Yes, at league
matches.

I think you had specific responsibility at the occasion
of the league match between Liverpool and Sheffield
Wednesday on 14th January, 1989, which is the C515
documents which we have already been referred to? - A.
I was the Superintendent in control on that day, yes.

I don't need to take everybody to it but we all know
that particular order contained within it a specific
order to serial 10 to ensure pens were filled in
accordance with instructions from Control, all right? -
A. Yes, I will accept that.

As I understand it - tell me if I have got it right or
wrong - when it came to the semi-finals there was not
sequential filling of the pens, that is right, isn't
it, of the Leppings Lane Terraces? - A. There wasn't
sequential filling of pens at league matches.

There could be sequential filling of the pens at league
matches? - A. Occasionally, yes.

And at league matches you could have a system whereby
you start with two then open up a third and open up a
fourth? - A. That is correct, yes.

And that was a responsibility for the filling of the
pens which fell fairly and squarely upon the Police
shoulders, didn't it? - A. Yes.

I want to know how you saw it at a semi-final. At a
semi-final we know that the whole terrace was thrown
open to the fans? - A. Yes, that is correct, it was a
system that was accepted.

Are you saying that in view of that the Police
abandoned, compared with league matches, all
responsibility for monitoring the distribution and
                                              B. D. MURRAY


filling of the pens compared with what they did at a
league match? - A. I have never said that.

What responsibility did exactly the Police take on
board at a semi-final, according to you, as regards
monitoring the distribution and filling of the pens
across the whole terrace? - A. At a semi-final the
whole terrace was open.

I know that. - A. The Police, the Control Room, Police
Officers in general, had a responsibility for
monitoring and filling the pens.

So you accept that there was a responsibility upon the
Police at the 1989 semi-final, albeit the whole terrace
had been thrown wide open, to monitor the build-up, do
you, and the filling of the pens across the terrace
before kick-off? - A. I have just said that it is a
shared responsibility by all the Police Officers
present and also by the Club.

Do you accept that the Police had that responsibility,
yes or no?

     THE CORONER:      I think he has said it several
times, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:      I am sorry.

     THE CORONER:      He has given his reply and we must
accept it.

     MR. KING:      So be it:

The Club management were not in the Police Control Box,
were they? - A. No, they weren't.

You in the Police Control Box had access to the
following, didn't you? First of all you were able to
look out of the windows to view specifically the state
of the Leppings Lane Terraces? - A. Yes.




                 /Q. I think everybody
                                                                      49

                                                           B. D. MURRAY


     Q'    JisiJnth«T»!2b0?y h! V l8l5ed       ground who needs to
                 ‘5® 8r<>und and I need not ask you questions
           bStUinWaHH i l ° U ° f n because we can observe them,
           . -J addition to that you have access to I think it
           is five monitors, do you not? - A. Yes, that is
           correct in the Control Room.

 Q#                   mo? itors allow you to see, first of all,
           onto the Leppings Lane terraces if you so wish to

           S S 'tS      terraces! '   ™ -    °ne ° f the "°"it0rs 11111
 Q.        It can be specifically controlled so as to view
           particular parts according to that which you wish? -
           A* I 6 S •

 Q.        fif.ha?1a zoom facility, does it not, so that you can
           actually zoom in close on to any particular area of
           £ -i?fraceZ ~ A * A11 the cameras have a zoom
           facility, which is limited.

 Q.       I do not want to give evidence; I simply want to put
          to you what one can do with the zoom. - A. The zoom
          lenses on all the cameras can zoom in as far as
          possible. They are not perfect, they could be better
          Dut, of course, the expense limits the capability of
          the cameras.

Q.        You could, in fact, zoom in quite close, could you
          not, to people on the terrace? - A. I don't know which
          camera, I am sorry, and I don't know how close we can
                   certainly have in the past been able to
          identify people on the Kop.

Q.        Can I put to you simply that there is a facility there
          ior zooming in close so that you can actually see
          people s faces clearly if you choose so to do? - A. I
          would not know exactly.

Q#        f ! r n n ! S i r er USed the zoom facility? - A. Do you mean
          through the operator, sir?

Q.        Yes. - A. Yes of course I have used it.

Q.        The video cameras enable you to see the Leppings Lane
          terraces, first of all a frontal view, do they not? -
              u iWe can,t 8et a frontal view. We can get a
          slightly oblique view from a camera situated in the
          centre of the South Stand.

Q.        But as befit you can looking at the front of the
          terraces? - A. As best we can, yes.
                                                            50

                                                B. D. MURRAY


Q.   But you also have a camera, do you not, which enables
     you to view parallel to the front of the terraces and
     parallel to the back, in other words looking along the
     terrace? - A. I think it is slightly set back to the
     left, if you think of the Control Box.

Q.   But it does allow you to look along the terrace, as
     opposed to looking towards the front? - A. Yes, it
     does.

Q.   You also have access to a view of the Leppings Lane
     turnstiles? - A. Yes, the outside of the turnstiles*

Q.   And there is a view down Leppings Lane to the extent
     you have indicated? - A. Yes.

Q.   So you are in a position in the Control Box not only
     to see that which you can see with your own eyes of
     the terrace, but also, if you so choose, to have the
     cameras so operated that you can look at a particular
     part of the terrace if you want to do so? - A. Yes, I
     can identify, or the operator can identify, a
     particular part that we should look at.

Q.   Furthermore, in the Control Room you have access to,
     via your communications with the Club Control Room, at
     any time the numbers of spectators who have already
     come through any given set of turnstiles? - A. Yes, I
     do believe that is the breakdown.

Q.   It is a fact, is it not, that you do have that access?
     - A. I have the ability to go and ask how many people
     are in the ground, how many people have come through a
     particular turnstile, and I think groups of
     turnstiles.

Q.   You have in the Club Control Room a Police
     representative, do you not, at a semi-final? - A. Yes,
     there is a Police Officer there.

Q.   I think it was PC Guest on this occasion in 1989? - A.
     That is correct.

Q.   He has a link, does he not, is it by telephone with
     your Control Room? - A. He has, on the radio network
     and the telephone.

Q.   So at any time if you want to know numbers of those
     coming through a specific set of turnstiles, you can
     obtain it through that system through him? - A. Yes, I
     can get it through him.

Q.   You could, for example, at any given time find out
     exactly how many people have come through, for
                                            B. D. MURRAY


example, the bank of turnstiles A to G? - A. I think
that facility is available, yes.

Mr. Murray, you say "I think" as if this is a facility
you are not sure existed? - A. I am sure it will give
the whole of the Leppings Lane turnstiles, I am sure
it will give the individual turnstiles, but I am not
absolutely sure that it will give the particular banks
of turnstiles.

It is simply the case, is it not, of keeping a running
total of A to G and you could within moments get the
running total, could you not? - A. What I am saying,
sir, is we could get the individual totals from
turnstiles A, B, C, D, E, F and G, and I think, but I
don't know, we can get the ongoing total. Obviously
they can be added together to give a total, yes.

Whichever way you do it, it does not take very long to
find out, if you wish to know, how many people have
already come through A to G? - A. No, it does not take
very long.

You, as having a responsibility for monitoring the
build-up of the crowd, would want to know, would you
not, as you view the monitoring and build-up of the
crowd, how many people are in and how many people have
still to come, for example, on the Leppings Lane
terraces? That would have been an important piece of
information, would it not? — A. It could be very
useful, yes.

It is useful, is it not, for two reasons? It is
useful generally so that you can assess how speedily
people are arriving at the ground? - A. I have not
used it for that purpose.  It would tell me how many
people were in different sections of the ground at a
particular time.

It would be important to you in   the Control Box, would
it not, as far as your planning   goes, to know whether
or not the ground is filling up   according to your
expectations, you would want to   know that, would you
not? - A. Yes.

One of the problems which might arise, because you
have told us about delaying kick-off, is if there is a
lot of people who are yet to arrive and we are getting
very close to kick-off, that would be a problem you
could anticipate? - A. It would be a problem that
should be looked at, yes.

You do not simply have to look at the visual
impression from the Control Box, although that
                                           B. D. MURRAY

obviously helps. You can actually gain specific
information from the Club Control Room? - A. Yes, I
can gain that information from the Control Room.

You were, again as somebody who had been involved in
the planning, knowledgeable, I assume, of the
turnstile arrangements for each particular area of the
ground? - A. What do you mean by "knowledgeable", sir?

You would know, would you not, that those who were
entering the Leppings Lane terraces, the west
terraces,   their tickets would send them through
turnstiles A to G? - A. Yes.

You would know before the semi-final began in 1989
that, therefore, there were seven turnstiles for about
10,100 spectators for the Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
Yes, there are only seven turnstiles.

Did you, before the game, turn your mind to whether
you were satisfied that that number of turnstiles
could cope with that number of people? - A. Before
that particular event, I do not think it was something
I had particularly considered, no.

Be careful, are you saying you did not consider the
turnstile   arrangements with a view     to ensuring that
there was   a reasonable number of turnstiles forthe
number of spectators expected? - A. I don't think that
was anything to do with me, sir. I am sure that was
down to the Club and the people who organised the
event.

You yourself were in the Control Box monitoring the
numbers coming in, were you not, or you could see out
of the window looking at the build-up of the crowd? -
A. Yes, I was in the Control Box.

You would have in your mind that there might come a
time when you had to assess whether you could get all
the people who had yet to come into the ground by
kick-off? That is easily a consideration you might
have to make, is it not, an assessment? - A. It was a
consideration I did assess about 2.30.

So in order to make that assessment sensibly you would
have to have knowledge of the number of turnstiles the
people still to come had to go through? - A. To make
it expertly, yes.

Not simply expertly, to make any assessment you would
need to know it, would you not? - A. To make it
expertly, to break it right down to figures, yes.
                                           B. D. MURRAY

In order to make any assessment which would be worth
anything, you would need to know, would you not, the
number of turnstiles through which the people still to
come in a particular area had to go, otherwise you
could not make an assessment whether you would get
them all in? - A. Yes, that would be the ideal.

It sounds as if it is a surprising proposition. You
have told us ~ I have not come to the exact events of
the match itself but I will break into this for the
moment - there came a time, I think it was at 2.30 on
the day of the semi-final, that you were able to make
a judgment as to whether or not you would get the
people still to come through into the ground? - A.


In order to make that judgment sensibly you first of
all have to ask yourself which part of the ground they
are going to come into? - A. I would have had to look
at all areas of the Leppings Lane end, all the areas
of people who were still to come.




                     /Q.   I will come to ....
                                                          54

                                                B. D. MURRAY


Q. I will come to the particular evidence which you have
   given later, but it is a fact that in order for seven
   turnstiles to be used for some 10,000 people, you have
   got to have a flow of people with which the turnstiles
   can cope?   That must be obvious? - A. To get the people
   through the turnstiles, yes.

Q. Had you turned your mind to the numbers of people which
   the turnstiles could reasonably be expected to cope with
   over, say, an hourly period? - A. I only know the figures
   that were given to be, either by the club or Mr. Mole.

Q. This was before the 1989 semi-final? - A. This was before
   1988.

Q. What was the number per turnstile? - A. It was 1,000 per
   turnstile per hour.

Q. I will approach it on that basis.   If it is 1,000 per
   turnstile then you would know that in the last half hour
   at 1,000 per turnstile those seven A to G turnstiles
   could only cope with about 3,500 people? - A. Yes, those
   seven turnstiles could.

Q. That's right? - A. Yes.

Q. In order to make a sensible assessment, shall we say, at
   2.30, as to whether or not you are going to get all the
   people expected on the Leppings Lane terraces through
   those turnstiles, a very easy way of making that
   assessment is simply to find out at 2.30 how many people
   have already come through A to G? -A. Yes, it is.

Q. That is a fairly obvious way of approaching it, isn*t it?
   - A. Yes, it is.

Q. Let me go back to the second reason why knowing numbers
   still to come is important.   You have accepted a role,
   on behalf of the Police, to monitor the build-up of the
   crowd on the Leppings Lane terraces?   You have accepted
   that? - A. Yes, the Police have a role in that.

Q. If you know the numbers still to come you can look at the
   terraces, for example, and ask yourself the question: is
   there still room on the terraces themselves for this
   number of people?   You can make a judgment? - A, Well, I
   can try. I am not an expert as to how many people can
   get into how much space.

Q. No, but you can look in the terrace and see where the
   empty spaces are and where the full parts are, can*t you?
   - A. I can look at the distribution, yes.
               ■f
                                                           55

                                                  B. D. MURRAY


Q. It is important as far as crowd management goes, to look
   at distribution at the same time as knowing how many more
   people are still to come in a particular area? - A. Yes,
   I think you have got to look at the distribution and look
   at the people to come.

Q. If you know in advance, for example - just take a figure
   for the moment - that there are 2,000 people still to
   come shall we say on the Leppings Lane terraces and you
   can see where the full areas and where the empty areas
   are, the knowledge that there are 2,000 people still to
   come is a very important piece of information, isn't it?
   - A. I am sorry, but to look where the full areas are and
   where the empty areas are does not always follow because
   different parts ofthe ground do fill up first.

Q. Of course they do. When you can see the parts you are
   expecting to be filled up have been filled up and you
   know, for example, from the figures that there are about
   2.000 people still to come, you can make an assessment,
   and a sensible assessment, of where you want those other
   2.000 people to go for their own safety, can't you? - A.
   I can try and see whether I consider there is sufficient
   space for the people there.

Q. You would not want, as someone in the Control Box, an
   entry of a large number of people into a particular area
   which was full when there was another area which had
   spaces in it?   You would not want that, would you? - A.
   I would not want that, no.

Q. It would be part of the monitoring of the crowd, and the
   build-up of the crowd, that you would try to ensure that
   did not happen, would not it? - A. I don t know whether I
   can prevent that happening.   I cannot really prevent one
   part of the ground filling up before another*

Q. Were you not aware of the system operated by the Police
   in the past, that is, before 1989, if they so chose, of
   diverting fans from, shall we say, the centre pens to the
   side pens on the terrace? - A. What system was that, sir?

Q.   The system whereby in some way closing off the centre
     pens so as to ensure and direct people still to come into
     the side pens?    Were you not aware the Police operated
     that sort of system in the filling of the terraces? - A.
     No, I wasn't.

Q.   You    weren't? - A. No.

Q,   Are you saying that before you started the1989 semi­
     final you did not consider that there might come a time
     when you might need to divert people from the popular
     centre pens to the side pens? - A* I was there in 1988
                                                               56

                                                    B. D. MURRAY


     and I had seen the system work.   I had seen the terrace
     spread.   I had seen the centre pens fill up first and
     the raised area.

Q. I accept that.   What I want to know is whether as part
   of your monitoring, not that there would necessarily come
   this time but there might come the time when you are
   monitoring the terraces, that the centre pens would be
   full and you would want to divert people to the side
   pens? - A. I think there may well have come a time when
   that was necessary, yes.

Q. That is fairly obvious from the fact that the centre pens
   are the popular pens? - A. It is not obvious because it
   happened before.   It would be exactly the same, the
   people had spreadright across.

Q.    You misunderstand me. It is obvious   that it might
     happen?   Not that it did happen or was going to happen
     definitely, but it might happen? - A. It may have been
     necessary, depending on the amount of people there and
     the way the crowd was spread, to take some action.

Q.   Do you know Mr. Lock? - A. Yes, I know Mr.   Lock.

Q. Mr. Lock, of course, had carried on your role on an
   earlier occasion some years before? - A. Yes, he had.

Q. When you came in 1988 you were able to speak to him
   because he then had a capacity with the club, did he not?
   - A. I saw him in his capacity as working for Sheffield
   Wednesday Football Club.

Q. Do you accept, therefore, that as regards the monitoring
   of the crowd at a semi-final that it was necessary to
   keep an eye on the pens, and the filling of the pens, so
   that if it were necessary to close off the centre pens
   and feed people into the side pens, that could be
   organised? - A. I think at any event it is necessary to
   keep an eye on what is going on, and if one sees a
   particular problem to do something about it.

Q. I am sorry, I want to ask you whether you had turned your
   mind in advance in 1989 specifically to the Leppings Lane
   terraces to the possible need, before any signs of
   distress, before any pressures had arisen to such
   dangerous proportions there was distress, but at a time
   when the centre pens were, shall I say, comfortably full
   and there was plenty of space in the side pens, did you
   turn your mind to the fact there might come a time, a
   need, to divert people away from the centre pens to the
   side pens? - A. No, I did not consider that at all,
                 f
                                             B. D. MURRAY


You are saying that you did not turn your mind at all to
the control of the filling of the pens at the 1989 semi­
final, save if someone drew to your attention a
particular problem, is that right? - A. No, I did not say
that at all.   What I am saying is there was a system
whereby people spread along the whole of the terrace.
Before the 1989 semi-final I had not had any sort of
necessity to consider giving my mind to closing the
centre pens.

That is what I am asking you.   It sounds as if in
advance you had not even thought of the possibility of
the need to close off the full areas in order to make
sure people went into the empty areas? - A. What I am
saying is that I had not seen a need to close the centre
pens.

The only match you had experience of was one match, the
1988 match? - A. Of a capacity crowd, yes.

Are you saying that you did not know of any arrangement,
in advance, to deal with the situation that if the centre
pens, for example, became full, you could speedily take
action to divert people to the side pens? - A. Before the
event started I did not have anything in mind as to
closing the centre pens.   I had been there in 1988 and
1988 was based on a previously successful event.




       Q. Did you know that in 1988
                                                      B. D. MURRAY


Q. Did you know in 1988 steps had been taken to divert
   fans from the centre pens by closing off the tunnel? -
   A. No, I didn't know.

Q. It does come down to this then, and I want to
   understand you clearly, that you understood that there
   was no system in advance worked out by those policing
   the game from the Control Box to close off the centre
   pens if they became too full to divert fans to the
   empty pens? - A. I didn't know of any system in advance
   whereby to close off the centre pens.

Q. So, in other words, people were just left to their own
   devices unless there were signs of distress noted? - A.
   I do not know whether the word 'distress' is right but
   there may have come a time when I or someone else would
   have noticed that the centre pens were full and the
   crowd did not appear to be spreading in which case then
   some action would have had to be taken.

Q. Maybe we are not as far away as I thought we were.   If
   "there came a time when you noticed the centre pens were
   full and the crowd was not spreading by which I assume
   you mean there were spaces, and obvious spaces, in the
   side pens you would take some action? - A. If it was
   brought to my attention and I saw it myself.

Q. It would be important, would it not, to make sure
   somebody was monitoring that situation to make sure
   that if it did arise action could be taken? - A. I do
   not see that - I think that people are always
   monitoring the situation from the Control Box, from the
   West Stand, from the track, from everywhere.

Q. As far as your position in the Control Box is
   concerned, compared with everybody else, you have told
   us about the view you had from the video cameras, you
   have told us about the view you had from the windows,
   you have told us about your means of access to the
   figures, you in Control also have the means of
   communicating with people on the ground to organise
   action, do you not? - A. Yes, we do.

Q. You in that sense   are - and by you I mean everybody in
   the Control Box -   in a unique position compared with
   everybody else at   the ground because you are the co­
   ordinators of all   the information which I have put to
   you? - A. We have   more information than anyone else,
   yes.

Q. If I can then take you through the events of 1989,
   bearing in mind what you say is the responsibility in
   the Control Box for monitoring, do you accept the
                                                    B, D. MURRAY

   following facts; first of all do you remember the
   position round about two o'clock-ish, when Mr. Jackson
   I think visited you as regards the state of the build
   up at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Not particularly, no.

Q. Did you not notice round about two o'clock, perhaps
   2.15, at that stage, that in fact it was obvious that
   the Liverpool end was filling far more slowly than what
   you might have anticipated? - A. I would accept about
   that time there were many more Nottingham Forest
   supporters than Liverpool in the ground.

Q. There were more Liverpool fans than in fact, sorry,
   less Liverpool fans than you would have expected at
   that time? - A. I would have expected some more than
   there were, yes.

Q. At that stage if you had wanted to you could have
   called for the exact numbers who had entered the
   Liverpool turnstiles, could you not? - A. Yes, I could
   have.

Q. Indeed your evidence I think is that at two o'clock-
   ish, perhaps 2.15 we are talking about, the North Stand
   and the West Stand was about quarter full? - A. I think
   that is correct.

Q. As regards the terraces I suspect you would not even go
   that far, would you? - A. I cannot remember.  I cannot
   remember what I said.

Q. Certainly a quarter full would be the absolute tops,
   would it not? - A. I do not know what I have said, sir.

Q • Certainly that is my note but I may be wrong on it? -
    A. Probably about a quarter full.

Q. That means there would be some 18,000 people, Liverpool
   fans still to come on that assessment? - A. Those
   figures seem to be about right, yes.

Q. As I understand your evidence this was an assessment at
   about 2.15? - A. I think it would be about 2.15, yes.

Q. Was it not obvious at that time, from that moment
   onwards, that given the limited number of turnstiles
   which were being used at the Liverpool end that from
   then onwards you had to be very much alive to the build
   up of the crowd and what was happening? - A. I was
   watching the build up of the crowd.
                                                     B. D. MURRAY

Q. You only had 23 turnstiles for the whole 24,000
   Liverpool spectators, did you not? - A. Yes, there were
   23 turnstiles.

Q. You have agreed with me you only had 7 turnstiles for
   the 10,000 odd for the Leppings Lane terrace? - A.
   Initially, yes.

Q. It would be obvious, would it not, that if 18,000
   people were still to come at 2.15 that this was a
   matter to cause you concern at that stage? - A. I think
   18,000 is just about, the turnstiles could probably
   cope with just about that number.

Q. I will not go any further with whether that be a fair
   judgment or not because I have been through figures
   with you already and it would only waste time. You
   then receive a message at 2.17 from Mr. Marshall asking
   for the closure of Leppings Lane? - A. That is correct,
   yes.

Q. This is at a time when you know, because it is only two
   minutes later, that there is a good 18,000 people still
   to come? - A. Certainly a lot of people still to come,
   yes.

j. If we continue through with just looking at it
   factually, the closure of Leppings Lane itself was an
   unusual request? - A. Yes, it was unusual.

». Clearly you would assume it was something to do with
   the large numbers of people who were arriving? - A.
   Yes, it was to do with the number of people in Leppinas
   Lane, yes.                                           *

• Then at 2.30 with only half an hour to go you could see
  clear spaces, could you not, in the wing pens compared
  with the centre pens of the Leppings Lane terrace? - A.
  Yes, I could.

. What assessment did you make at 2.30 in terms of
  proportion of the numbers still to come for the
  Leppings Lane terraces? - A. I didn't make any
  assessment on proportion.

. Did you not think it important given that you only had
  half an hour to come, given that at 2.15 you knew that
  roughly about 18,000 or so people were still to come
  that it was obvious you should make an assessment to
  find out how many people were still to come by finding
  out the numbers? - A. I am sorry, I am not with you on
  that one.     ’
                                                                       61

                                                              B. D. MURRAY


        Q. At 2.30 this was the time that you made the assessment
           that you could get the people in by kick-off? - A. Yes.
    B   Q • Yet this was the time when there was clearly space in
            the wing pens? - A. Yes, I would have expected there to
            be space.

        Q. It was only quarter of an hour after you had mentally
           made the note that there would be three quarters of the
           people still to come? - A. Yes.

        Q. It was less than quarter of an hour after Mr. Marshall
           had asked for Leppings Lane to be closed? - A. Yes.

        Q. Did you not turn your mind at that stage to find out
           the numbers who had come through the turnstiles A to G?
           - A. I think we estimated at that stage that the ground
           was about half full at the Liverpool end, certainly the
           North Stand and the terraces and the West Stand was
           more than half full.

        Q. If the Leppings Lane terraces were only half full, how
           could you legitimately expect half the expected numbers
           still to come, that is to say 5,000 people, to get
           through 7 turnstiles in half an hour?

                  THE CORONER:   You do not have to answer that
             question.

                 THE WITNESS: I didn't mentally draw that
             particular comparison or proportion and I do not accept
             it was only 7 turnstiles right the way through.
             Initially it was 7 turnstiles but it may well have been
             that we could utilise other turnstiles for those
             people.

        Q.       MR. KING: Mr. Murray, you were in charge, as I
             understand it, in the Control Box of monitoring the
             numbers coming into the ground. You were the person
             giving the information, when asked, of your assessment
             of whether you could get them all in? - A. Yes, I gave
             him that information.

        Q. Are you saying that your information was based on an
           assumption at 2.30 that more than 7 turnstiles were
           being utilised for the Leppings Lane terracing? - A.
           No, I didn't say that at all. What I said was at that
           time 7 turnstiles were being utilised.  It may have
           been nearer the kick-off, nearer three o'clock, that if
           the West Stand people were all in we could have
           utilised other turnstiles.




H
                                                             62

                                                    B. D. MURRAY


Q. You would have to use other turnstiles to get 5,000
   plus other people in after half past two, would you
   not? - A. On the figures, yes, I would.

Q. Not simply on the figures, just knowing - never mind
   about what the exact figures were - that there were
   half still to come? - A. I am saying on the figures,
   yes.

Q. Did you start planning at 2.30, therefore, as regards
   this obvious matter that you were going to have to
   start thinking how you were going to get them all
   through and which turnstiles to open up to them? - A.
   No, I didn't start planning on that.

Q. You were in a position as indeed were all the people in
   the Control Box at 2.30 to see the position outside the
   turnstiles through the video monitor, were you not? -
   A. On the monitor, yes, we had a view.

Q. On any view you could see that there was a large crowd
   outside those turnstiles? - A. I could see that there
   was a large crowd, yes.

Q. This is a question which you do not have to answer.
   Did you not, when you looked back at that monitor to
   the Leppings Lane terrace, ask yourself the question
   whether there was room in the centre pens for the crowd
   outside? - A. I was looking at a crowd outside which
   was going to several different sections of the ground,
   the North Stand, the West Stand, the Leppings Lane
   terraces.

Q. But you were in a position, specifically because no
   doubt of Mr. Marshall asking that Leppings Lane should
   be shut, to have a specific look, were you not, at the
   turnstiles outside A to G? You could see that area? -
   A. No, I couldn't make any distinction between the
   numbers that were outside turnstiles A to G, 1 to 8, 10
   to 16. They were spread right across the enclave.

Q. Of course, you could not get the exact numbers but one
   thing you could see was that you could see it was
   thickly spread? - A. I did not consider that the crowd
   was any more dense in the areas A to G than it was
   across the whole enclave.

Q. I accept that. That density was a thick density, was
   it not? - A. At 2.30 I do not think it was, no.

Q. Is it not a fact that at 2.30 you could see that the
   crowd was thickly spread, and I use that expression
   advisedly, thickly spread across all the turnstile
                                                         B. D. MURRAY

 enclave at the Leppings Lane end? - A. I think there
 was a good crowd outside those turnstiles.

. Would you dispute the expression "thickly spread"? - A.
  I do not think it is my expression.  It is not one I
  would use.

      MR. KING: In the light of that, and I am trying
 to limit as much as I can the use of the transcript,
 could the witness, sir, look at page 79 of his Taylor
 evidence?

      THE CORONER:   Page 79?

      MR. KING:   Yes, sir.

      THE CORONER: We are going to show you this and I
 am going to explain again the rule about you not having
 to answer because I do not want you to be confused
 about this. The fact that you have given evidence
 before Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry does not mean you
 have either got to agree - because these are all
 incriminating questions - that what is stated is a
 correct record nor need you affirm it, so to speak.
 Both those aspects may tend to incriminate you and so
 by all means look at the letter.

      MR. KING: Letter H, sir. So that I do not waste
 time, could he just be handed 79, 80 and 81 because 80
 is very short and 81 is relatively short for my
 purposes.

      THE CORONER:   Yes.     You want him to read to?




                              /MR. KING.
                                               b   .   d   . Mu r r a y '


        MR. KING:   Sir, if he reads to "C” on page 81.

      THE CORONER:   Have you got that?     Start at the
 bottom of page 79 against "H".

      Is it "people going forward", is that the
 paragraph, Mr. King?

     MR. KING:      Yes, indeed.   Sir, just so I don't
mislead him:

If you look to letter "E" you can see that we are
dealing with 2.30 specifically.

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, in looking at that perhaps we
can look at the question before, because that is where
the description of the crowd comes, and then "the
spread of it is over the whole enclave".

     THE CORONER:    Starting reading at "G" then, on
page 79. - How   far do you want me to read?

        MR. KING:    Have you read to page 81C? - A. Yes, I
have.

Just go back and have a look at page 79H and then I
will ask you a question. - A. Yes.

I am asking you about your view of the crowd outside
the Leppings Lane turnstiles at 2.30 on 15th April,
1989, and what I suggested to you earlier was that what
you could see was that the crowd was thickly spread
across all the turnstile enclave? - A. Yes.

And you said to me that isn't a word or expression,
thickly spread,   which you wquld use? - A. It wasn't an
expression thatI thought    I would use but I did use it,
yes.

Do you therefore now accept, to save my going through
it all, that at 2.30 you could see that there was a
crowd thickly spread across the whole of the turnstile
enclave outside the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

So going back then to 2.30, given that at 2.30 you were
of the view that half the people had still to come -
that was your evidence to us already at the Leppings
Lane end? - A. Probably, yes.

Given that you could see this crowd thickly spread
across the whole of the turnstile enclave, you also
knew, didn't you, that the centre pens were from
experiencerthe most popular? - A. Yes, the centre pens
were more popular than the wing pens.
                                            B. D. MURRAY'


You also knew, didn't you, that you had a
responsibility for monitoring the build up of the crowd
on the Leppings Lane Terrace? - A. The build up of the
crowd?

On the terrace? - A. Yes, sir, I accepted that I had a
duty along with others to monitor the crowd.

You would be able to see at 2.30, wouldn't you, that
the centre pens compared with theside pens were
clearly being filled, compared with the side pens? The
side pens were hardly being filled up, isn't that the
position, and the centre pens were being filled up, at
2.30? - A. There were more people in the centre pens
than there were in the others, yes.

But it was more obvious than that even. Clearly the
centre pens were being filled, and the side pens there
were wide open spaces, weren't there, even at 2.30? -
A. No, I have said that there were more people in the
centre pens. There were a lot more people in the
centre pens than there were in the wing pens.

Right. Did you then at 2.30 consider that there might
come a need to divert this crowd which you could see
outside, when they came through into the Leppings Lane
Terrace, to divert them from the centre pens to the
side pens? - A. I didn't consider there was a need to
divert the crowd at all.

But I am not now talking about diverting it when you
open a large gate, I am talking about simply so as to
ensure that there was a reasonable distribution across
the terraces before dangerous pressures, crowd
pressures built up. Wasn't it obvious at 2.30 that you
should have that in mind? - A. No, I have said that at
that stage I did not consider it was necessary to
divert the crowd and I only knew from experience, or I
thought I knew from experience that in the past the
crowd had found its own level on the terraces.

I am sorry to press the point again, Mr. Murray, but
you only had one experience, which was 1988? - A. Yes,
sir, but that was based on success in the previous
year.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I think you have pressed
the point quite sufficiently.

     MR. KING:   I appreciate that.   I am trying to
move on in time anyway:

But at 2.30 at a time when you made an assessment of
the numbers still to come, and at a time when - was it
                                            B. D. MURRAY'


 at that time you told Mr. Duckenfield you thought you
 could get them all in? - A. It was about 2.30, yes.

So there was clearly a discussion between you as to the
numbers still to come at that time? - A. I don't know
whether it was a discussion or whether it was just
something I said to him.

And at that time coincidentally there was also a
discussion as to when one would delay kick-off? - A. I
think it was coincidental, yes.

It was at exactly the same time, wasn't it? - A. It was
about the same time, it wasn't exactly, about the same
time.

How did that come into discussion? Remind me, please,
Mr. Murray, as to when one would delay kick-off? Do
you know how it came about that was brought up? - A. I
think it was just about the way that you have put it
there, Mr. Duckenfield saying that to me.

But you would not have a discussion like that, would
you? You would not be interested in it unless you were
beginning to become concerned as to whether or not you
could get everybody in? - A. That was something I could
remember being spoken about, about 2.30.  It was my
intention to try and put everything I could remember
had occurred on that day into a form of statement, for
the information of the Public Inquiry. Everything that
I could remember that we had talked about, everything
that I could remember that had happened, I wanted to
bring to the attention of the Public Inquiry, and I
could recall that particular conversation happening.

Doesn't it sound as if the reason that came up in
conversation at 2.30 was that it was beginning to
become obvious in the Control Box that you might not
get everybody in still to come at 2.30? - A. I think it.
was just a question of Mr. Duckenfield getting his mirw
straight on the circumstances about delaying kick-off.

And the answer you gave was by reference to some
agreement, wasn't it, because you said it was what you
had agreed? - A. What I had spoken to him about before,
yes.

I am interested in the use of the word agreed, because
that is the expression you have used, isn't it? - A.
That is the expression I have used. Okay, as far as I
am concerned I used the word agreed.  I certainly
discussed it with Mr. Duckenfield, I told him the
scenario that a kick-off would normally be agreed.
                                           B. D. MURRAY


An agreement sounds as if in advance it has been worked
out a policy as to when you would delay kick-off and
that is fair, isn't it? - A. I would say that by agreed
I meant it was something that we had discussed before.

And it is a fact, isn't it, that all you told Mr.
Duckenfield as regards this agreement was that there
had to be a specific reason, an identifiable problem
for people not arriving, before you would delay kick-
off? That was the gist of what you were saying, wasn't
it? - A. I told him that was the usual situation with
delaying kick-off as far as I was aware.

There was no suggestion that you would abandon the
policy if in fact, albeit people had come too late
through their own fault, they were in difficulties
outside? There was no mention of that, was there? - A.
I don't think it was ever a rigid policy, it was the
only circumstances, the only thing I knew about when
kick-off would be delayed.

Since we are dealing with kick-off, do you remember -
you do remember, don't you - an invitation or
suggestion from, I think, P.C. Buxton that kick-off be
delayed? - A. Yes, sir, I recall that.

You told us that you thought that had come after the
gates had been opened? - A. I feel it must have.

Why do you say it must have? - A. Because of the timing
of it and the fact the players were coming onto the
pitch.

I say that because, I only put it to you, that you
could be quite wrong about that, on the basis - and I
don't know if you were at the Inquest when P.C. Buxton
gave his evidence? - A. No, I wasn't.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I think it is important that I
put this:

P.C. Buxton's evidence was that it was several minutes
after his request to delay kick-off that .he saw that
the crowd was being relieved outside the turnstiles by
the opening of the gates? - A. I can only accept that
when I heard that message was when Sergeant Goddard
replied immediately, "It's too late now, the players
are on the field".

Let me accept that for a moment. Why would it just be
too late because the players were on the field? Why
does that make it automatically too late to delay kick-
off? - A. It was too late in those circumstances, I
                                              B. D. MURRAY'


feel, that presumably P.C. Buxton wanted the kick-off
delayed for whatever reason I don't know.

To say "for some reason I don't know", you were aware
by that time, whatever it was, that there had been a
very large problem outside the turnstile area at
Leppings Lane, weren't you? - A. There is no doubt that
if we could have communicated to that crowd outside the
turnstiles that the kick-off had been delayed, and if
they had taken any notice of that communication, it may
have had an effect.

Mr. Murray, I want to take it in stages.  I want to
know why at the time you say it was, whenever it was,
that it was just too late to delay kick-off, merely
because the players were on the pitch? - A. It wasn't
merely because the players were on the pitch, it was
because the gates were open and the crowd had come in
by unauthorised means.

I understood - I may have totally misunderstood- that
you were saying, and that was the communication of
Sergeant Goddard, it was too late because the players
were on the pitch, so it is nothing to do with the
players being on the pitch then, it was too late? - A.
No. It doesn't make any difference whether the players
were on the pitch or not, apart from the fact that once
the players come out a cheer goes up naturally, and it
would be extremely difficult to try and convince
anybody after that stage that you had delayed the kick-
off.

But it is a fact, isn't it, Mr. Murray, that you should
not refuse to delay kick-off merely because the players
are on the pitch, if there is a crushing situation
outside? - A. I think I have already said that there
aren't any hard and fast rules at all about delaying
kick-off. There are no limitations. A kick-off can be
delayed whenever, for whatever reason.

Would you not agree that the statement, "It is too late
to delay kick-off, the players are already on the
pitch" sounds like just the application of a rigid
policy? - A. No, I don't.

You don't, all right.     Let me move on in time ....

        MR. MANNING:   In that case, sir, can we call
time?

        THE CORONER:   Yes - 10-past-3.

             f     (Short Adjournment)
                                                             69

                                                    B. D. MURRAY


      aoc M R * KING; M r * Murray, you have told us what your
      assessment was at 2.30 on 15th April as to whether or
      not you get numbers in and your assessment of the
      terraces. Between 2.30 and, shall we say, quarter-to
      3 did you monitor in any way the Leppings Lane
      terraces, have a look at it, the build-up on the
      Leppings Lane terraces between 2.30 and quarter-to 3?
      - A. I am sure that I would have looked at the
      Leppings Lane terraces and every part of the ground
      between that time.                             5

Q.    In looking at the Leppings Lane terraces, did nothing
      at all strike you as to the distribution of the fans
      at that time between 2.30 and quarter-to 3? - A. There
      was nothing I saw that caused me any concern at all.

Q.    Did you observe the marked disparity between the wing
      pens and the centre pens? - A. I can't recall noticins
      a marked disparity. It wasn't something that I recall
      particularly noticing.

Q.    So bad a disparity that it looked, for example, in Pen
      . ~ an<* y°u know what I mean by Pen 6, do you not7 -
      A. Yes, I do.

Q.   As if that had been set aside for segregation purposes
     when we know, of course, that it had not been? - A. I
     did hear that afterwards.

              CORONER: Mr. King, I think somebody said
     that. It does not necessarily mean that that is
     correct.

          MR. KING: I agree, sir. He is entitled to
     disagree with it, of course.

          THE CORONER: But if you put it so marked, then
     you are stating it as a gospel fact.

             MR. KING:   Sir, I was not there, as you well
     know.

             THE CORONER: Indeed, that is why I said it.

          MR. KING: I am trying to fit this witness's
     evidence in with other evidence, of course, sir. At
     the end of the day I do not have to assess the
     evidence.  I am in that happy position.

             THE^CORONER:   Yes, a very happy position.

          MR. KING: But, Mr. Murray, would you regard
     yourself as the principal Officer in the Control Box
     who was monitoring the build-up of the crowd? - A. I
                                           B. D. MURRAY

 was in charge of the Control Box. I would be looking
 at the crowd.  I would be looking at everything. I
 would be looking all around.

I cannot press it any further than this. It is your
evidence and we must assess it, but you are saying
that nothing registered with you at all between 2.30
and, shall we say, quarter-to 3 as to the distribution
of the spectators between the centre pens and the side
pens? - A. I think what I said was that nothing caused
me concern.  I would only qualify that by saying I do
not know what effect or how long the Control Room was
disrupted when the radio went down.

The radio was out of operation from - I do not want to
put words into your mouth. How long would you say, in
terms of minutes, was the radio out of operation in
the Control Box? - A. I don't know, but I think I have
estimated it between a minute, two minutes. It could
be longer, I do not know.

May it seem a long time, but a relatively short time?
- A. I consider it was a short time. I don't know how
long.

There is a message, is there not, which is logged at
2.42 where PC Bichard is radioing, I think, to Force
Control outside the ground at Hammerton Road and is
saying the radio is down? - A. Yes, I have seen that
message.

?°.Hhat PlnPoints it at 2.42? - A. Which is between
2.30 and 2.45.

Certainly the radio was back in business by the time
Mr. Marshall made his first request for the gates to
be opened? - A. I think so, yes.

I just want to return briefly to make sure I
understand your evidence as to the distribution of the
fans. You did not see anything unusual which caused
you concern, but could you tell us this. It did
register, did it, that the centre pens were clearly
fuller than the side pens? - A. Yes.

Did it register with you - this is between 2.30 and
quarter-to 3 - that the centre pens were markedly more
full than the side pens? - A. I think that the centre
pens and the north-west terrace were fuller than the
other parts of the terrace. I wouldn't say that the
centre p^ns were any fuller than the north-west
terrace or vice-versa.
                                                               71

                                                  B. D. MURRAY

 Q.    I am really considering the centre pens as opposed to
       the side pens? - A. Yes, I know.

 Q.     I am not suggesting for one moment that you did a head
       count, but do you think you looked at the west
       terraces at about 2.45, something like that? - A. I
       would think I did. I was looking all over.

 Q.   I am not suggesting that you necessarily would have
      formed the conclusion that pens at that stage had a
      specific number in them, but the centre pens on any
      view were full at that stage, were they not, at 2.45?
      - A. I can't recall. I can't recall sufficiently to
      describe them as full or nearly full.

 Q.    I am not suggesting that you cannot argue with me - I
      know there are arguments about whether you could see
      an empty space here, or an empty space there - but
      clearly compared with the side pens, the centre pens
      wer® full and the side pens clearly had space, that
      would be fair, would it not? - A. There were a lot
      more people in the centre pens than the side pens.

Q.    I cannot take that any further. Even at that stage,
      this is before any request to open gates comes, was it
      not within your mind, did you not turn yourself to the
      question of the need to divert any people coming in
      even in a regular route to the side pens as opposed to
      the centre pens? - A. It hadn't crossed my mind to
      take a course of action such as that, no.

Q.    As I understand your evidence earlier today, that
      really was not part of the system you thought you were
      operating is that right? - A. To divert?

Q.    Yes. - A. No, I had no prior planning for it and it
      did not cross my mind at that time.

Q.    At 2.40 there was a request from Inspector Hand-Davi
      was there not, a mounted Officer, for mounted Officers
      to go to the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, he asked for
      mounted Officers from the other end of the ground.

Q.    Upon that you sent round a mounted serial, did you
      not? — A. Sergeant Goddard was very quick, he straight
      away asked Sergeant Salisbury to make available to
      Leppings Lane all the horses that he could spare from
      the Penistone Road end. I dispatched a standby serial
      of foot Officers from the gymnasium.

Q.    The foot ^Officers which you sent round were Inspector
      Delaney's serial then? — A. Inspector Delaney, yes.
                                             B. D. MURRAY

 You also got a message around that time about the
 i            US^d °utslde Leppings Lane? - A. A little
 later I think the request came for a tannoy message.

 You were able to see on the video the condition and
 state of the crowd outside the Leppings Lane
 turnstiles, the enclave which you have described? - A.
 It was about that time that the video operator used
 his zoom lens and zoomed in on one of the horsemen who
 was surrounded by a crowd of people.

How was the density of the crowd at that stage, that
is about 2.AO, changing compared with what you had
noted at about 2.30 when you were making your
assessment as to whether you would get everybody in? -
A. That is very difficult because at 2.30 I had an
overview of the whole of the enclave and Leppings
Lane* At 2*40 the video zoomed in, as I say, on a
horseman and the people around him. But my impression
from that was that the crowd was more densely packed.

Right, so at 2.AO we could summarise the position in
the Control Box to your knowledge as this, could we
not, that at about 20 minutes before, or just over 20
minutes before, at around 2.17, there had been the
request from Mr. Marshall to close Leppings Lane? ~ A.
Yes, that is correct.

     there had been a re<Juest for further mounted
Officers to be sent? - A. At about 2.A0, yes.

There is the sending of the reserve serial, there is a
request for the tannoy message and you have seen the
crowd in your perception getting a lot denser. Taking
all those factors together, was it not at that stage
obvious that there was a problem outside the turnstile
area in terms of the numbers of people and getting
them into the ground? - A. I think we were getting t'i
a situation then where there was obviously a problem
J?fSause   **ke fact of the request for mounted
Officers, as you say, the despatching of the serial
and the messages that were to be passed.

At the   same time you were able to see, by just looking
at the   monitors, the state of the west terraces? - A.
Yes, I   could see if I looked round the ground how many
people   were on the terrace.

You then have the malfunction of the radio system for
about two minutes or so, that is what you have told
us. - A.fl think we are possibly talking about two
minutes being down air time. Just how long the place
was disrupted, I do not know. The Communications
Officer was a large, heavily built man and, like I
                                            B. D. MURRAY

say, it was not just losing the air time;   it was
actually the disruption to the control.

I understand that, but none the less the radio is back
on after that period of time, that short period of
time? - A. Yes, the radio comes back on.

As regard then available manpower, by which I mean
what was available to you in the Control Box to call
up for assistance if you so wanted, the position was
this, was it not, that before Mr. Marshall's first
request for opening the gates, but just before, you
got the message from Inspector Bennett asking for
assistance at Leppings Lane, is that not right? - A. I
cannot say whether that message came before or after,
but Inspector Bennett certainly asked for assistance.
He was on top of the turnstiles. Again the camera
picked him up and I could see him. He asked for
assistance down at Leppings Lane.

Mr. Murray I do not want to delay matters too much - I
am conscious of time - but you have been able in the
past, have you not, to suggest that it was about the
time of Mr. Marshall's message, immediately before or
shortly before, that Inspector Bennett asked for his
assistance? - A. I will accept that if I have said
that somewhere else.

I do not want to mislead you. - A. I can't remember, I
am sorry.

If you did say it, for example, to Lord Justice
Taylor, you would accept that, would you? - A. If I
did say it, it was fresher in my mind than it is now.




                          /Q.   I will move on
                                                             74

                                                 B. D. MURRAY


Q. I will move on but for those who want to check it, it is
   page 90 of the transcript, at letter F.    We have this
   picture that Inspector Bennett asked for assistance at
   Leppings Lane and around the same time you get
   information that in fact there are a number of spare
   Serials in the gymnasium?   That is a message which comes
   through from Inspector Sewell? - A . If I can just
   explain, the radio, of course, is on talk-through so that
   everybody can hear the messages being passed.    Inspector
   Sewell picked it up from the radio message from Inspector
   Bennett to Control.

Q. Yes. - A. He came through on the telephone before we
   could ring him and said he had spare Serials of D
   Division Officers who should have taken up a standby
   position in the gym after quarter to three.

Q. How many Serials did he have available? - A. He had ten
   Serials.

Q. Of how many men? - A. Well, he had ten Serials;  they
   were a Sergeant and eight.   I asked him to send five and
   fifty.   He actually sent, I think, six Serials, which is
   six Sergeants and forty-eight.

Q. So there were in fact available to you, if you had chosen
   to use them, up to eighty men, ten Serials with eight
   Officers? - A. Yes.

Q. You despatched to Inspector Bennett six Serials of eight,
   that is forty-eight? - A, Yes.

Q. This is before any instruction was given to open the
   gates? - A. Yes, I think it was before the gates were
   opened.

Q. Therefore, before the gates were opened, as regards
   available manpower to you in the Control Box there was
   the reserve Serial which had already been sent ahead -
   Inspector Delaney's? - A. That is correct.

Q. There was the eighty men who you were told were in the
   gymnasium, of which forty-eight were despatched? - A.
   Yes, I asked for five and fifty.

Q. Of course there were the existing Serials on the
   concourse? - A. Yes.   The despatching of the Officers
   down to the Leppings Lane end was to try and retrieve the
   situation which was existing outside.

Q. I want just to discover the available manpower*    You are
   helping us very fairly with it#    Let me take it in
   stages.   Hadf Inspector Delaney's Serial been sent to any
   particular part of Leppings Lane? - A. I did not give
                                                          75
                                                           *    •


                                                 B. D. MURRAY


   them a particular part.   I sent them down to the
   Leppings Lane end.

Q. What about the one sent to Inspector Bennett?   Were they
   sent to any particular area? - A. They weren't sent to a
   particular area by me.   They were asked to go down to
   the Leppings Lane end.

Q. They would approach the end from within the ground? - A.
   I would have expected them to have gone along the
   concourse behind the North Stand.

Q. They would therefore end in a position whereby they could
   gain access to the concourse area at the Leppings Lane
   end? - A. If they had gone that way, yes, they would.

Q. Of course we still had left in the gymnasium the four
   Serials which had never been sent? - A. I retained those
   as reserves.

Q. Given that is the manpower, let me now deal with timings.
   You would accept, I am sure, there was a time gap between
   Mr. Marshall first asking for the gates to be opened and
   the instruction to open them? - A. Yes, there was a gap.

Q. The instruction to open them, of course, was the
   instruction which led to Gate C being opened for what we
   call the second time? - A. Yes, Gate C was opened when
   the instruction was sent through.

Q. We know there were two openings and the first one was not
   one you were expecting?   That is the one you saw open
   for a short period and then closed again? -A. Yes, that
   is correct, it did.

Q. What we call the second opening was at 2.52? - A. I will
   accept that time, yes.

Q. The time of Mr. Marshall's first message, the first
   message he gave, seems to be accepted to be 2.57.   Woulci
   you accept that? - A. I have to accept that if it can be
   proved.   It seemed only two or three minutes between the
   first request and the second request, but I will accept
   whatever times have been proved.

Q. If - I mean, it is a matter of evidence - but if it is
   evidence, and accepted, that the first message from
   Mr. Marshall is 2.47 and the order to open the gates led
   to the authorised opening at 2.52 of Gate C, that is a
   time gap of five minutes? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. Indeed, as regards Gate A, I don't suppose you know the
   times of the fopening of Gate A yourself? - A. I only seem
   to think that Gate A came soon after the other requests.
                                                          76

                                                B. D. MURRAY


Q. The request to open Gate A was after Gate C had been
   opened, wasn't it, the authorised opening? - A. Yes, it
   was.

Q. So it was after 2.52.   The request to open Gate A, and
   the order to open it, followed on very quickly? - A. Yes,
   the request came in, and the authority was given almost
   straight away.

Q. If, and it is a matter of evidence, if Gate A was opened
   at 2.58, if that be the case, then there would have been
   eleven minutes between Mr. Marshall's first request to
   open the gates at 2.47 and the opening of Gate A? - A. If
   the times are right it has got to be eleven minutes, yes.

Q. Dealing with the five minute period between 2.47 and
   2.52, when Gate C was opened in the unauthorised way, how
   many people came through from your view? - A. I think I
   estimated 150/200, but I did not see it open.   I only
   saw part of it.

Q. Within those five minutes Mr. Duckenfield was having to
   make the decision whether or not to authorise the opening
   of the gates, was he not? - A. Yes, he was having to do
   that, sir.

Q. You ultimately had to press him for a decision? - A. I
   did say to him that as far as I was concerned a stage had
   been reached when it had to be opened.

Q. You said to him, "Are we going to open the gates or not?"
   - A. Yes, I did - words to that effect.

Q. That is something you remember because it clearly sticks
   in your mind? - A. I do remember, yes.

Q. Was the impression you were gaining that Mr. Duckenfield
   was uncertain in his mind as to what to do? - A. I don't
   think I gained that impression.   I think it was just a
   question, as far as I was concerned, that the time had
   come when we had to open the gates.

Q. During those five minutes it is right, of course, that as
   regards those five minutes no instructions were sent out
   from the Control Box as regards any sort of reception
   committee - reception Serials - for the people who would
   come in upon the opening the gates? - A. I don't think
   anyone was given specific instructions to receive the
   people coming in.

Q. As a matter of fact, no instructions were sent out to any
   of the Serials we have talked about, saying, "The gates
   are about to (be opened.   Position yourselves here,
   there, or what have you."?
                                                            7?
                                                  B. D. MURRAY '


          THE CORONER:   This is another one which I am going
     to refresh your memory on.

          THE WITNESS:   Yes.   Well, no instructions were
     given to that effect, but like I have said, the radio was
     operating on the talk-through mode and every Officer with
     a radio could hear messages going backwards and forwards
     from Control and whoever they were talking to.

Q.        MR. KING:   As a matter of fact there was no
     specific instruction sent out? - A. I didn't send an
     instruction out, no.

Q. It follows from that there was no instruction, for
   example, to direct them in any particular way for anybody
   coming through the gates? - A. I did not give any
   instructions to direct people.

Q. There were no instructions, obviously, from that to close
   off the entrance to the tunnel? - A. I gave no
   instructions to close the tunnel.

Q. As a matter of fact, in those five minutes you clearly
   had the manpower available to utilise for the purpose of
   closing off the tunnel if you had wanted to?   You had
   the manpower there, didn*t you? - A. If I could have got
   the manpower to the tunnel in time I would have thought
   it was possible.

Q. There were five minutes between the first request and the
   opening of Gate C, all right?    That is long enough, more
   than long enough, to get the Serials we have already
   described in a position, if you had wanted to, outside
   the tunnel? - A. One would have hoped so.    I heard a
   Sergeant in one of the Serials speaking here two or three
   days ago and he obviously never got to the Leppings Lane
   end.   I heard him say he made his way along the track
   and stop behind the goals.    I cannot say.   I would hope
   that if I had been able to identify a particular task for
   Officers at the gymnasium to do, I would have hoped that
   they may have been able to get there in time, but I
   cannot say.

Q. In any event you had already sent ahead not only the
   reserve Serial of Mr. Higgins', there had already been
   sent ahead the six times eight Serials to Inspector
   Bennett? - A. Those are the Serials I was talking about,
   just now.   One of them did not get there, obviously.

Q. Those forty-eight men, the six times eight, had already
   been despatched before the instruction to open the gates?
   - A. I would have hoped so, sir, but as I say, one of the
   Sergeants wasfin here saying he never got there.
                                                            7 8*   •


                                                  B. D. MURRAY


Q. You know of nothing yourself to tell us about which gives
   you any reason to think you did not have the manpower -
   if it had been so decided - the manpower to utilise
   before Gate C was opened, or any of the gates were
   opened, for the purpose of closing off the tunnel,
   directing fans and so forth? - A. I think I could
   probably have got the manpower to attempt to do that task
   and got them down to the tunnel in time if it had crossed
   my mind.

Q. Before the order for the gates to be opened, it was known
   to you in the Control Box that there was a large crowd in
   the enclave outside the turnstile area at the Leppings
   Lane end? -A. Yes, I could see there was a large crowd
   outside.

Q. You were in a position at that stage, in the five minute
   period between 2.47 and 2.52, to observe the state of the
   West Terraces, weren't you? - A. I was in a position to
   be able to observe them, yes.

Q. To be fair to you, Mr. Duckenfield in the Control Boxwas
   in a position to look first of all at the monitor showing
   the Leppings Lane turnstiles, wasn't he? -A. He was in
   the same situation as I was.

Q. Just as you could see there was a large crowd outside,
   you have no reason to doubt that he also could see it,
   have you? - A. No, I have no reason to doubt it.

Q. You were in a position from the Control Box to see the
   state of the Leppings Lane terraces and Mr. Duckenfield
   was too? - A. I would think we could both have looked at
   the terraces and seen the state of them, yes.

Q. If I can just show you for a moment photographs 509, and
   511 - 509 is probably the best we are going to do for
   about this time.

         MR. GRIFFITHS:   C.509, sir.

Q.        MR. KING:   Mr. Murray, this is a photograph which
     shows at 2.52, all right? - A. Yes.

Q. I would have liked to have shown you one at 2.51, but
   that is the best I can do.   I need to show you C.511 and
   C.326.A for the purpose of looking at the side pens.
   Just look at 511, which is two minutes later. - A. Yes.




               Q.f I am sorry, I will have to
                                                                 79
                                                    B. D. MURRAY

Q. I am sorry but I will have to come back to 509 for a
   moment. On 509 we can see the beginnings of the wing
   pen, pen 6? - A. Yes, we can.
                                                             r


Q. On 509 all we can see is a corner of it but such corner
   as we can see clearly, it would be fair to say, it
   looks as if it is almost completely empty apart from
   two or three people? - A. It looks very sparse in that
   particular part I can see on this film.

Q. Again under the Control Box the area leading into pen 1
   and leading into pen 2, although there is clearly more
   people at the back again it looks very sparse to the
   side of pen 1 and down to the front? - A. Yes, there
   are less people there but that is the part of the
   ground where I expect there to be less people.

Q. I accept that. Then to 511 we get a better view of pen
   6 two minutes later? - A. Yes.

Q. If we can move to 326A we get an even better view of
   pen 6 at some five minutes later? - A. Yes.

Q. Going back to the position just before the order was
   given to order the gates to be opened, because we know
   gate C was opened at 2.52, if one looked at the west
   terraces it would be clear that pen 6 had marked empty
   spaces in it? - A. From where that photograph is taken,
   yes.

Q. Even without the photograph, the position on the
   photograph, it must have been obvious, must it not,
   from your use of the cameras you had from the Control
   Box that pen 6 was markedly empty? That was not
   difficult to see, was it? - A. From the views that we
   were getting from the cameras, from the views that I
   could see from the Control Room, it wasn't obvious.

Q. At the end of the day that will be a matter of
   evidence. You sure saying that from the Control Box
   with your use of the videos, the cameras, and you had
   the ability to look along as we have already described?
   - A. I think you have got to look at the individual
   cameras. I think the colour camera was unfortunately
   focussed on the problem area in the Kop and that is
   where it stayed until about three o'clock. The camera
   on the gantry next to the Control Box was unfortunately
   not working up to its potential. I do not know how
   that affected it but I can see from the angle that that
   photograph is taken, 326A, yes, there is a lot of room
   on the front of pen 6 but I didn't have that view and
   if I had had that view it might have affected my
   decisions.
                                                         £. D. MURRAY


Q. If you had had that view, which decision would have
   been affected? - A. I don't know.

          THE CORONER:   I think that is hypothetical.

Q.        MR. KING: Before the gates were opened, if one
     looked at the west terraces, would you accept this much
     or not; that there was an obvious difference between
     the state of the centre pens and the side pens, would
     you have said that much? - A. I think I have said that
     there were a lot more people in the centre pens and the
     north west terrace than there were in the other parts
     of the terrace.

Q.    You have agreed with me that   there was a large crowd
     outside the gates? - A. Yes,    there was a large crowd of
     people outside the gates.

Q.    In respect of which the order was about to given for
     them to be opened? - A. Yes.

Q. Once in the concourse area, whichever gates were
   opened, those people had to go somewhere, did they not?
   - A. Yes, they had to get into the concourse first away
   from the crush.

Q. Then they had to go somewhere into the ground, did they
   not? - A. Yes.

Q. This is a question you do not have to answer. Before
   the order for the gates to be opened was made did you
   ask yourself the question, "Where are these people
   going to go when we open the gates?”? - A. I can't
   recall asking myself the question. All I can recall is
   trying to relieve the injury and suffering that was
   taking place outside the gates in the concourse in the
   enclave in front of the turnstiles. That was the
   problem.

Q. It must have been obvious to anybody who turned his
   mind to the question of what was going to happen after
   the gates had been opened that those people had to go
   somewhere on to the terraces? - A. What was obvious to
   me is that we had a terrible problem outside.
   Experienced Officers were letting us know that people
   were being injured, likely to be killed. We had never
   had anything like it before. There was tremendous
   pressure to take a course of action to relieve that and
   that course of action was taken. Nothing else was
   obvious.
                  r
                                                      B. D. MURRAY


Q. So your evidence is that you yourself never considered
   where these people were going to go if these gates were
   opened? - A. I did not consider they were going to go
   in any particular direction.

Q. Did you consider where they were going to go?     Did the
   question enter your head.

          THE CORONER: Mr. King, forgive me, but I think it
     is at least the third time in this particular series
     that you have asked the same question and he has given
     you the same answer.

          MR. KING: I apologise, sir, I thought he was
     saying something different.

          THE CORONER:   It is difficult for you I know.

          MR. KING: I thought he was saying something
     different and I apologise for that.

          THE CORONER: I thought he said, and let me make
     sure I have got it right, that the question of where
     they were going to go did not cross his mind.

          MR. KING: I thought he had said that and I
     thought he was saying something different just then.      I
     apologise.

Q.        THE CORONER:   That is right, Mr. Murray, is it? -
     A. Yes, sir.

          MR. MANNING: Sir, I was about to say, I am
     writing and my learned friend obviously is not but I
     will read him out the two replies that have already
     been given in answer to that question.  I am sure the
     shorthand writer could read it back if my learned
     friend needs it.

          THE CORONER:   I am satisfied we do not need to go
     over that again.

Q•        MR. KING: I misunderstood you. I thought you
     said in the end that you did not consider which
     particular direction they were going in but what you
     are saying is, and I accept it, that you did not
     consider where they were going to go at all? - A. They
     were going to go in through the gates.

Q. After that the question of where they were going to go
   did not cross your mind, we have established that? - A.
   It did not crbss my mind that they were going to go in
   any particular direction.
                                                  B. D. MURRAY



     MR. KING: As long as everybody is happy that
means the same thing, so be it.

     THE CORONER:   That is what he has said.

     MR. KING: You would agree with me though that
they would have to go somewhere? - A. Once into the
ground they had to go somewhere else, yes.

Do you know yourself, and please say yes or no, as to
whether or not Mr. Duckenfield in the five minutes
between the first request and the order to open the
gate, considered the question of where the spectators
were going to go if the gates were opened? - A. I do
not know that, sir.

Going back to the view of the terraces, and you have
told us you did not see this which is why I have to put
it in this way, if it was obvious - and you do not
agree - from the Control Box before the gates were
opened and the order was given that there was plenty of
space in the side pens and little or no room in the
centre pens, if that had been      obvious but Iaccept you
say it was   not, you would not    have wanted, would you,
the people who were still outside the gates who were
going to be let into the ground when the gates were
opened, you would not want them to have gone into the
centre pens?

      MR. MANNING: Sir, I have to say I do not think
that that is a fair or proper question.    If, as my
learned friend has already said, the witness does not
accept the premise from which that particular question
starts but    then says, "If you     did accept itthen what
would have    been the position?", it seems tome that he
must work from the situation that the witness starts
from.

     THE CORONER:   I agree with you.

     MR. KING: If you in the Control Box are
monitoring a terrace and you know that a large number
of people sure about to enter through a large series of
gates, do you not accept that the question you have to
ask yourself in that situation, and the obvious
question you have to ask yourself is, where on the
terraces are we going to let this large number of
people go to?

     THE CORONER: Mr. King, I am very sorry, I do not
want to interrupt but we have dealt with this four
minutes ago. He gave a clear reply as to what he
                                                 B. D. MURRAY


thought or did not think at the time. There is
absolutely no point in doing it again.

     MR. KING: I am entitled to ask, sir, and I do not
accept it as a pure hypothesis, because it is important
to know what this witness in his experience can tell us
about policing at matches. I am entitled to ask him
whether or not he agrees or does not agree that if the
position is that side pens have plenty of space and
centre pens do not that in that situation he would want
to take steps to prevent a large number of people about
to come in from getting into the centre pens.  I do not
understand why I am not entitled to put that question
to him.

     THE CORONER: Are you wanting to ask him based on
his experience? I suppose if you put it like that,
purely hypothetically.

     MR. MANNING: As long as it is understood, sir,
that it is purely hypothetical because the Officer has
used the word on more than one occasion that this was
unprecedented. That in any usage of the word means
that he had never ever known it to happen before which
means, therefore, if he is drawing on experience his
experience cannot help him. Therefore, how can he
possibly answer the question?

    MR. KING: Mr. Murray, when the order was given
there was no specific order given as to which gates,
was there? - A. From what I can recall, no, sir.

You accept, do you, when gate C was opened that the
crowd coming through gate C, the first thing they would
see ahead of them as regards the direction into the
ground would be the tunnel? Do you accept that? - A. I
know that now, yes.

You say you know that now as if you did not know it in
1989 but as regards the gate which we know as gate C
and I am not now specifically worrying about the letter
but where it was and if Mr. Griffiths could just point
it out to us, that gate, gate C, through which on the
instruction which was going to be opened, once that was
opened and people came through that gate the only thing
that people could see in front of them as regards
getting into the ground would be the tunnel, would it
not? “ A. I have said that I can see that now but at
the time I couldn't draw the sort of route that people
coming through an unexpected exit gate would take when
they got into the ground.  I don't know that end of the
ground that ihtimately.
                                                B. D. MURRAY

You had been round the ground before, had you not? - A
Yes, I had.

You would know the gates to which the reference was
being made by Mr. Marshall presumably? - A. I knew
there were three large gates at that end of the ground.
I didn't know exactly what was in front of each gate or
where they opened on to.




                        /Q. You knew..
                                           B. D. MURRAY’


You knew that they would open onto the concourse? - A.
Yes, I did.

Are you saying that you did not even know that one of
them entered into the concourse immediately behind
turnstiles A-G? - A. I knew that one of the gates
entered that concourse, yes.

And you knew that before the beginning of the match on
15th April, 1989, didn't you? - A. Yes, I am not trying
to deny that.

Therefore you can confirm, can't you, that anybody
coming through that gate leading onto the concourse
behind A-G, what is immediately in front of them is the
tunnel, isn't it? - A. I am saying to you that now I
know and I will accept that, but what I am saying is
before that event I didn't know the Ground that
intimately that I could see what was immediately in
front of each exit gate, each turnstile. No, I didn't
think that that was the obvious thing that would face
people coming through that gate.

Well, I can't pursue that any further.

     THE CORONER:   No, I don't think you can. I want
to stop for a few minutes because we are going to go on
until 4.30. Can I say we will go on until 4.30 today.
If need be we are going to sit on the Saturday, so make
arrangements - not the whole of the Saturday, of
course. That is not popular with me, let me tell you,
and it is not going to be popular with anybody but if
we have to we have got two Saturdays left before the
end of the month, I want us to conclude this Inquest
before the end of the month, and if need be we will do
that, so make the necessary arrangements. We will go
on until 4.30 every day, as far as I can see, and
Friday we are going to have to treat as a full working
day this week, certainly.

     Let's have a quick break until 5-past, but we are
stopping at around 4.30, we are not going on and on.

                (Short Adjournment)

     THE CORONER:   Before we continue, Mr. King I have
tried to give you as much latitude as possible and I
hope you accept that, and I have never tried to prevent
you asking whatever is appropriate, but if you could
try and focus in.

     MR. KING:   I agree, sir. The reason why we have
gone a bitrlonger than normal is, of course, we are
dealing with vital events at this stage.
                                            B. D. MURRAY


      THE CORONER:   I know, I appreciate that and that
 is why I have not wanted to hinder you more than I need
 to.

      MR. KING:   I don't intend to be as detailed in
 subsequent matters.

Can I just make sure I understand, as quickly as
possible, what your state of knowledge was on 15th
April, Mr. Murray, as regards the layout of the Ground.
You would know, wouldn't you, that there was a tunnel
which was a centre tunnel leading onto the West
Terraces? - A. Yes, I knew there was a tunnel there.

And you knew where it was positioned in the Ground? -
A. I knew it was at the Leppings Lane, yes.  I knew it
was in the concourse.

Did you also know that the centre pens tended to be the
most popular pens? - A. I knew that the centre pens
tended to be the most popular pens?      I knew, yes,
the centre pens were the most popular.

Had you yourself ever gone down the tunnel yourself,
walked down it? - A. Just walked down the tunnel, yes,
I would think I had walked down the tunnel.

You would know therefore that it had a marked gradient
near the end of it? - A. I can't recall being aware of
that.  I don't know whether I walked down it or up it,
I can't remember.  If you realise that I haven't
policed the Ground, I haven't been on the Ground when
events were taking place.  I have walked round the
Ground when it was empty on more than one occasion and
taken in what I could see.

Let me go on to after the decision to open the gates
had been made and the order had been given. You in the
Control Box were able to see the gate C opened and
being in a state ofopenness for about five minutes,
weren't you? - A. I could see that the gate was open
and people were coming through, yes.  I don't know how
long I watched it.

We know that it was   open from 2.52 and 6 seconds to
2.57 and 40 seconds, so we know it was open for about
five minutes? - A. Yes, well I will accept that.

And you would be in a position to see during those five
minutes what was happening as regards seeing people
coming through the gates, wouldn t you, gate C? - A. I
do recall seeing people coming through the gate.
                                            B. D. MURRAY'


 And you were able to see, if you were watching, a
 steady stream of people coining through the gate over
 that five minute period? - A. I recall seeing a lot of
 people coming through the gate, yes.

At that stage, and this is a different question from
the one before, because I am now asking you as to your
considerations after gate C was opened, at that stage,
at any time during that five minutes, did it ever enter
your head at that stage where that throng of people
were going to? - A. Yes, I considered that people would
go all over, onto the terraces, into the stand, into
the concourse.

No, I am sorry, I am talking now about those people you
could see on the monitor entering gate C into the
concourse area you could see on the monitor? - A. I am
talking about people coming into the Ground, yes, that
I could see.

Those people coming in over that five minute period,
you could see on the monitor were entering the area of
the Ground which was bordered on one side by a wall
with a gap in it, you knew that, didn't you? - A. Yes,
I did.

And you could see from the monitor, therefore, the area
they were entering was that area which was in front of
the tunnel, you would know that? - A. I knew the tunnel
was in that particular part of the concourse.

What reason if any did you have to think that the
people entering through that gate in that throng would
go sideways through the gap in the wall, that is the
wall dividing the A-G concourse from the 1-16
concourse? - A. I am sorry, Mr. King, but I didn't
think they would go in any particular direction.   I
didn't have any reason to feel they were going to go
for a gap in the wall, for the tunnel.  I just saw then
coming, they had been released from outside, they had
taken the pressure off the people who were being
injured and they came into the Ground.  Iexpected them
to disperse all over.

You would know that there was nobody on the concourse
when they came through gate C directing them sideways,
you would know that, wouldn't you? - A. I know that
there were serials on the concourse, I didn't know what
they were doing.

You weren't expectingthose serials, were    you, to
direct them sideways?    You had no reasonto think that,
did you? - rA. I wasn't expecting them to, nor was I not
expecting them to do.
                                           B. D. MURRAY'


You would know that it was no part, under the
Operational Order, of any of your serials specifically
to direct spectators sideways. You would know that? -
A. There was nothing in the Order to say that, no.

I don't want to waste time but are you really saying
even in the five minutes when gate C was opened that it
wasn't obvious then that that throng were heading
straight for the tunnel and the centre pens? - A. Do
you think I would have done nothing about it if I had
known that that was going to be the case, or if it had
been obvious to me that was going to be the case? Do
you think I would have done nothing about it if anybody
had brought it to my attention?

If it had been obvious that they were going to the
tunnel and the centre pens, what would you have done
about it? - A. I don't know.  I feel I might have got
in touch with the Officer in charge of that area and
asked him to deflect.  I honestly don't know.

Why would you have wanted to do something about it.

     THE CORONER:   No.

     MR. MANNING:   Are we not back really one question
down the line to where I intervened before?

     MR. KING:   I am sorry, it is a legitimate line of
reasoning.  If this Officer is saying,  If I had known
they were going towards the tunnel I would have done
something about it", to ask why he would have done
something about it?

     THE CORONER:   It is a legitimate and an
interesting point but it does not, I think, advance the
object of this Inquest, and that is simply, Mr. King,
that this Officer has said that he did not do anything
about it, that is fair enough.    You have asked him.
and I didn't object to that, whether it wasn't obvioac.
to him that something needed to be done. His response
was that if it had been obvious to him he would
undoubtedly have done something. Now the next
question, which is what we   are talking about, "What
would you have done?", doesn't advance matters any
further forward.  I did allow the first one but I am
not going to allow a whole string of questions as to
what could have been ....

     MR. KING:   Sir, with respect, that wasn't my
question. My question was if it had been obvious to
him they were going to the tunnel why he would have
done something about it, what ....
                                            B . D . MURRAY’


     MR. ISAACS:    I am sorry, sir, I must interrupt
my learned friend because that is not, in fact, what
happened. He asked the question what he would have
done and then the Superintendent gave an explanation,
he said he was not sure what he would have done, he
might have done something, and then my learned friend
said, "Why might you have done that", so my learned
friend has fallen into error, no doubt because he is on
his feet at the moment. He actually did ask the
question why in relation to the Superintendent's answer
as to what, in fact, he might have done.

     THE CORONER:   That is right.

     MR. ISAACS:   It is a marvellous exercise in
hindsight, sir, with respect.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I don't want to get into argument
and I will move on. I will have an opportunity later:

At any stage before you saw or were conscious of people
coming over the top onto the perimeter track, Mr.
Murray, do you recall looking at the cameras, the video
monitor, which showed the terraces, and this is after
gate C had been opened? - A. I cannot recall
specifically but I would have been looking all over.  I
would have been looking at the terraces, looking at the
monitors.

Do you recall the use at all of any of the zoom
facility at that stage on the people in the centre
pens? - A. I don't know, sir.

When you saw people were coming up over the top, people
being let out apparently onto the perimeter track,
because that was your first indication that something
was wrong, wasn't it? - A. Yes, it was.

At that stage did you consider zooming in with that
facility to see what the problem was in the centre
pens? - A. I cannot recall whether I asked P.C. Bicharc
or whether he did it off his own initiative, but he
certainly took the camera from the Kop and swung it
round to the Leppings Lane end.

I don't want to mislead you, including the zoom
facility? - A. Well, of course, it is on the camera.

Were you not able then to look at and see the faces of
those in the centre pens who were in the front third of
the pen? - A. No.
                                            B. D. MURRAY


Why not? - A. I don't know.   You couldn't see the faces
of the people in the pens.

Do you recall a message going out of the Control Box to
the effect that all available people, men, should go to
the Leppings Lane Terraces end? - A. I cannot recall
that message.  I don't know what time it was sent but I
can't recall it.

It is a message which we have heard from a number of
sources which originally called serials onto the pitch,
and people heard it from all parts of the Ground? - A.
I can't recall it being sent.

You can't? - A. No.

Do you recall, before you left the Control Box for the
first time, do you recall any discussion with Mr.
Duckenfield about what had happened? - A. I can't
recall a conversation.   I am sure we had a conversation
as to what is happening and part of that conversation
would be Mr. Duckenfield saying, "Get Roger Greenwood
round to have a look at it", then there was the
observations from Mr. Greenwood that I took as the
match had to be stopped.




          /Q. What I want to ....
                                           B. D. MURRAY


 What I want to discover is whether or not you heard
 earlier on a suggestion that it was a pitch invasion?
 - A. I really can't remember. I didn't know what
 people were suggesting.

You told us that after the game had been stopped,
which we know was at 6 minutes past the hour, you
returned for a short period to the Control Box? - A.
Yes, I did.

Can I show you documents C517A and B. This is a log,
we are told, of messages which were being sent out
from the South Yorkshire Police Operation Room, which
is not in the ground, but is outside the ground, I
think it is at Hammerton Road? - A. It is the
Headquarters at Snig Hall.

It was put in in the context of calling for an
ambulance.  I want to look at a message which
apparently was sent out at 15.08, so that is two
minutes after the match was stopped. - A. Yes.

Which is on the second page.   Do you see a reference
1508.14? - A. Yes.

The message which apparently was being sent out at
that stage between the Operations Room and the
Ambulance Service was:

     "A lot injured, apparently one of the gates, has
     they've been pushing and pushing and shoving I
     understand and one of the gates has, they've
     collapsed the gates and there's."
A. Yes.

Do you have any knowledge from your time in the
Control Box, and you were there in the Police Contr-'
Box at just after the match was stopped at 6 minutec
past 3? - A. Yes.

Of information such as we know was transmitted onwards
being transmitted out of the Control Box to Snig Hall?
- A. I have no sort of recollection of that. I would
think that that would be in response to my request for
ambulances that that message was passed.

What I want to investigate - you may not be able to
help us - is how it came about that the message at 8
minutes past 3 was that "...one of the gates has....
they've collapsed the gate"? - A. I would think that I
am on thfe pitch at this time because it was my request
for the fleet of ambulances and I would not have been
in the Control Room at this time.
                                                             92

                                                 B. D. MURRAY


Q.     Because it is right, is it not, that as regards the
     ' opening of the gates, apart from the one at 2.48, the
       short one, they were authorised openings, were they
       not? - A. Yes, they were.

Q.    Can you think of any reason from your time in the
      Control Box as to how it may have come about that the
      message which was sent out from the ground, and then
      out to the Ambulance Service, was a suggestion that
      "they've collapsed the gates"? - A. I don't know
      whether that refers to the track gates, I really don't
      know. The message is a bit of jibberish, it doesn't
      make sense, but I wouldn't have been there and I
      wouldn't have known why that message was passed.

Q.    Just in terms of timing, you yourself did not
      appreciate, as I understand it, that there were
      injuries, crushing injuries, requiring ambulances
      until the time of the stopping of the match at 6
      minutes past? - A. I didn't realise that the thing was
      so serious until I went down to the pitch the second
      time, which would have been about 7 minutes past.

Q.    When you got back into the Control Room, whatever that
      was, about 9 minutes past, 10 minutes past, something
      like that? - A. Immediately after the match was
      stopped?

Q.    Yes. - A. I was there for only a few seconds, 30
      seconds, and then I was back down on the pitch.

Q.    At that stage, which is 8 or 9 minutes past perhaps,
      something like that --

           THE CORONER: He has just said that the fleet of
      ambulances was requested at his initiation, and we
      have got a log which clearly shows that that was at
      1507, so it cannot be 1509.

          MR. KING: I am sorry, sir, I was not trying to
     add on minutes.
Q.   What I want to know is when you were back in the
     Control Box for the short period of time? - A. Yes.

Q.   What was your understanding of what had happened at
     that stage? - A. My understanding then was the same as
     it had been all the time, that we had had some
     pushing, some crushing, we had been relocating people,
     that for whatever reason lots had come onto the pitch,
     taken advantage of the situation.  I have seen it
     happen before where once you ease a situation people
     will not go back, they do stay where they are, and
     apart from that I wasn't sure.
                                             B. D. MURRAY

 At that stage was any use in the Control Box being
 used of the cameras onto the Leppings Lane terrace? -
 A. I would think so, I don't know. Having gone back
 for just a few seconds, I wouldn't start looking at
 the monitors.

 Let me just ask one or two matters. The
 communications, the radio system: had any checks been
         °ut before the 15th April match as to their
 efficiency and their workings? - A. I cannot say but I
 would feel sure that we would check it before such a
 big occasion, yes.

Is there any emergency word which is known to those
who have to operate radios, either in the Control Room
or on the ground, when there is congested traffic
which you can shout into it which will clear the
traffic? - A. There is a code number for an Officer i
distress, an Officer needs immediate assistance. The.
is the only emergency code.

What is that code?

     THE CORONER: No, we do not want to know the code.
Did you ask him what it was?

     MR. KING:   , I misunderstood what he said, sir. I
apologise.                                          *

     THE CORONER: Perhaps I misunderstood you. We
would not want him to disclose the code number.

     MR. KING:   I am only interested in whether there
was a means by which one could unscramble it, sir.

     THE CORONER: By all means explore the
methodology, but not the detail.

     MR. KING:   Is the answer there was a method? - A.
There is a coded number that an Officer who needs
immediate assistance, and usually for his own safety,
can pass to prefix a message which will usually
receive immediate response by any units in the area.

So if, for any reason, somebody wanted to get a
message through as an emergency and there was
congested traffic, all that person had to do was to
use this code? - A. If it was heard, people would tend
not to pass messages while he got his message through.

At any stage on 15th April did you yourself ever hear
that code being used? - A. No, I did not hear it.
                                                                94

                                                   B, 'D. MURRAY


Q. Just one matter.   Do you know a Sergeant Morgan? - A.
   Yes, I know Sergeant Morgan.

Q. It is Sergeant John Morgan. - A. Yes, I know Sergeant
   John Morgan.

Q. Do you recall meeting him at all or passing him when you
   were returning to the Control Box after the game had been
   stopped? - A. No, I cannot recall seeing Sergeant Morgan.

Q. Can I just put it to you to see if it jogs your memory.
   There was an exchange between you and him.   You were
   going up the steps and he was coming down and you said to
   him, "Do what you can"? - A. I have seen that in Sergeant
   Morgan's statement, but I cannot recall seeing him at
   all.   I can recall seeing a Sergeant Hemmingway.

        MR. KING:      Thank you.

                    Further by THE CORONER:

Q. Can I just ask one question and then we are finishing?
   You mentioned that the Serials, thefive and fifty, or
   six and eighty, as it turned out.    You said that one of
   them actually gave evidence here.    Was that Sergeant
   Green you are talking about? - A. Yes, it would be
   Sergeant Green.

       THE CORONER:   Very well.   We wanted to know who we
  were talking about.   Now we will pause until tomorrow
  morning at ten o'clock.   There are the usual rules of
  evidence and so on, which you know about?

        THE WITNESS:      Yes, sir.

                       (The Jury left Court)

       THE CORONER:       Can we get a few estimates of time?

       MR. CATCHPOLE:   I believe I will be very short and
  should be less than five minutes.

       THE CORONER:       Mrs. McBrien, what do you say?

       MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am not absolutely sure, but most
  of my questions may just require a yes or a no, so it
  could be quite a short time, really.

       MR. RUSSELL:       Very short, a handful of questions.

       THE CORONER:   Mr. Manning, have you any idea?   The
  only reason I ask is so we can have some idea when we are
  likely to ge^ to Mr. Duckenfield.
                                                             1
                                                      ' 95




     MR. MANNING:   I believe that my client - I say in
the absence of the Jury - has answered fully.   I do not
believe there is a necessity, knowing you are going to
sum-up, for me to necessarily go through everything all
over again.   It is my intention to highlight one or two
points and to clarify, but otherwise be short.

     THE CORONER:   Hopefully, then, we will be starting
with Mr. Duckenfield sometime during the morning.

     MR. ISAACS:   I would hope so, sir.

      THE CORONER:   I mentioned Saturday.    That was not
intended as a threat, although it is a threat and if we
can avoid it obviously I would very much prefer to do
that.    However, I think if I have got to balance an
adjournment against a few hours on Saturday, I would
rather have a few hours on Saturday, but we will see.

      MR. ISAACS:  I have taken a straw poll of everybody
down the line and we do not believe it will be necessary
because the proceedings have taken on a pace now and we
hope to be able to finish within your expected finishing
date.

     THE CORONER:   As I say, it is exceedingly
inconvenient for me if we sit, so it is not as if I am
doing it because I want to.   It is simply that I am
anxious to make sure that we do meet the timetable if we
possibly can.   Is there anything else?   No. All right.

          (The Inquests were adjourned until
          ten o'clock the following morning)
