HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                13
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

             STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                   Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                     At

              The Town Hall,
                Sheffield.

                     On

            5th December, 1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, L t d .,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                 Page

     R.W. CREASER Recalled

          By The Coroner    (Cont)                 1
          Cross- Examined   by Mr.   Payne         5
          Cross- Examined   by Mr.   Manning      15
          Cross- Examined   by Mr.   King         18
          Cross- Examined   by Mr.   Catchpole    48
          Cross- Examined   by Mrs    McBrien     52
          Cross- Examined   by Mr.   Russell      58

STATEMENT BY MR. MAXWELL ON BEHALF OF THE
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL                            60

     R.W. CREASER (Cont)

          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne     62
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale      66
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King              70
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole         70
          Further by The Coroner                  72

     J .A . McGAULEY Recalled

          Further by The    Coroner              75
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Hale          92
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Payne         93
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Manning       94
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. King          95
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Catchpole     96
          Cross-Examined    by Mrs McBrien       98

    G. SYKES Sworn

          By The Coroner                         98
\\




                           THIRTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                          WEDNESDAY. 5th DECEMBER,   1990
     B             THE CORONER:   Good morning.   A couple of minor
              administrative points.   The first one is to remind
              everybody that we will not have the use of the Mandela
              room tomorrow because somebody else wants it.   I don t
              actually know to what extent it is being used. We are
              going to have a look and review that, but whether it is
              used or not, tomorrow we can't.

                   The second thing is we are still in trouble with the
              notification of witnesses to you.   Towards the end of
              each day my Officer will know who we are planning to call
              the next morning so either approach h i m a n d ask who is
              coming, or it may even be possible he might stick a
              provisional list up.   Whether we can get through a ll
              them is another question, but hopefully experience will
              enable us to improve on that, but he will know before we
              rise in the afternoon who we have scheduled and that
     D        might be of some help to you.

                   Mr. Creaser.

                          ROBERT WALLACE CREASER Recalled

                           3y THE CORONER (Continued):

         Q. We left the matter, Mr. Creaser, I think you will
            remember I was just talking to you, or you were telling
            me about the loud speaker announcement? - A. Yes.

         0.    Just to refresh your memory.  We had got in fact to PC
              Ryan I think and you were telling me to what extent you
              were able to hear what he was saying. - A. Yes, sir.

         0. At that time I think the cordon of horses was still in
            place, or had it already been disbanded? - A. I am sorry,
            sir, what time are you referring to?

         Q.   When you heard PC Ryan come over the  tannoy? - A. I think
              it is fair to say that his announcements were made over a
              considerable period of time.

         0. I think you have explained to me that you actually
            disbanded the cordon of horses when you realised that the
            concertina gates had been opened and that the crowds
            inside had cleared? - A. Yes.    The purpose of the cordon
            was to stop more people joining the back of the crowd
            waiting at the turnstiles.    Once the concertina gates
            had been opened, particularly Gate C, the need to stop




     H
                                                        R. W. CREASER



          those people joining the back of the crowd had ceased
          because there was no longer a crowd at the turnstiles.

It   Q. You yourself did not play any part in the decision making
        with regard to the concertina gates.   I think that was
        dealt with by other people? - A. That is correct.

     Q. Were you relieved when you saw the crowd disperse ahead
        of you? - A. Yes.   I wasn't involved in the decision
        making but I thought that was the correct decision
        because I was aware there was a large area of ground
        immediately inside the turnstiles.   I think you have
        referred to it as the concourse, between the West Stand
        and the turnstile wall, and there is ample room there to
        accommodate several thousand people.

     0. You, of course, were outside so you could not b e i n s i d e
        to monitor what was going on within the stadium itself?
        A. That is correct.

     Q. If this situation hadn't arisen which you were faced
D       with, would you normally have stayed outside the whole of
        the time or would you have gone back in in a normal match
        situation, as far as you were concerned? - A. As an
        officer with responsibility for several Inspectors, both
        inside and outside the ground, I would be passing to and
        fro inside, monitoring the position inside and outside,
        talking to the stewards, talking to the police officers,
        making everything was going smoothly.

     Q.    However, on this occasion you couldn't doit, is    that
           right? - A. I could have done it but...

     Q. Perhaps I ought to say you didn't do it? - A. There were
        no apparent problems inside.   The problems were outside.

     0.    Can you think back to 1988? - A. Yes.

     0.   First of all, in a nutshell were you outside Leppings
          Lane at any time in the period which you have been
          talking about, between 2.30 and 3.00 in 1988? - A. Yes, I
          would have been, sir.

     q   . Fromyour recollection now was it a similar situation or
          was it different? - A. It was a very different situation
          in the density of people queuing up to gain access to the
          turnstiles.

     Q. Can you recollect whether in 1988 the entry to the tunnel
        was closed off at any point? - A. I believe it was, yes,
        sir.




H
                                                             3



                                                   R. W. CREASER


    Q. D/) you know that from your recollection of it or is it
       something that you have found out since the 1989
       incident? - A. I think it is something I was told since
       the 1989 incident.
B   Q. Are you telling me then that on the 15th of April, 1989,
       when you came on duty you didn't know that the tunnel had
       been - I will used the expression "closed off" or
       "controlled" might be a better word - controlled in 1988?
       - A. The difficulty in recalling what happened in 1988 is
       that it although it was a large football match^things
       went routinely.   There were no problems.   Things went
       according to plan and so it was the same as other large
       football matches that took place in the 1988 season.    To
       have a specific recollection of whether something did or
       didn't take place in 1988 is difficult for me to say.

    Q. In other words what you are saying is you know it now but
       you can't distinguish at what point the knowledge
       impinged upon your... - A. That's right, sir.   I have
       attended many large football matches at Hillsborough and
       in 1988 there were no difficulties that spring to my mind
D      from the semi-final, particularly in relation to things
       like the flow of spectators and that sort of thing.




E




F



                     Q. Can I just ask you.




H
                                              R.W. CREASER


    Q. Can I just ask you: it sounds then from what you say
       although you believe it happened you yourself have no
       recollection of giving that order to close. That is
       correct? - A. Yes sir.

Q   Q. What do you think, bearing in mind what you have just told
       me about the 1988 match that it went off as far as you
       were concerned smoothly, why would anybody wish to control
       or seal off the tunnel? - A. If the central pens, the two
       central pens from which access is gained by the tunnel
       were full then a quite justifiable decision might be made
       that we will not allow any more fans in there. There
       are several ways of controlling that. One of them would
       be to consider closing that gate or putting Police Officers
       at the concourse end of the central tunnel to discourage
       people from going down the tunnel.

    Q.    And thatdecision would have to be   made at what level or
         by whom? - A. It would possibly be   made by an Officer of
         the rank of Inspector.

    Q. And the sealing or the closing would of course be done
       on the concourse side of the tunnel not at the terracing
D      side? - A. That is correct.

    Q. Presumably those Officers cannot actually see what is
       going on in the terraces in detail.  Is that right?
       - A. Well I don't know the length of the tunnel, it is
       perhaps 10, 15 metres.

    Q.   A bit longer than that. - A. It is  several seconds walk
         although viewing the terrace from the rear of the tunnel
         is not an accurate way of estimating whether or not the
         pens are full because it is a shallow slope and you can't
         see the front of the pens from the rear of the pens from
         the tunnel.
    Q. That is in fact the point I was putting to you.  In order
       to get a proper assessment as to whether or not the tunnel
       should be sealed it really has to be done from somebody
       who is on the far side, namely who is looking at the
       terraces from the ground end rather than the tunnel end?
       - Q. When I have worked at Hillsborough I have used several
       methods of gauging when those pens have been full.   I
       can itemise them if you want. One of them will be
       information from the Ground Control who have a sideways
       view slightly to the front and to the side and they can
       view across the terraces. People on the perimeter track
       obviously have good sight of how full the pens are at the
       front.  It can be observed from the West Stand, so from
       the steps to the West Stand which are situated near the
       concourse end of the tunnel you can go up to the West
       Stand and view it from the West Stand or alternatively
       communicate with somebody who is in the West Stand by radio.




H
                                                               5

                                            R.W. CREASER


Q. But they all depend upon somebody communicating with the
   Officers out in the concourse area to take action of some
   sort or other? - A. Well when I have been an Inspector with
   those duties I myself have walked up to the West Stand,
   looked down and made an assessment of whether or not those
   pens have been full.

Q. I see and when you say an Inspector with those responsibilities
   you mean an Inspector in the concourse area, do you mean?
   - A. Yes sir.
Q. As far as you know you have no knowledge that that tunnel
   was sealed off in 1989? - A. Correct, yes sir.

Q. I am not criticising you, I am just asking you? - A. No,
   that is correct. At the time when that action was likely
   to be taken, i.e. when the pens were full, I would have
   been outside the Stadium.

Q. That is why I asked you that earlier. - A. Yes sir.


                          Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. Mr. Creaser, I wonder if you would be kind enough please
   to go through with the jury the planning that took place
   in preparation for this match and please do it by reference
   to the Operational Order which I think you have got in front
   of you.

             MR. JONES:     C285 sir.

q   .         MR. PAYNE: Now in the Operational Order can you go
        to page 15. Now at page 15 headed "Senior Officers'
        Duties" I have come straight to the part where your name
        is first mentioned, Mr. Creaser.  It starts off by saying:

              "Chief Inspectors and above will NOT use a
              call sign but will be identified by their name
              and rank."

        Then one runs one's eye down the column of Officers and
        you are about a third of the way down the page in charge
        of Sector IB, Chief Inspector Creaser. Right? - A. Yes
        sir.

Q. I am just drawing your attention to it and then we will
   come to the particular serials. Under your command are
   Serials 11-19 and Reserves 20/21. Over the page at page 16
   there is a further table setting out the Inspectors who
   are under your command in sub-sectors 5 down to sub-sector
   9, that is halfway down the page, each of those Inspectors
   in command of mostly two Serials.  In the case of Mr. Builas
   in the West Stand just one and it gives the call sign of
   each of those Inspectors. Right? - A. Correct sir.
                                            R.W. CREASER


    Q. Now will you go on now please to look at the particular
       dvities of each of the serials under your command beginning -
       at page 28.
             Now as we embark on this exercise of looking through
       the duties of the various serials can you just put the
B      jury in the picture.
             This Operational Order    was drawn up largely, broadly
       speaking following the lines    of the 1988 Order, as the
       jury already know.   Were you   issued with a copy of it
       before the event? - A. Yes, I   received a copy perhaps ten
       days, slightly less than the    event.  Yes, this document
       in a yellow bound folder.

    Q. Do you know if any steps were taken to circulate the
       plans to the Officers under your command? - A. I am quite
       sure that the information in this Order would have been
       available to these Officers, yes sir. Whether they
       received a personal copy or whether they were told:^
       "Please consult a copy which is located at wherever" I
       don11 know.
    Q. We will have to ask any of them who give evidence in
D      particular. - A. What I can say is on the morning of
       the match I satisfied myself that they had all familiarised
       themselves with the contents of the Order.

    Q. Was that at the time of the briefing? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was that after Mr. Duckenfield had given his briefing
       to the whole body of men? - A. Yes, it was not a specific
       question:  "Have you all read the Operational Order?"
       but "Are you all satisfied as to your responsibilities?"
       Implicit in that is "Have you read the order?"




                              Q. Now then dealing




H
                                                      R. CREASER




    Q. Dealing with the duties of the particular serials,
       beginning at page 28, it may be helpful just to
D      identify the whereabouts of each of these, if Sergeant
       Griffiths would be kind enough to put up C274 on the
       screen, which is the plan of the ground.   Serial 11,
       under Sergeant Edwards, Phase 1 before the match,
       ordered six Police Constables to be

              "... located at the rear of turnstiles 1-8,
              (Leppings Lane end), to ensure that the fans
              entering the ground are not in possession of items
              prohibited by the ground rules [and various
              things], or alcohol.

              B) 4 PCs and 1 Sergeant will patrol on the upper
              level concourse to maintain order, paying
              particular attention to refreshment bars."

         Now we can see at turnstiles 1-16 on the plan, the
         numbering starts at the top, at the north as we look at
D        it, and then goes down to 16, down to the junction, so
         this serial has got the top half of that row of
         turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

    0. "At the rear of the turnstiles'* means inside the
       ground, does it, on the concourse? - A. That is
       correct, yes.

    Q. Now I am not going to spend time on dealing with Phases
       2 and 3, but they had particular duties then after the
       match had started, or particular activities were given
       to them.  Over the page to 29, please, Serial 12, just
       running down the duties and whereabouts of this serial
       of ten Officers, were two of them located at the rear
       of Gate 0, Penistone Road - now where is that? - A. It
       is the concertina gate which is the most northerly, I
       think you would describe it, of the gates to the
       ground.

    Q. Has Mr. Griffiths got it right? - A. That is correct.
       It is a concertina double gate similar to the gates you
       are familiar with, A, B and C.

    Q. And they have got to assist the stewards and prevent
       unauthorised access, then two Police Constables at the
       gate to the car park at the rear of the gymnasium.
       Now, do we know where that is? - A. Yes, sir.

    0.        THE CORONER:   It is well away from the West
         Terrace. - A. It is a gate between some terraced
         nouses*  It is a new gate, where it says "Main Police
         Access" on that plan.




H
                                               R. CREASER




     HR. PAYNE:   Sir, I am anxious not to take up time
unnecessarily and I do accept your rebuke in dealing
with matters away from the ground, but I am anxious
that the Jury should see that a lot of other matters
were included in the planning, and not only the area
concerned with the Leppings Lane end.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYilE:    But it can be taken shortly, having
made the point:

At (C) under Serial 12:

     "2 PCs ... at the rear of turnstiles 73-88 in
     Penistone Road

so that is well away from the area, but they have got
particular duties and (D):

     "4 Remaining PCs will patrol lower level concourse
     of North Stand paying particular attention to
     refreshment bars."

Now then, the whole of this serial has also got
activities during Phase 2 and Phase 3 and at the bottom
of this page, 29, Serial 12, its attention is
particularly drawn to the Emergency Evacuation
Procedures.  Mr. Creaser would be you be kind enough
just to read that out? This is the first time we have
come across this. - A. Yes, I think this is repeated
for other serials, but on page 29 it says:

     "Emergency Evacuation Procedures

     In the event of such a situation arising, PCs
     located at the gates at the end of each level
     giving access to ramps leading to Penistone Road
     will ensure these are open.

     Officers will also take up positions at exit gates
     in Penistone Road and Leppings Lane to ensure
     these are open.

     Further instructions will be as directed by
     control or passed over the public address system.

     Officers will be nominated for individual points
     at the start of this duty."

Now we are coming to the West Stand, over the page,
page 30, Sub Sector 6. The West Stand is the seated
area benind the terrace.   There are 12 people allocated
to this Serial 13, and particular jobs are given to
                                             R. CREASER




various people in the serial, two of them under (A), if
we are looking under west Stand, Phase 1 (Before
match), two of them have got to go to

     "... the North entrance gates to assist stewards
     in supervising entry and where necessary
     preventing of unauthorised persons."

Then (B), two at the South entrance with similar
duties.  (C). two have got to patrol the concourse/bar
area, and (D):

     "6 PCs will be located at the front of the Stand
     to prevent missiles being throw/Stand tickets
     being dropped to the terraces below or persons
     climbing from the terraces to the stand and to
     maintain order."

and at the bottom of the page there is also an
emergency evacuation procedure for this team, and these
instructions refer to paragraph 3.16, so can you go
back just to look at that, in the narrative
instructions, at page 9 in the Order? - A. Yes, I have
got that, sir.

Page 9 in the Order, 3.16, "Emergency and Evacuation
Procedures" - just take the Jury through this would
you, Mr. Creaser, please - read it out. - A. Page 9,
3.16, it says:

     "Emergency and Evacuation Procedures

     3.16.1 In the event of an emergency situation
     arising (ie fire or bomb call) which may require
     evacuation of all or part of the stadium, the
     procedure outlined will be followed:

     Ground control will pass the following message
     over the PA system and this will indicate to
     Police personnel tfiat a provisional emergency and
     evacuation is in force:

     'THE ATTENDANCE OF MR. MEADOWS IS URGENTLY
     REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL.*"

It goes on to say:

     "Should an emergency evacuation be necessary then
     an oral message will be passed to Police personnel
     via Inspectors and Serial Sergeants, giving
     specific instructions as to the action to be
     taken.
                                             R. CREASER




     In the event of an 'all clear* situation, the
     following message will be passed to Police
     personnel indicating that the necessity for
     emergency evacuation has ceased:

     'MR. MEADOWS IS NO LONGER REQUIRED AT POLICE
     CONTROL.'"

It then states in the final paragraph:

     "Evacuation procedures for various parts of the
     stadium are shown on the appropriate serial order.

Thank you very much. So if you go back to page 30
there is an example of that where particular
instructions are given to Serial 13? - A. Yes, sir.

That deals with Serial 13. Over the page, please, to
31. Here we have got Serials 14 and 15, under the
command of Inspector White:

     "LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE AND REAR ENCLOSURE (SOUTH)

     Phase 1 (Before match)

     This serial will ensure that supporters entering
     through turnstiles A-G do not enter in possession
     of items prohibited by the ground rules (banners,
     etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol.

     They will ensure that order is maintained on the
     terraces."

And Serial 15:

     "LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE AMD REAR ENCLOSURE (NORTH)

     Phase 1 (Before match)

     This serial will ensure that supporters entering
     through turnstiles 9-16 do not enter in possession
     of items prohibited by the ground rules ...."

- the same list -

     "They will also ensure order is maintained on the
     terraces."

and at the bottom of this page these two serials are
also given particular emergency evacuation procedures,
instructions. Now, whereabouts were these two serials
then posted please, Mr. Creaser, by reference to our
plan? - A. Serial 14 headed by Sergeant Crawford would
be to the south of a dividing wall which passes
                                             R. CREASER




adjacent to concertina gate B, to the rear wall of the
West Stand.




 /Q.   THE CORONER:   Could you point .
     THE CORONER:   Could you point to it again? In
other words, behind A and G, in that area? — A. That
is correct, sir.
     MR. KING:   Just inside Turnstiles A to G, is
that? - A. That is correct, yes, sir. When I say
just inside, if it was necessary perhaps to speak to
the fans they would leave a position from immediately
inside the terminal and they would be assisting in
ensuring there were no problems with fans gaining
access to the West Stand.

Are these the Policemen who you were describing
earlier in your evidence that at early hours they
would be searching a lot of spectators but as the
arrivals built up it would not be possible to search
such a large proportion of people coming in? - A.
Yes, fans would initially perhaps be searched outside
the turnstiles and these were, if you like, a stop­
gap. They would do secondary searches. Obviously
some unfortunate people would be searched twice and
some people would not be searched at all but they
would pick out people in their experience who were
likely to be in possession of prohibited items.

Serial 15 has similar duties but this is the other
half of the bank of Turnstiles 1 to 16? - A. That is
correct, sir.
These are the ones which Sergeant Griffiths is
showing on the plan now. That is the section giving
access to the concourse behind the West Stand? - A.
That is correct, yes, sir.

Those serials have also got functions during phases
two and three? - A. Yes, sir.

Over the page now please to page 32 where we have got
Serials 16 and 17 under Inspector Sykes and Inspector
Purdy which you mentioned earlier on in your evidence
yesterday.  These two serials are outside the
Leppings Lane turnstiles. Can you read out the
instructions for Serial 16 please? - A. Serial 16,
Phase 1, "This serial will be responsible for
turnstiles A-G.  They will ensure that persons
entering do not possess items prohibited by the
ground rules (banners etc., weapons, missiles or
alcohol).  They will maintain order and ensure
orderly queues are formed."
I am going to ask you questions about queues in a
moment but just before coming to that, let your eye
run down the page to Serial 17 under the control of
Police Sergeant Whitlam and this is the serial
responsible for Turnstiles 1 to 8 with similar
duties, also including ensuring that orderly queues
are formed? - A. Yes, sir.

Go over the page just to complete the groups of men
who have got responsibility outside the turnstiles.
Do we find on page 33 Serials 18 and 19, another 22
Officers in total including the Sergeant in charge of
each serial with Serial 18 being posted outside
Turnstiles 9 to 16 with the duty to maintain order
and ensure orderly queues are formed amongst other
things.  Then Serial 19 is a serial located in
Leppings Lane to ensure that orderly queues form and
they will assist other serials at this location as
required and in the event of vehicles and coaches
arriving to supervise their unloading.  There are
four serials in that group posted outside the
turnstiles at various particular locations and each
of them has got the function to ensure orderly queues
are formed.  Can I ask you this question please, Mr.
Creaser, from your own experience which is, as you
have told the Jury, extensive? How much does the
orderly formation of queues depend on co-operation
from the crowd of people who are approaching the
turnstiles? - A. Well, it obviously depends on the
people who are there.  If you have a small number of
people who do not want to form a queue they can be
told to form a queue.  The larger that number gets
progressively that becomes more difficult.  In
addition to the Officers who are on here I had also
the call of mounted Officers who could assist in this
process but there obviously can come a point, and on
this day did come a point, when it was impossible to
form orderly queues.

The Jury may be interested in this because some time
has been spent in the Inquest on this matter. With
this quite considerable force of Officers altogether
stationed outside the turnstiles, what was it which
made this plan to ensure orderly queues go wrong?
What was it that made it go wrong? - A. There is not
one single factor.  There are a number of factors.
Perhaps the first one is the geographical layout of
the turnstiles.  If I can perhaps direct your mind to
the other end of the ground where there were - I
wasn't there - apparently no problems, the turnstiles
there are in a straight line on a busy arterial road.
So on one side people do not form a queue in the road
because they get run over. So that assists the
Police. The traffic flow stops people walking into
the road.  In addition there will be a horse walking
up and down to make sure that people form flat queues
against the turnstile walls.

     That queue can be extended along Penistone Road.
As I am sure you will appreciate, at Leppings Lane
end there is a different geographical layout.   I have
heard it described by various means of funnels and
that sort of thing.  It is far more difficult to get
people to form orderly queues. The other factors
that you have to bear in mind is the willingness or
otherwise of those people to form an orderly queue.
I am sure people have given examples of people who
queue for going to the theatre or other social
events. They form an orderly queue without the
necessity for large numbers of Police Officers.
Traditionally that is not the case with large crowds
attending football matches.  So all I can say is that
the attempt is to form an orderly queue.  That can be
achieved at most football matches with some degree of
co-operation from the participants.

In the light of the numbers who arrived between 2.30
and 3 o'clock, particularly at about and after
quarter to three on the occasion of this match, was
there any way in which the Police Officers could have
complied with this part of the operational plan? - A.
They were striving to achieve it but I think this
Court has had the advantage of seeing the video and
you can see the efforts made.   Particularly
prominent are the mounted Officers who you can see
over the crowd.  Perhaps there is no sound on the
video but the mounted Officers were encouraging
people not to push. The definition of an orderly
queue becomes blurred as the crowd gets larger.

On the question of the crowd, I would like to ask you
a question about that.  It has become apparent as
this Inquest has progressed that although obviously
the crowd is made up of a large number of individuals
there are significantly different sections of the
crowd and that there are some sections who are well
behaved and orderly and other sections who are not
well behaved. There are some sections, a significant
number, who have had too much to drink.  From your
observation and experience, Mr. Creaser, can you tell
the Jury what effect does each of these sections have
on the behaviour of the crowd as a whole? - A. I
couldn't say that there were sections. The people
who constituted what you are describing as sections
were different categories of spectators.

I should have said categories? - A. But they were
interspersed.  In other words, you could not point to
one crowd and say, "That is where the more orderly
people are" and I am talking about the crowd at
Leppings Lane.  It couldn't be divided into sections.
The different mix of people were interspersed.

I have misled you by using the word "section".  I
should have said category.  It is clear there are
different categories.  There is a large category of
very well behaved orderly people who are trying to
co-operate with the Police and there is another
category of people who have had too much to drink.
What I want to know is, what effect does that
category have upon the behaviour of the crowd as a
whole? - A. I don't understand your question, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Pardon? - A. I don't understand
the logic.  I can tell you there was a mixture of the
behavioural groups that you are talking about.

I just want to complete looking at the serials under
your command. We have got to page 33 and in addition
to the serials you have dealt with so far, just going
to page 34 which completes the list under your
command, these are the two serials, Serials 20 and
21, under Inspectors Delaney and Berisford. Where
abouts were these serials stationed, Mr. Creaser? -
A. They would obviously be located in the gymnasium
but they would have been deployed at the discretion
of the ground commander. They are listed perhaps as
a matter of convenience under my command but in the
event of some particular problem at a location they
would be deployed or made available to other sector
commanders.
            Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:

I possibly have the advantage of my learned friend,
Mr. Payne, who was possibly thinking on his feet in
relation to that question.  In fact, the question is
this; you had a crowd who was made up of people who
were behaving but interspersed in that crowd were
people who were not so well behaved and people who
had been drinking? - A. It is a vague question. At
what time are you suggesting that crowd existed? I
think I have given evidence to say at 1.30 it was a
Ui'L.
                                                                          16




                                                            P-   w_ f- R R a c r o



              very genial crowd looking forward to a sporting
              occasion.  If you are talking of quarter to three
              there was a mixture of the categories who have
        B     previously been described there, yes.

            Q. That is exactly the time I am talking about? - A.
               Right. Then certainly there was a mixture of those
               elements or categories.

            Q. It is right to say that if the crowd, and that is the
               whole of the people there, were to have stood still
               and not jostled and not been subjected to pushing
               from wherever at this moment in time, that it would
               have been to its advantage in gaining entry through
               the turnstiles? - A. That is correct, sir, yes. The
               whole emphasis of the policing operation at, if you
               like, approximately quarter to three was to encourage
               the people in the crowd to stop trying to surge
               forward, to slow down the progress, so that an
               efficient and effective entry could be made into the
               ground.
        D
            Q. It was the crowd as a whole that appeared to be
               surging forward? - A. Some people are dragged along
               by the crowd.

            Q. Yes, and that is I think the point that my learned
               friend, Mr. Payne, was making. There may have been a
               large number of people who fall within the
               description of well behaved? - A. Certainly, yes,
               sir.

            Q. But they had no option but to be dragged along or
               pushed forward by the actions of those people who
               would be described as either not well behaved or in
               drink? - A. The people who were not well behaved or
               in drink tended to arrive in larger numbers as time
               progressed and so in proportion they would form a
               larger part of the rear of the crowd and they would
               be pushing and struggling and the more responsible,
               if you like well behaved or innocent, however you
               want to describe them, the more orderly people, would
               tend to be at the front of the crowd.

            Q. It would be impossible for them to move back against
               the pushing and struggling of the ones at the back? -
               A. It was impossible, yes, sir.

            Q. Because they obviously could not move forward because
               of the immovable object of the wall? - A. They could




        H
                                               R. W. CREftSER


move forward in only a limited fashion through the
turnstiles.

Indeed. But by being squashed forward against the
turnstiles and more precisely the walls between the
turnstiles they were not even able, for the most
part, to gain access to the turnstiles themselves? -
A. I heard that evidence given yesterday.  I didn't
see any evidence of that.

You did not see the evidence? - A.I didn't   see the
crushing effect, the flow through the turnstiles.




                                       /Q.   In talking.
                                                               18



                                                      R. W. CREASER


        ✓
    Q. In talking about the people who arrived at the back at
       around 2.45 or thereabouts, your evidence, as a very
       experienced officer, is that it was a larger percentage
B      of people who had been drinking than you had ever seen
       before? - A. That's correct.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. KING;

    Q. Chief Inspector, I think in a statement you originally
       made when you were first asked to put something_into
       writing about these events, and, sir, I am looking at
       page 9 of the transcript of the Taylor Inquiry.   Just on
       the matter of how many had been drinking and how many
       hadn't. - A. I haven't got that document with me, sir.

    Q. No, I know you haven't.   Can I just read out to you what
       I am going to suggest you said and see if you agree with
       me.   It is between E and F on page 9 of the transcript,
       - A. Before I answer that quest ion, I understand that my
       transcript consists of seventy- seven pages of written
       evidence.   If you are going to ask me to say, "Did I say
D      that?", I have not been asked t o say that that is an
       accurate record.   If you will give me a copy of the
       document I will examine it and then I will confirm what I
       have said.

    0. That's very fair.   In fact, officer, what I am putting
       to you is not what you said at the Inquiry, but an
       extract of what you said in your original statement.

            MR. PAYNE:   If this is going to be done with this
       witness and with any others, then it would obviously be
       helpful if preparation is made so that the witness can
       have the document in front of him.   It just so happens
       that we do happen to have a copy of this transcript here.
       I will hand it to Mr. Creaser.

            MR. KING:   Sir, to be fair to myself, I am not
       seeking to put what he said to the Taylor Inquiry.    I am
       seeking to put to him what he said in a written
       statement, as I made very clear.  Sir, as I understand it
       you may well have that written statement.   I don't, but
       I do have what I understand to be an extract from it.
       That is all.

            THE CORONER:   I think, Mr. King, as you k n o w f r o m
       earlier exchanges, we are not going to go through it line
       by line.

            MR. KING:    Of course not.

            THE CORONER:   You were putting something to him and
       you were going to get him to say which was right.




H
<r
                                                                           19



                                                               R. W. CREASER


                   MR. KING:      Absolutely.

                   THE CORONER:      I have done that and...

                   MR. KING:   On a very narrow issue, sir.        If my
     B        learned friend will bear with me...

                   THE CORONER:      Perhaps I could address the witness
              for one minute.

                   MR. Creaser, it is difficult, of course, for
              everybody, including you, but as far as I am concerned I
              intend to be fair to everybody, the jury, the lawyers,
              interested parties and the witnesses.   Although it is
              perfectly proper that you should be cross-examined,
              checked and challenged as to what you have said here, and
              this is what I think Mr. King is attempting to do, if I
              feel he is going too far then I will say so and if I
              overlook it then no doubt I will be reminded.   We are^
              not threatening you, at least I am not and I am not going
              to let anybody else.

     D             THE WITNESS:      I don't feel threatened at all.

                   THE CORONER:   I don't think Mr. King is threatening
              you either.   It is just a possibility that you might
              perceive it that way if, as you say, you are faced with
              seventy-seven pages of transcript which you haven t had
              chance to review, so to speak.

         0.        MR. KING:   Can I stress I am only u s i n g t h e
              transcript because it happens to have stated in it an
              extract from your written statement because I d o n ' t have
              your written statement.   I am not concentrating on what
              you said to the Inquiry, I am concentrating on a small
              passage in your written statement.   Do you understand? -
              A. Yes, sir.

         Q. If I can just show you the extract from your statement.
            I will read it out.   I am not sure what you are being
            shown, but if you are being shown the transcript at page
            9, if you look at letter E you see an extract from your
            written statement.   Have you found that officer? - A.
            Yes, sir.

         0. Can I just read it out to you:

                   "The mood of this crowd was changing from a good
                   natured crowd to a frustrated crowd who could
                   perhaps see they had little chance of gaining access
                   prior to the start of the match.   The proportion of
                   spectators who had been drinking increased as time
                   progressed but they were out-numbered by people who
                   did not exhibit any signs of drink."




     H
Gr
                                                                    20


                                                        R. W. CREASER


            Do you agree that that is something which you said in
            your written statement? - A. Certainly, yes, sir.

         Q. Does that reflect your impression of the day? - A. Yes,
            I mean, that's not an impression, that is fact.
     B
         Q. Thank you, Officer, that is all I want to deal with.
            You see, it is not as bad as it looks!    Chief Inspector,
            there came a time when you put a cordon which you
            described, I think it was about quarter to three or
            perhaps a little later, when you put a cordon in front of
            the perimeter gates, a little way back - you described
            how it stretched across the roadway - t o stop people
            joining the throng which was already at the end of the
            turnstile area. - A. Is that a question ?   Yes, I did do
            that, sir.

         0. At that time there was already a whole mass of people
            behind your cordon who had already got through because
            you hadn't put the cordon up yet? - A. That is correct,
            sir.

     D   Q. How many people would you estimate were already there
            outside the turnstile area, and I include in that from
            the turnstiles to the perimeter gates and from the
            perimeter gates spilling out on to the forecourt and
            perhaps into the roadway of Leppings Lane? - A. Between
            the cordon, as it was then, and the turnstile, sir?

         Q. In other words, the great mass of people who you were
            very properly attempting to stop others joining, could
            you estimate... - A. Four and a half to five thousand.

         0. Would you agree with me that for both safety reasons,
            efficiency of getting people into a ground, there are
            only a limited number of people who ought to be allowed
            into an area between the perimeter gates and turnstiles
            A to G, if the Detective Sergeant would point that out.
            You see the area there, that can only take a finite
            number of people, can't it? - A. Yes, sir.

         o. Obviously there comes a critical limit over which one
            shouldn't go because if you get too many people in there
            it becomes so dense no-one can move? - A. Well, yes.
            You are putting in terms as if that is general knowledge
            and that everyone knows that.   Prior to this happening I
            had never known that situation ever exist before, but you
            are correct, there is obviously a finite number of people
            who can be accommodated in a space that has got
            boundaries.

         Q. Officer, for the moment I am not asking questions about
            your past experience at the ground, I am just asking as
            one who was planning, looking at the ground, what




     H
                                                          21



                                               R. W. CREASER


  perhaps...    It is not a criticism, it is obvious. -
  A. I didn't take it as a criticism.

Q. It is a restricted area between the turnstiles A to G, if
   the Detective Sergeant would point that out again, to the
   perimeter gates?    You have agreed with me? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. Again there is a restricted area even from the perimeter
   gates on to the pavement at the arc in the road where
   people will congregate before going into the turnstile
   area, isn't there?   It is a larger area but it is only a
   restricted area, if they are not going to spill out on to
   the road? - A. Yes, it is obviously a restricted area.

Q. Clearly the number of people who you saw on the day,
   behind your cordon, which I think you estimated at about
   four and a half thousand people, were, putting it
   bluntly, far too many for that area at that stage?   I am
   not placing any blame at the moment but there were far
   too many people there at that stage? - A. In the
   condition those people were in and their conduct, yes.

0. More than that, Officer, between the perimeter gates and
   the turnstile area one can measure that amount of space
   and one can measure the amount of space outside the
   perimeter gates.   Are you saying that four and a half
   thousand people is a safe number to have outside in that
   area? - A. What I can say is this, that if the efforts of
   the police officers had been heeded and if,^and I will
   hypothesise as you have, if somebody said, "Right,
   everyone stand still and stop pushing," and everyone
   stood still and stopped pushing, and "Orderly proceed ^
   forward through the turnstiles, there is adequate room,
   it would accommodate more than that number.

   If you have got a crowd in there that is pushing from one
   end to the other against a flat wall that is^interspersed
   with turnstiles, then you are quite correct in what you
   say.

Q. As far as you know has any thought been given to the
   number of people who can be safely accommodated in the^
   area I have described?   Do you know of any thought being
   given to it? - A. Again I can answer that indirectly
   because there is no mechanism for counting the number of
   people in that area so the answer to your question is, if
   we had been able to accurately assess how many people
   could be accommodated there and if we had some mechanism
   of counting them, then we would think about it.

Q. You would agree with me though that if you g e t - leave
   aside the numbers for the moment because that is a matter
   of judgment - if you get too many people inside the
                                            R. W. CREASER


turnstile area for the purpose of efficiently going
through the turnstiles, then you will be in trouble as
far as getting people efficiently into the ground, won't
you?   You must be if you get too many. - A. Yes, sir.

Therefore, any planning ought to take into account
control of the numbers going into the turnstile area,
would you agree with that? - A. It is difficulty the way
you are putting it because you are sort of bending the
question that you should give a plan to some event, and I
have got to relate it to experience.   I can't draw^it
out on paper and plan it that way.   An event of this
nature is policed by experience.   The offices who were
in command of this match were very experienced police
offices and in their experience at that location the
situation you are describing had never previously
occurred.   If somebody had given them some indication
that there was a possibility that this m i g h t h a v e
occurred, then, yes, some thought would be given to it.

Do I take it from that that before this match in 1989 no
thought was given to a means of controlling the people as
they go through the perimeter gates, controlling the
numbers going in to the turnstile area.

      THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I think you can ask him
whether he gave thought, but he can't say that there was
no thought because he doesn't know what other people
said.    Answer that question in relation to yourself.

     MR. KING:   Sir, he did say he was aware of the
planning.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   Well, first of all in relation
to yourself and then in relation to people you know about
who did the planning, but not in respect of every
conceivable person there might be, so answer twice, so to
speak.

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, my answer would be in my
experience and the thought I gave to this, this is a
situation which has never previously arisen.   We were
policing an event which is - my description - a carbon
copy of the event the previous year.   There was not a
problem the previous year, so when an event has run
smoothly why change it?

     MR. KING:   I understand that.   It is saying that
because there has been no fire we won't have any
precautions to prevent fire.   I am asking you:   was
there any provision, to your knowledge, in your planning
for the control of the numbers of people entering the
turnstile area? - A. Your analogy is unfair.    We had
here a football stadium that holds approximately 52,000
rc-
                                                                  23


                                                         R. W. CREASER


            people.   We have policed that on many occasions when
            52,000 people have attended at that football match.   The
            kick-off time was a conventional kick-off time of 3.00 pm
            and never in my experience, and, I suggest, in the
            experience of the other senior officers who commanded
      B     this, has there been any indication that that area would
            become over-full.

          0. What you are saying to us - and I understand your answer
             - is because we haven't experienced this problem in the
             past, we didn't - and you may say legitimately - provide
             for it happening in the future.   That is what you are
             saying? - A. Yes, sir.

          Q. What it comes down to is this, that there was no
             provision in the planning for the control of the numbers
             of people going through the perimeter gates into the
             turnstiles area?   That is right, isn't it? - A. No, it
             is not.   The planning is we were put in charge of this
             policing operation, police officers who have got
             considerable experience of public disorder situations.
             The police officers in South Yorkshire are perhaps
      D      fortunate, or you might say unfortunate, that they have
             vast experience of policing large events where there is
             public disorder.    I would include in these the miners
             strikes of the early seventies, the steel strike of
             1980/81, the miners' strike of 1984/85, numerous football
             matches, race meetings.    Officers from South Yorkshire
             visited the riots in Liverpool at Toxteth, the riots in
             Birminghan, Handsworth, and so we have a c o r e of very
             experienced police officers in dealing with public
             disorder, perhaps far more experienced than several other
             police forces.

             The planning would be that you combined the experience
             and talent of those officers in applying their policing
             tactics to situations as they arose.   If some event was
             not planned and not written in this Operation Order it^
             doesn't mean to say that no thought would be given to it
             should it arise.

          Q. Dealing with the Operational Order - just take, for
             example, page 31 of the Order, which we have looked at
             which are the duties of the serials outside the Leppings
             Lane turnstiles. - A. Right, sir.

          Q. Do you agree with me this much:  there is no written
             provision in this Operational Order dealing with the
             controlling of the entry of persons into the turnstile
             area?   You will agree with me that far? - A. Yes, and
             there is nothing specific in that about the example you
             have quoted about there being a fire in the stadium.
             There are all sorts of contingencies not mentioned in
             there.    The point I am making his that there were very




      H
                                                                 24



                                                      R. W. CREASER


         senior police officers there, very experienced police
         officers, who would respond to contingencies as they
         arose.

B   Q. Are you saying that in fact although it wasn t in writing
       there was in the planning provision for controlling the
       entry of persons into the turnstile area? - A. I am not,
       no, sir.

    Q. You are not saying that? - A. I am not, sir.

    Q. Let me deal with inside the ground for a moment.   You
       have been asked about the situation in 1988 and you have
       indicated that although you didn't have personal^
       knowledge you understood that in 1988 at the semi-final
       there came a time when spectators were prevented from
       going down the tunnel into pens 3 and 4.   That's right?
       - A. I did say that, yes.

    Q.   Pens 3 and 4 are the central pens   behind the goal, aren't
         they? - A. Yes, sir.

D   0.   I think we all know that by now.     Would you agree with
         me that spectators tend, if theycan, to    get the position
         behind the goal?    That is the favourite spot for most
         football fans going on the terraces from your experience?
         - A. Yes, some people will deliberately go to the sides,
         but there are perhaps the younger element of spectators
         who prefer to be immediately behind the goals.




                   Q. If you leave fans,




H
                                   R.W. CREASER


If you leave fans to their own devices they don't
necessarily distribute themselves evenly between different
sections of a terrace do they, necessarily? - A. No, if
you leave them to fill up naturally they will fill from
the centre outwards.

And just dealing with this particular terrace, if we
look at the model to refresh ourselves.  I can't remember
now whether we had got a plan of the whole of the West
terrace or not.
      THE CORONER:  We can use one of the acetates.  It
does not have the side bits.  It does not have the end
bits.  Will not the plan do, Mr. King, the one we have
just had out?
      MR. KING:   Yes, the plan will do fine sir.

      THE CORONER:  Can you put back the plan, Sergeant
Griffiths, because I think you can see them all there,
can't you?  Is that satisfactory?

      MR. KING:   Yes sir.

I am sure you know it very well but just to refresh
everybody's mind, the standing terrace of the Leppings
Lane although it goes the length of the West Stand is
in fact, or was in 1989, divided up into a number of
pens? - A. Yes sir.

And the method of division were radial fences running
from the back to the front of the terrace? - A. Yes sir.

There was a means of gaining access from the centre pen
to a side pen if you went through a gate at the back
of the terrace? - A. That is correct sir.  Those gates
were locked open.

But of course, you would accept this I am sure, you
would have to know it existed in order to make your way
to that gate? - A. No sir, you could see it.

Well you say you could see it.  I will take you through
this then.  Have a little look if you will at C267.
You see there that is a view of the Leppings Lane
terrace and you can see the entry point of the tunnel
on to the terraces? - A. Yes sir.

And you see that there is a wall on each side of that
entry point which stretches down into the terrace?
- A. Yes.

 So that when you enter the terrace as a spectator you
 are not in fact level with the back of the terrace,
 are you? - A. No sir.
                                  R.W. CREASER


And you are not level, therefore, with the gate to which
I have
    /
       referred? - A. That is correct, yes sir.

So in order to know the gate exists you would either have
to turn round and be able to see it .... A. Forgive me,
sir.  I think you described it as an "entry point" to the
pen.  What you are now describing to get through that gate
it would be an exit point.

Sorry, I may be confusing you.  I did not mean to? - A.
From the central pen to go through that gate if you are
in one of the two central pens to get through that gate
you are exiting from the pens.  You asked me if it was
an entry point to the pen.

I beg your pardon. - A. And there you would see it from
what I would call the extreme north or the extreme south
pe n s .

I am sorry, I may be confusing you then.  If I am a
spectator who has come down the tunnel, all right? - A.
Yes sir.

Into the centre pens, shall we say Pen 3, all right?
- A. Yes sir.

And I make my way down the pen and move sideways perhaps?
- A. Yes sir.

I will eventually come to a radial fence on my right,
won't I? - A. That is correct.

And as far as I am concerned as a spectator there is no
further way in which I can move further to my right, shall
I say, I come to a full stop because of the radial fence?
- A. That is correct.

What I was saying was in fact at the back of that very
terrace behind me in the corner there is in fact a gate
which if I had known about and could have got to would
take me on to the next terrace to the right.  Do you
understand the gate I am talking about? - A. You are
suggesting that you would not be able to see it?

I am suggesting that unless I turn round and have a view
of it I certainly can't see it unless I turn round? -
A. That is correct.

And what I have suggested to you is when I enter the
terrace through the tunnel I am not level with that little
exit gate, whatever you call it, because it is behind me
because the tunnel enters me down on to the terrace.  Do
you understand? - A. Yes, if you entered through the central
tunnel so we take the situation where the stadium is empty,
if you do that or that you will see those gates.
                                  R.W. CREASER


I agree. - A. If you empty the stadium when it is full you
do,that and that, you have difficulty if not it would be
impossible to see those gates.

I am obliged.  So as far as the fans finding their own
level on terraces filling the pens, if they enter through
the tunnel and the terrace is already full in the centre
pens then they are going to find it almost impossible, I
would say impossible by their own devices to find a way
to the side pens.  You would agree with me? - A. No sir.

You don't agree? - A. I disagree with you entirely.

Why? - A. The method of filling those pens and letting
them find their own level was a tried and trusted method
and if you talk about an individual spectator moving
through those pens then what you say is probably correct
nobody else would notice it, but if it became too full
in those pens then people in the crowd would be able
to detect movement through those gates and in fact the
strategy was used in 1989 because it had been successful
the previous year.

In order for people in the centre pens to move    to the
left or the right they have to go through that    small
gate at the top, that is the only way they can    go if
they are going to move while on the terraces.     That is
right, isn't it? - A. That is correct.

There is a way of getting to the side pens round the
side of the West Stand, isn't there? - A. There are three
access points to the terraces, one through the central
tunnel, one to the south end of the West Stand, one to
the north end which is also as it happens a tunnel.

If one comes through the turnstiles A-G one can either
go through the tunnel? - A. Yes sir.

And we know that takes you to Pens 3 and 4, the centre
pens? - A. That is correct, yes sir.

Or if one knows about it one can go to the left through
that little wall and round the side to the side pens
eventually? - A. That is correct, yes sir.

Or one can go to the right to the side pens.     Right?
- A. That is correct, yes sir.

If the Pens 3 and 4, those are the centre pens, become
too full and the side pens are not yet full so there is
an uneven distribution if you have got that picture.
All right? - A. Are you hypothesising on any particular
match?
                                   R.W. CREASER


Yes, just deal with that.  Would you agree with me, as
somebody who has experiences of terraces, that it is
important to redistribute, to make sure that anybody coming
into the ground doesn't go down into the full pens but
goes round the sides to the emptier pens.  That would be
a sensible plan to have, wouldn't it? - A. Yes sir.

Often one talks about the even distribution of crowds across
a terrace.  You understand that concept? - A. Often one talks
about it?
Yes, but do you understand the concept of even distribution?
Do you know what I mean having a crowd evenly distributed
across a terrace? - A. Well that does not happen at football
matches.  As you have said there is a preference for people
to be behind the goals.   It is very difficult to get an
even distribution.

Well it is difficult if you leave the fans to their own
devices obviously, but you can in fact have means of
controlling the entry into individual pens, can't you?
- A . I can.

Well could you not devise a system for controlling entry
into individual pens? - A. If you asked me to do that I
could, yes sir.

You could for example, I have just put examples to you,
you could for example have a turnstile which only gives
access to a particular pen, couldn't you? - A. Yes, are
we talking in general what I could do at any football match
in any ground# or are you asking what happened last April?

Let me deal for the moment with just general ways of
filling a terrace which is divided into pens, all right,
just generally now before we come to last year. - A.
Right sir.

You have agreed with me that if you leave it to the fans'
own devices they are likely not to evenly distribute
themselves, they are likely to go to the two centre pens
behind the goal, because that is what you have said?
- A. If I was considering this problem then I would
consider where do these people who have paid money to
come and watch football want to stand and if they want
to stand behind the goals and I can facilitate that then
I will do that and it might be, and I will talk now in
more specific terms, at Hillsborough if there is for
example when there is a league match away fans coming
then I would certainly fill one or other’of the two
central pens first and it might be that that is the
entire complement of away fans but I would try to
facilitate the people as much as I can within my terms
of reference to watch the game of football they have
come to watch.
                                   R.W. CREASER


And in order to facilitate the filling of pens    you have
to,have a means of directing people to a given    pen, don't
you? You have got to direct them to a pen in      order to
have control over where they go? - A. Well you    are putting
it in very specific terms.  People come in and    they naturally
walk into a pen, yes.

In order to control the numbers entering a pen you have to
in some way either prevent people going where they want to go
and you don't  want them to go or generally direct them in
a given area.    You have to do something to control the
numbers going   in apen if you are going to control them
you have got to do something? - A. To control the numbers,
yes, you need a counting mechanism, some turnstile or
electric ray or whatever to count the numbers.

That is just counting the numbers but actually ensuring
that people go into a particular pen which is a means of
controlling the numbers you need to direct them in some
way, don't you? - A. If I am exercising that sort of control,
yes.

And one of the ways you can do that, just coming now to
the Hillsborough ground, is for example you can cordon off
or block off a tunnel which is the means of entry on to
the centre pens and direct people round the sides.  That
is one way of controlling the numbers going into a given
pen, isn't it? - A. It is, yes sir.

Another way ofcontrolling numbers of people going into
a given pen is to make sure that a given turnstile leads
only, gives access only to one particular pen. That is
another way of doing it? - A. It isn't at Hillsborough.

No, but that is a way of dealing with it, isn't it?
- A. It is not a way in which I have got any influence,
but yes, you are right.

You seem to think I am criticising.  I am not, I am trying
to elicit from you experience of means of control.  That
is one way of dealing with it, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Now just looking at turnstiles A-G now and dealing with
Hillsborough as it was on the 15th of April, everybody
who came through those turnstiles A-G were people who
were going to stand on the terraces.  I say "everybody"
that is the turnstiles which were designated for those
who were going to stand on the terraces.  You agree with
me? - A. Yes.

In Hillsborough on the 15th of April all those turnstiles
led to the same concourse area, didn't it? - A. Yes sir.

As you rightly say those individual turnstiles weren't
in any way directed to a particular pen on the terrace.
That is right? - A. Yes sir.
                                  R.W. CREASER


Do you know yourself whether from your knowledge of the
planning on the 15th of April were there any provisions,
to your knowledge, for the directing of fans when they
came through turnstiles A-G to ensure that they went into
any particular pen? - A. Yes, it was a matter of commonsense
I think the allocation for Liverpool fans was 24,000 and a
considerable number of those would be allocated at the
Leppings Lane end and again a considerable number - although
I don't have the figures it is only supposition this - a
considerable number of those people will have been to the
event the previous year.  There will be Liverpool fans who
have acquired tickets, so they would know the layout.
They would know where to stand and the situation or the
tactics used in the direction of fans was absolutely
identical to the previous year.

So is the answer to my question that the only provision
for directing fans as they came through turnstiles A-G
to a particular pen was that they should rely on their
experience of the year before? - A. I think we have been
through at some considerable length the duties of the
serials and you refer, if I can refer to page 31,
Serials 14 and 15 in relation to your specific question
of turnstiles A-G, Serial 14 were given the task of
searching supporters as they came into the ground and
whilst they would not speak to them all, in the course
of speaking to people they would obviously be asked
questions and some fans, perhaps those that had not
visited the previous year, might say:   "Which way do I
go? Where do I get a good view?"   I don't want to give
the impression that the policing of this is clinical
in that there is not a certain amount of rapport and
friendliness with the football supporters.

Of course not. - A. And they will ask the Officers:
"Where is the best view? Where do I get a good view
from?"  The Officers will advise them and so that is
just one example of the factors of where fans would
be directed to.  I gave an example saying many of the
fans must have visited the previous year, it is the
same Football Club, so they would know where to go.
Many of the fans will have visited Hillsborough at the
league matches.

When you say "they would know where to go" or the Officer
would tell them where to get a good view, that is only
directed to the general way of getting on to the terraces.
What I am asking you is this: was there any provision
for ensuring that fans went into a particular pen as
opposed to another pen? - A. No sir.

Would you agree with me, however, that if a particular
pen got too full then it would be important to ensure
that any newcomers went into a different pen, a pen
which was not too full.  That would be a natural
planning thought, wouldn't it? - A. Yes sir.
                                   R.W. CREASER


To your knowledge what provision in the planning which you
knew about was directed to ensuring that fans did not
enter a pen , when they had come through turnstiles A-G,
which was not too full.  Was there any provision for that?
- A. Not in those specific terms, no sir.

You see the first matter which anybody has to consider
is to determine when a pen has become full.  I mean
obviously you have got to decide that first before you
can go on to the next stage of stopping fans going on
to a pen.  Do you understand? - A. I do, yes sir.

Was there any written provision in the Operational Order,
as far as you know, which gave specific duties to any
particular serial or Officer for monitoring the fullness
of a particular pen? - A. The Court has the opportunity
of reading the Order.  It is not written in the Order
because the Officers who are deployed at these locations
are experienced.  I keep coming back to this point that
every conceivable contingency cannot be written into
an Operational Order.  Now I have considerable experience
of policing at that end of the football ground and I use
my own experience to gauge when pens are full or otherwise.




                       Q. So the system
                                          R. tf. CREASER




So the system as you understand it was just generally
leaving it to any particular Officer who saw something
to bring it to the attention of another Officer? There
was no specific .... - A. No, sir, no ....

Well was there a specific .... - A. No, I will refer
you to the Order, the part of the Order that says that.
It is called "Intention".

     "It is the intention of the Police to allow this
     match to take place and to ensure public order and
     safety both inside and outside the football ground
     • • • •


I understand that. - A. And that is the intention and
that is the written instruction. Following that, if I
can relate to my experience perhaps as an Inspector,
when I was monitoring the pens at Leppings Lane I would
use all sorts of methods to establish when in my
opinion no more fans should be permitted entry to a
particular pen. I would go up into thd West Stand and
look down and decide whether or not I thought it was
full.  I would ask Officers who had sight of the pen,
perhaps in the Police Control Room, whether they
thought it was full.   I would, although I wouldn’tuse
this as a reliable method, people who exited from the
pens, perhaps down the central tunnel, might say, "It's
choc-a-bloc in there, don't let any more people in".   I
would use a variety of sources, but all that can't be
documented in an Operational Order.

That, of course, is relying on spontaneous information,
I understand that. What I am asking for, and it may be
it is just a straightforward answer, there wasn't a
specific briefing or a specific Operational Order
directed to the monitoring of the pens, that is right,
isn't it? - A. No, it is not right. There was a
specific order to say that the fans will find their own
level within the pens.

I am sorry, I didn't realise that. Could we have that
again, please? - A. Yes, my instructions were that the
fans would be allowed to find their own level within
the pens.

And how was a fan who had entered Pens 3 and 4, those
are the centre pens, to find his own level if there was
no way he could get to the sides beyond Pens 3 and 4.
Once he was on the terrace how was he going to find his
own level on to, say, Pen 5 or 6? - A. Well, surely
that is commonsense? If you go to a football ground
and you stand on a terrace and you are not comfortable,
or you are not satisfied with the view you have got,
you would prefer to be close to the corner flag to see
                                            R. W. CREASER




corner kicks being taken, or you want to be directly
behind the goal to see penalties taken, or wherever,
you determine yourself where you want to stand.

But you go onto the centre terrace through the tunnel,
and you meet the radial fence on your right-hand side
when you are moving across. You can't go any further,
you are in a crowd. How do you get into the side pen?
- A. Well, these things happen. People have come who
have consumed alcohol, and I would stress they are a
minority, but these people would presumably want to use
the toilets and other facilities such as they are at
the club. The question shouldn't be addressed to lae as
to how they get out of there. They either go out the
way they have come in or through the radial fences.

To whom should I direct the question ....

     THE CORONER:      I don't think you can ask the
witness that.

     HR. KING:      So be it, sir.

     THE WITNESS:   I can say I have never experienced
people having been in a pen and wanting to go from that
pen, whether to use the toilets, to buy a hot dog, to
buy a programme, to get a better view in another part
of the ground, I have never experienced them having
difficulties in being able to do so.

     HR. KING:   If a pen is too full for the safety of
the persons in it .... - A. We don't let that situation
arise.

I am sorry? - A. You should not let that situation
arise.

You shouldn't let it arise, right. Well, I agree with
you, so what provision was there in the Operational
Order designed to prevent, shall we say the centre
pens, getting too full? What was the system in
operation on 15th April directed to that problem? - A.
The situation would be that Officers would be told, "Do
not allow any more fans entry" into whichever pen was
causing the problem.

Where were the Officers stationed who were going to
stop the fans going onto those pens? - A. Where were
they stationed?

Yes. - A. It depends which pens.

Let's say the centre pens. Where were they stationed,
these Officers who on 15th April were going to prevent
                                          R. W. CREASER




the fans getting into a Pen 3 or 4 which was too full.
Where were they stationed? - A. They would be stationed
- Officers could be used at that location from the
concourse.

Are you saying it is the Officers on the concourse ....
- A. No, I am not saying that. You are asking me - it
could be, there are two reserve serials there, it could
be members of the reserve serial.

What I want to know is who on 15th April, which
Officers, had the specific duty of preventing fans
getting into Pens 3 and 4 when they had become too
full? - A. You misunderstood me. What I am saying is
that if the pen became full then I or another Officer
present, on their experience of policing that football
match, would make a decision it is time now to stop any
more fans entering a particular area, wherever that may
be, and the Officers deployed there would be dependent
upon the Officers available for deployment at that
time.

So the system for preventing any further fans going
onto Pens 3 or 4 would be for you, was it you who would
communicate with Officers on the concourse? Who had
the job of deciding whether or not Pens 3 or 4 were too
full? Who was in control of that problem?

     THE CORONER:   That is a very difficult question
for this Officer to answer because this is potentially
an incriminating question, I think.

     MR. KING:   So be it.

     THE CORONER:   I had better explain this to tne
witness so that he can decide what he wants to say:

In a Coroner's Court you do not have to answer any
question which may tend to incriminate you.  It is in
the Rules - it is Rule 22, I think. This question has
a potential, in my judgment, a potentially
incriminating aspect to it. You are, of course,
entitled to answer it if you wish, but if you genuinely
believe that an answer might incriminate you then you
are perfectly entitled to refuse to do so. - A. I am
obliged, sir. Will that warning be given in relation
to every single question of that nature?

If I notice it, yes. - A. I am obliged, sir.

I won't give it at such length, I will probably shorten
it, but you will know the sense. - A. Yes.  Then I can
only refer you back to the written instruction, "It is
tne intention of the Police to ensure that the match
                                                               35

A
                                                 R. W. CREASER




       takes place safely", and so all Police Officers would
       have a responsibility in that direction.
B   Q. I do understand that.  I am trying to find out - there
       may not have been - whether there was a specific plan
       in the operation planning for first of all discovering
       whether or not, say, the centre pens were too full, and
       then for taking steps to ensure fans didn't go into the
       centre pens. What was the system which was going to be
       put into operation? - A. The system would be that when
       the information was received that the pens were full,
       in fact, that would be as they were approaching
       becoming full, some positive action would be taken to
       prevent more fans entering that part of the ground.

    Q. Let me take that in stages then. To whom would the
       information be sent? - A. To the people controlling the
       match.

    Q. And who were they on 15th April, 1989? - A. There was a
D      set up, the Police Ground Control, which would be
       headed by a Chief Superintendent, who would be assisted
       by a staff of four or five people in his Control Room.

    Q. Where were they stationed - in the Control Room? - A.
       They would be in what is called Ground Control, which
       is overlooking the terraces that you are talking about.

    Q. So in other words they were in the Control Box, I think
       everybody knows to what I am referring, which is higher
       looking down over the terraces? - A. That is correct,
       yes.

    Q. So you say the information would be passed to them,
       right? - A. In some respects they would be one of the
       sources of the information because an Officer at the
       rear concourse, or an Officer who walked down the
       tunnel, would perhaps gain the impression that the
       centre pens were full, and I have done it myself.   I
       have radioed back and said - at different matches -
        These pens are full", only to be advised by those in
       control to say, "Ho, they are not full actually, there
       is plenty of room at the front."

    Q. I understand that, they could be a source. - A. So it
       is not just from one single source.

    Q. I understand that.  I am talking now about the
       collecting of the information once it has been
       received, and you tell me that the information would be
       sent to the Ground Control in that Box? - A. Correct,
       sir.




H
                                         R. W. CREASER




Was the system then that they in the Control Room would
then have the responsibility of taking the next step,
which was to ensure that fans did not get into the full
pens? Would they have the next step .... - A. They
wouldn't have the sole responsibility but they would
have that responsibility to some effect.

Somebody has to make the decision to stop fans going
in. - A. What I am saying is we have got Sector
Inspectors there. We are sat here now in the fourth
largest city in England. This city centre is now being
controlled by an Officer of the rank of Inspector, so
that is the calibre of the Officer we are talking
about, so it is quite possible that an Officer of the
rank of Inspector could take independent action in the
manner you have described, and in doing so he would
advise Ground Control of what he was doing, to receive
confirmation that the action he was taking was correct,
or informing them that he had taken that action
afterwards.

So there wasn't, in fact, any specific person who had
the responsibility for making the decision to stop fans
going into the centre pens? That would be left to the
initiative of any particular Officer who saw the
problem, is that right? - A. No, you are slightly
twisting what I am saying. Officers of that rank, and
indeed more junior, could take those decisions if they
wanted, but they would tell the Ground Commander of
what was happening. He might, in fact, in relation to
some decisions, overturn them, but he would either
agree or otherwise with the decision that had been
taken, or alternatively he might give the positive
instruction for that action to be taken.

That is therefore just a general situation whereby, as
you say, it could happen in a variety of ways. All I
am asking is, there was no specific plan to deal with
that situation? It was left to individual Officers to
spot the crowding if they saw it, to send a message if
they thought fit, to themselves take action if they
thought fit. There was no overall provision for this
problem, was there? - A. There was overall concern and
I will refer again to the intention. The intention of
all the Officers at that ground was to abide by the
instruction that I have just read from the Order, and
so contained and implicit in that is any problem with
overcrowding on terraces.  If it says, and I will have
to repeat it to you, sir:

    "It is the intention of the Police to allow this
    match to take place and to ensure public order and
    safety both inside and outside the football ground
                                                                   37



                                                       R. W. CREASER




       and that is the intention.

2           THE CORONER:    Hr. King, I think we have had this
       repeated about three or four times now, so I think you
       have got to move on. If you want to just round it off,
       and we will have to break because we need to have a
       break for the Jury for a few minutes.

               MR. KING:      I am obliged:

    Q. I will just put one final point to you, Officer, on
        this particular issue. You say it is implicit. Would
        you agree with rae there isn't a word in the Operational
        Order dealing with overcrowding and steps to prevent
        overcrowding? That doesn't appear in writing in the
        Operational Order, you would agree with me? - A. If
        what you are saying is a matter that affects public
        safety then it is in the Order because I have just read
        it out, but there is no specific plan. Those sort of
        details, after the formal briefing - the formal
D      briefing of the match will take place surrounding this
        document. These are everyone's written instructions.
        This is what will happen. Following that there will be
        informal briefings by Sector Commanders to the various
        Inspectors and Chief Inspectors as to matters that will
        take place.

    Q. You are not suggesting though, are you, that there was
       a specific briefing dealing with a potential problem of
       overcrowding, are you? - A. what I am suggesting is
       that in the informal briefings people will have been
       advised to monitor how the pens are filling up.

    Q. You are saying that? - A. I am saying that, yes.  In
       fact, I received specific instructions myself to that
       effect.

    Q. From whom? - A. Superintendent Murray.

    Q. Thank you.

               MR. KING:      I will leave it there, sir.

            THE CORONER:   If there are other matters which
       you want to continue with, but I think practically we
       have to stop for a few minutes.

               MR. KING:      I agree, sir.

               THE CORONER:      We will stop for quarter of an
       hour.

    Q. Mr. Creaser, I am sorry, we haven't finished yet. If
       you would remember you are on oath, and all the usual


H
                                          R. W. CREASER




things about discussion of the evidence and so on. - A.
I understand, sir.

     THE CORONER:   We will meet again in about quarter
of an hour, if that is satisfactory.

                (Short Adjournment)
                                                  R. W. CREASER


     MR. KING:   I wonder, sir, in the light of the answers
given by the Inspector just before the adjournment, they
were important, I wonder if the shorthand writer might read
back exactly what he said?

     THE CORONER:   I do not think it is the same shorthand
writer but I am informed we can have the tape recording
played back.
                (The tape recording was played)

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, to be consistent with the warning
that you gave under Rule 22 earlier - can you hear what I
am saying?

      THE CORONER:   Yes, indeed.

     MR. PAYNE:   I was just thinking of consistency in
relation to the warning that you gave under Rule 22 in
relation to the last answer that this witness has given.
It is a matter for you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I do not think an answer to say he was
given directions - that may be incriminating for
Superintendent Murray, I have no idea, but it cannot be
incriminating to him.

     MR. PAYNE:   I am not saying anything about it.   I am
merely drawing attention to the question of consistency.

     THE CORONER:   I am obliged.  It is quite possible
that I will miss it because it is quite difficult and if
anybody feels I have not responded you can draw my
attention to it and I will consider it. I think that
question and answer was, I think in my view, not one to
which the warning applies.

     MR. KING:   It will be necessary for me, sir, in the
light of the answers to refer the Inspector to the
transcripts of the Taylor Inquiry.  Sir, in order to
facilitate that could a copy be provided to the witness?

Q.       THE CORONER:   Have you got a copy? - A. Yes, one
     was provided by the Sergeant when you previously
     referred to it.

Q.       MR. KING:   Chief Inspector, so that I understand
     your answers from this morning your answers are that
     it was part of the briefing to Officers that their
     attention was to be directed to the monitoring of the
     pens and issues of overcrowding on the pens.  It was
                                                          40




                                                R. W. CREASER


  part of the briefing.  That is what you have said
  this morning? - A. Part of the informal briefings or
  formal briefings?

Q. Yes? - A. Informal briefings to that effect were
   given, yes.

Q. The informal briefing is the briefing to your
   Inspectors, is it not? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were telling us this morning that it was part of
   the briefing you gave to the Inspectors that they had
   to have an eye on the filling of the pens,
   overcrowding and so forth? - A. That would have been
   one of many factors that would have been given, yes.

Q. Chief Inspector, you gave evidence, did you not, to
   the Taylor Inquiry into this disaster? - A. I did,
   yes.
Q. We have a transcript of the questions and the answers
   you gave on that occasion and you have been provided
   with a copy? - A. I have been given a bundle of
   papers which I am assured is that transcript, yes.

Q. Can I direct your attention to that part of the
   transcript dealing with the very same questions and
   answers which we have been dealing with just now,
   this issue? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I am going to direct you to what is recorded as the
   questions and the answers and then I am going to ask
   whether or not you want to change in any way the
   evidence you have already given to this Jury on these
   matters.  Do you understand? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Could you turn to page 5-B of the transcript?

     THE CORONER:      Can you put it as shortly as you are
able, Mr. King?

     MR. KING:      Of course, sir.

Q. It is page 5-B. Have you found page 5, Chief
   Inspector? - A. I have, yes.

Q. Do you see at letter B this question to you:

   "Anyway, did you as part of your briefing to your
   Inspectors at any stage refer to this question of
   keeping an eye on the fullness of Pens 3 and 4?"
                                                          41




                                             R. W. CREASER


  A. Yes, sir.
Q. Your answer to that question in the Taylor Inquiry
   was "No, sir"? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you maintain that to be a correct answer? - A. The
   situation will have been, and I think we are
   referring here to Inspector White (or ex-Inspector
   White who has now left the Force) whether or not I
   gave him a specific briefing.  I will have covered
   the point you made - and I would be on first name
   terms with Mr. White - by saying "Are there any
   problems, Harry? Are you all right with the filling
   of the pens?" Now whether or not by definition you
   say that is a briefing or not is a matter for
   interpretation. What I will have done is that I will
   have satisfied myself that he was aware of his
   responsibilities.

Q. Can I continue on with the next question and answer?

   "You I think were present when Inspector White in
   particular briefed his serials? - A. I was present
   when he briefed the Club's stewards or I should say I
   entered the stand when he was part way through a
   briefing to the Sheffield Wednesday Club stewards."

   A. That is correct, sir. He gave a briefing to some
   stewards in the West Stand. They were all seated
   round him and he was giving them instructions.

Q. The question then was:

   "Did Mr. White in your presence say anything about
   monitoring or the possibility of monitoring the state
   of the pens? - A. No, sir, but if I can say Inspector
   White is a very experienced Inspector who has
   considerable experience of policing at Hillsborough,
   particularly again at the Leppings Lane end, the West
   Stand end, and I did not have to say it to an Officer
   of that calibre."

   A. Certainly not in front of a briefing given to club
   stewards.

Q. Is it the case, therefore; would you say that the
   evidence you gave to the Taylor Inquiry which I have
   read out is accurate? Is that correct? - A. Yes,
   sir.
     MR. KING:   I will not take that issue any further,
sir. One matter I do want to deal with though and, sir, it
is allied but it is in view of the fact that he referred to
Superintendent Murray.

       THE CORONER:   Yes.

Q.        MR. KING: You said that it was Superintendent
     Murray who mentioned monitoring the terraces.   You
     said that to us? - A. I attended the full match
     briefing.  I then had informal briefings - briefing
     is the wrong word.  It is conversations - with the
     respective Superintendents amongst which I made a
     visit to the Police ground control room, the control
     box as you referred to it, and I spoke to
     Superintendent Murray. We had a conversation which
     confirmed my understanding of how the pens would be
     filled.

Q. That is what I want to ask you about, that
   conversation with Superintendent Murray. What were
   you asking Superintendent Murray? - A. I was asking
   for confirmation of the manner in which the pens
   would be filled.

Q. What was that manner? - A. I can't remember the exact
   words of the conversation he and I had but I can give
   you the gist of the conversation which would be
   something to the effect, "Is it exactly the same as
   last year? Are we going to let them find their own
   level?".  Those sort of points would have been
   covered and the answer to that was yes.  I was really
   fairly confident that that was the plan.  I was just
   adopting a professional attitude to it.

Q. What was the alternative plan which might have been,
   and you were just obtaining confirmation that it was
   going to be used on this occasion? - A. I would
   imagine there are all sorts of options.

Q. There was a specific plan used at League matches, was
   there not? - A. Yes, different tactics, if you like,
   were used at Football League matches.

Q. At League matches there was a specific system for
   filling the pens, was there not? - A. There were
   some, yes.

Q. It is important because of the difference between
   what happened on this occasion and on those
   occasions.
                                             R. W. CREASER



     MR. KING:   Sir, in the light of the answers which I
have heard this morning I do submit it is important to see
a very different system which was in operation at League
matches as to the filling of pens as opposed to allowing
them to find their own level. Sir, I want to direct this
Officer to a page in the Operational Order which is
equivalent to the Operational Order for this match but was
for a League match in 1989.

     THE CORONER:   Which Operational Order, is it? Rather
than direct him to that, can you not put it to him so that
he can respond?

     MR.   KING:   Of course, I can, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Again I see what you want to establish.
You want to paint the picture but remember that he has told
us what was decided at this match. The fact that there
were other alternatives is interesting but not terribly
relevant and so be as brief as you can.  I am not going to
stop you just getting the point over but that is it.

     MR. KING:     So be it, sir.

Q. I am looking at an Operational Order of the South
   Yorkshire Police for a game between Sheffield
   Wednesday and Liverpool on the 14th January 1989.
   All right, Chief Inspector? That is what I am
   looking at? - A. Right, sir.

Q. You yourself would be one of the Officers I suspect
   who may have been involved in that match and the
   operation of that match? - A. I don't believe so, no,


Q. So be it? - A. But if you have got the Order you will
   be able to see if I was in fact allocated to duties
   at that match.

Q. All right. All I want to put to you is the
   Operational Order for the equivalent serial who was
   on the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Perhaps you could
   establish if I was present at the match first or if I
   am named in the Order?

Q. Certainly.  You, Officer, are not listed and I
   suspect, therefore, you may not have been there? - A.
   Right. Was it an all-ticket match, sir?
                                                  R. W. CREASER


0. I cannot answer that. - A. Was it an evening kick-
   off?

Q. I cannot answer those questions. - A. Right.

Q. What I want to put to you is the system as opposed to
   whether you were there because you went to Sergeant
   Murray with a specific question as to what manner was
   going to be used on the occasion of the Semi Final in
   1989? - A. Superintendent Murray.

Q. Superintendent Murray? - A. Yes.

Q. Looking at the equivalent serial order for the
   Leppings Lane terrace which one finds in that Order,
   and of course we have an equivalent one in relation
   to the 1989 game, this is what it says for the League
   game:
     "Serial 9 Leppings Lane terrace, maintain order."

     So far that is similar to what we had on this
     occasion in 1989, the Semi Final? Maintaining order
     was one of their duties? - A. I am not trying to be
     evasive but you are talking to me about a football
     match about which you appear to know nothing. Was it
     an evening kick-off? Was it an all-ticket match? I
     don't know.

Q. So be it. Can I just put to you this instruction
   which they had in 1989 at a League match? It says:

     "Ensure pens are filled in accordance with
     instructions from Control."

     That appears in that Operational Order? - A. You are
     telling me.  I don't know if it does or not.

     THE CORONER:     That is fair enough.   I told him to
read it to you.

Q.     MR. KING: You are aware from experience that at
     League games there have been systems in operation by
     the Police for ensuring pens are filled in accordance
     with specific instructions? - A. I am, yes, sir.

Q. In order to carry out those instructions what do you
   do - that is all I am interested in - in order to
   ensure fans go into a particular pen so that those
   pens are filled in a particular order? What is
   actually physically done to ensure that they go into
one pen as opposed to another? - A. I can speak in
generality or I can speak in specifics and there are
so many parameters to the policing of a football
match that it is very difficult to be general but if
I knew if it was a League match, how many fans were
coming, whether it was an all-ticket match, whether
they were travelling by train coming to Wadsley
Station or Midland Station, whether they come by
coach, whether they come by private transport, these
are all factors which have to be taken into account
as to the size of the crowd, the time of arrival and
how they would be accommodated.

All I want to know is that if you decide to control
the numbers going into a pen, give me an example of
what you actually do to control them going into the
pen? How do you ensure that one pen is filled and
then another one is filled in a certain order? What
do you actually physically do as they come into the
ground?   That is all I am asking? - A. If I was going
to fill, Pens 3 and 4, what I would know as the
Centre South and Centre North, if a decision had been
made to fill the Centre South then access to that
would be gained either through the radial fence from
the southern pens or through the central tunnel.   If
I wanted to confine fans just to that pen I would
shut it off and direct them to that pen.

In order to control the filling of pens the way to do
it is to shut off other pens and direct fans to the
one that you want them to go to? - A. That is the way
I would do it, yes, sir.

Thank you.  In 1989 we know that a large number of
people were allowed into the ground through the
concertina Gate C? - A. Yes, sir.

You saw that gate opening.   You were present when it
was opened? - A. Yes, sir.

Would you agree with me that those people when they
entered the concourse could have been specifically
directed to a particular pen in the way you have just
described happens at a League match, could have
happened? - A. Yes, but I think you will agree that
the flow of people through Gate C was far more than a
gentle or steady trickle as would happen at a League
match through turnstiles and perhaps the mood of the
crowd would be different.
Q. Those may be factors which other Officers can deal
   with? - A. You are asking me to hypothesise.  I was
   outside the ground at the time.

Q. Of course you were. - A. But I can hypothesise.

Q. Certainly. Because it happens at a League match it
   is possible to shut off, for example, the centre pens
   and direct the fans to the side pens? That is
   possible, is it not? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

Q. Also would you agree with me that if there was this
   briefing and order as to monitoring the fullness of
   pens that it would be important for anybody
   considering where those people were going to go to
   ensure that they did not go on to pens which were
   already full. That would be important, would it not?
   - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Indeed, it is fairly obvious, is it not, that if you
   have got a large number of people coming through at
   once then it is going to be crucial that they do not
   enter pens which are already full? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I do not want to labour the obvious but what is the
   danger if hundreds of people, thousands of people
   perhaps, who are allowed in go on to pens which
   already full? What is the potential danger? - A. The
   potential danger is that there is the possibility of
   injury.

Q. Through crushing? - A. Correct.

Q. In order to stop the fans going down the tunnel into
   Pens 3 and 4, all you would need, would it not, is a
   cordon of Officers in front of the tunnel directing
   them to the sides?

     THE CORONER:   I think you have got enough from the
Officer on this point.

     MR. KING:   So be it, sir.

     THE CORONER:   He was not there and we are going to
get into an argument about how many Officers he would need
and so on.

     MR. KING:   So be it, sir.

Q. Can I just clarify one or two points specifically on
   your evidence and then you will all be pleased to
                                                          47




                                                 R. W. CREASER


  know I will sit down? When, Chief Inspector, you
  asked or gave the message to Constable Buxton to
  delay the kick-off, do you remember that stage of
  your evidence? - A. I do, yes.

Q. The concertina gate, Gate C, had not been opened at
   that stage, had it? - A. I don't think so, no, sir.

Q. That is fairly obvious because if it had been you
   probably would not have seen the need for the delay
   in kick-off. You gave evidence that you thought you
   gave the message to Constable Buxton at a time when
   there was a roar from the crowd or the teams were
   going out on to the pitch, something like that? - A.
   I understand.   I can tell you what I did.  I asked
   Police Constable Buxton to make the suggestion to the
   Ground Commander that if he had not already done so
   he perhaps might address his mind to delaying the
   kick-off.   I have been told since that at or about
   the time that message was received the teams ran out
   on to the pitch.

Q. What we do know for certain, because we know certain
   times, you see, is that Gate C had not yet been
   opened when you relayed that message?

     THE CORONER:   Just a minute, Mr. King, I do not think
that is entirely fair because you must put to him the time
when the teams ran out on to the pitch.

     MR. KING:      So be it, sir.

     THE CORONER:      Have you got them because, if not, I
can help you?

     MR. KING:      14.54, was it not, sir?

      THE CORONER:  14.54, that is right, and then you had
better put to him the times when the gates were opened as
well.




                                       /Q.    MR. KING.
                                                   R. W. CREASER



q.        M R . KING: We know - and no-one is blaming you for
     this, Officer, because you didn't have a stop-watch and
     we have been able to get these times from looking at
     videos and so forth and it takes a lot of time and effort
     to do that and nobody is criticising you for not getting
     times right exactly - we know that the teams ran on to
     the pitch at about six minutes to three. - A. Yes.
     There is an assumption that the timing device on the
     video was correct, but I will accept it was six minutes
     to three.

Q. We know that Gate C, that is the big concertina ga t e , was
   opened prior to that time on at least two occasions;
   once at about twenty minutes to three for a short period
   and again at eight minutes to three for about five
   minutes when the great bulk of people entered.   Now when
   you gave your message to Constable Buxton had you been
   conscious at that stage of any gate having already been
   opened? - A. No, sir.


                Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

0. Chief Inspector, the whole thrust of your evidence is
   that as a police officer progresses through his career
   with the police he builds up a vast body of experience
   and then relies on that in discharging his duties as a
   police officer, is that right? - A. That is correct.

0. Although you have said in passing that your own
   experience of policing football matches is extensive, I
   don't think we have actually had precisely how much time
   in relation to other grounds you spent at Hillsborough.
   Is Hillsborough the ground where you mainly policed
   football matches? - A. Yes.   The first I attended in an
   official capacity on duty at Hillsborough was in 1977.
   I believe it was a semi-final, Manchester United and
   Leeds United.

Q. Then from 1981 to 1987 I believe you were an Inspector
   who regularly policed at Hillsborough ground? - A.
   Between 1981 and 1987 I was stationed in the F Division
   of the South Yorkshire Police, which is the Division
   which covers the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club so I
   would be called on very frequently to perform duties at a
   variety of football matches, ranging from league, league
   cup, FA cup, semi-finals.

0. Again, obviously there are different parts of the ground.
   How much time in your policing at Hillsborough was spent
   at Leppings Lane end as opposed to other parts of the
   ground? - A. My experience was confined mainly to
   Leppings Lane.   Perhaps 80% of the time was at the
                                             R. W. CREASER


Leppings Lane terraces, West Stand and the Leppings Lane
turnstiles.
That gives the jury the full benefit of your experience.
It is also right to say, not following on exactly from
what Mr. King was saying, but an Operational Order
cannot, by nature, be definitive,   can it? - A.  It cannot
cover every possible eventuality, no, sir.

If it was laid down in black and white exactly what it
was intended every single police officer would do, aside
from the practical problem of trying to guess what every
single police officer would do that deprives that officer
of the ability to use his experience and discretion and
have the flexibility to react to situations as they
develop throughout the course of their duties? - A. Yes,
sir.
Presumably, however, parts of the Operational Order are
drafted on the basis of the collective experience of
police officers policing football grounds, that is, how
to deploy your manpower in certain areas because of what
has happened in the past and you can see patterns and^
trends emerging? - A. Yes.  What   would have happened is
that this document would have been produced in     draft form
and the senior officers involved in the planning of it
would have scrutinised it, perhaps made comments,
possibly some additions, and refined it until the
document we have here.

Can I ask you to look at page 30 of the Operation Order.
It is Sub-Sector 6, West Stand, Serial 13 and then D
says:
     "6 PCs will be located at the front of the stand to
     prevent...persons climbing from the terraces to the
     stand and to maintain order."

Is it your experience, having policed the Leppings Lane
end of the ground, that fans are in the habit of
attempting to climb from the terraces into the West
Stand? - A. Yes.     The construction of the ground is such
that interms of height there is not a    very great
difference between the top of the terracing and the West
Stand.     Obviously the tickets for the terracing are
cheaper   because it is standing, than the tickets for the
West Stand.

So fans quite naturally think they can get a better view
in a seat they don't have to pay so much for and some of
them will attempt to climb up and get into the stand by
that route? - A. Yes, and in doing so there is a risk
that they will injure themselves or should they fall they
                                                                    50




                                                          R. W. CREASER


        will fall on to other fans stood below, so it is a
        practice the police discourage.
B    Q. Let's move on to the events of the 15th of April.   You
        have said you were present at least for part of Inspector
        White's briefing of the stewards? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. I believe it is fair to say that in another place you
        said you were very impressed with the briefing that was
        given by Inspector White? - A. I certainly was, yes, sir.

     Q. A very experienced officer? - A. Yes.    He again has
        frequently worked at Hillsborough and I was impressed -
        it would have been 11.30/12.00-ish when he had got the
        stewards assembled round him and he was giving them
        specific instructions.   I arrived part way through the
        briefing and stood to one side and listened to the
        instructions he was giving them.    He was giving them
        instructions like - if there was a problem or argument
        over who is occupying which particular seat, the seat
T)      will have a number on it corresponding to the ticket and
        he would say that that was a matter for the stewards to
        resolve, not a matter for the police.     In other words,
        he was drawing some sort of demarcation between the
        responsibilities of the police and the stewards.

     Q. The stewards were there to make sure people were in the
        right seats, resolve problems arising out of the seats
        and duties connected with that? - A. Yes, sir.    Indeed,
        their responsibilities were to be, I believe, to show
        people to their seats and direct them to their seats,
        which was not considered a police function.

     0. Presumably you were aware of where the stewards were
        going to be deployed in areas on that day? - A. Yes.
        There were perhaps more stewards than is the norm but I
        know a lot of the stewards, if not by name by face, and I
        had a reasonable understanding of where they were likely
        to be positioned.

     Q. Can you very briefly just confine it to the Leppings Lane
        end say where you expected to see the s t e w a r d s ? - A. Yes.
        There would be four stewards on Gate C.      I believe a
        similar number on B.   Perhaps two or three on A.           There
        would be perhaps three or four stewards at the bottom of
        the two sets of steps that lead up to the West Stand,
        which are marked gangways V, W, X, Y, Z, because that
        would be the point where fans would present their tickets
        that gave them access to the West Stand.

        There would be stewards positioned in the West Stand, at
        the extreme left and extreme right hand side, where there
        are fire escapes.   There would be at least one if not
        two stewards at the top of the gangways leading into the


H
A4
                                                                    51




                                                        R. W. CREASER


            West Stand.   There would be people from the club in
            contact by radio monitoring the flow through the
            turnstiles.
     B
            I have obviously missed some out, but...

         Q. But that would be the normal deployment of stewards?
            That happened whether it was a league cup or whatever
            sort of match?   That is the sort of deployment of
            stewards you would expect to see at the Leppings Lane
            end?  - A. Yes.    There would be, if you like, the
            maximum number at a semi-final.    At a league match there
            would be far less.

         Q. The important thing about that is that there were no
            stewards deployed on the Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
            That is correct.

         Q. That didn't surprise you? - A. No, sir.

     D   Q. That was the same, as you have just agreed, for all
            matches, no stewards on the Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
            That is correct.

         Q. Can I take you back outside the ground?   Would you look
            at C.305?   I believe you were in court yesterday when
            Chief Superintendent McKay was giving his evidence and
            possibly when Chief Inspector Waring was giving his
            evidence.   Now to put this in context this photograph is
            taken outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles at 2.30 - it
            is 2.31 on the photograph but we know that in fact it is
            a minute fast so the actual time is 2.30.   I showed this
            photograph to Chief Superintendent McKay.   Do you see
            the police officer with the helmet working his way down?
            He is obviously on horse back? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. He is working his way along the line towards the
            turnstiles? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

         Q. If you move slightly to the right there is a gentleman
            there standing on the other side of the blue barrier with
            a red coat on and a flat cap, an elderly gentleman? - A.
            Yes, sir.

         Q. He has got a gap in front of him? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. He is waiting to get into the turnstiles.   From what you
            can tell from that photograph there is a line of people
            waiting to get into the turnstiles at that particular
            time? - A. Yes, sir.

         0. We know that that isn't the situation that remained at
            Leppings Lane end, but the essential difference between
            that and the situation you had to deal with by forming a


     H
                                             R. W. CREASER


cordon, was there were a lot more people pushing forward,
creating pressure, into that area?   Is that right? - A.
That's right, yes, sir.

However, your impression was that when you formed the
cordon, which was intended to relieve the pressure, is
that right? - A. It was to stop more people getting into
that area to relieve the pressure, yes.

Relieving the pressure at the turnstiles.   Your
impression was that that cordon was effective to achieve
that task? - A. Yes, sir.

The reason you didn't continue it was that other steps
had been taken to relieve the pressure, namely, the
opening of the gates? - A. That crowd dispersed, yes,
sir.
But in your mind it was effective to achieve the task you
set out to do, that is, keep those fans back and relieve
the pressure that had been created at the turnstiles? -
A. That is correct, yes, sir.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Chief Inspector, would you agree that the main purpose of
the police on the 15th of April,   1989 was to move the
fans safely into the stadium from the outside of the
stadium via the turnstiles?    The main purpose was to use
the turnstiles and get them in safely? - A. Yes, it was
to ensure...   It wasn't the police's responsibility to
move them, they move themselves, but it was to ensure
that they did so in a save manner.

And to ensure the safety of all the fans, would you agree
that searches would have to be made on individual fans as
they passed through the turnstiles? - A. Yes,^that was
the instruction.   Obviously every fan couldn't be
searched and police officers would use their discretion.
For example, that man in the red who has been described
as an elderly person - it is difficult to tell from the
photograph.   However, in police experience people
dressed like that who are aged sixty are not the people
who take Stanley knives to football matches.




                  0. Do you think that
                                  R.W. CREASER


Do you think that could be risky though.  Sometimes
pepple could dress in a certain way and they could be
the biggest criminals going? - A. Of course he could,
yes, you are right.

There is a risk there, definitely? - A. Yes, as a rule
the people arrested in possession of offensive weapons
and who are convicted of offences in relation to violence
and disorderly conduct at football matches tend to be in
the lower age groups.

So would you agree they should all be searched really,
you know somebody could skip through the net who
shouldn't do so it would be wise to make more thorough
checks? - A. Well experience has not shown that to be
the case but you could be right, yes.

You say you have had considerable experience at football
matches.  Would you say generally Leppings Lane is kept
open to traffic when fans are arriving for the match?
- A. Generally, for all categories of matches or — .

Yes, most matches? - A. Yes, as a general rule it is a
main road in a large city and it is kept open.

So the question I would like to ask is should the road
have been closed at all on the 15th of April 1989?
- A. In my opinion, yes.

What I mean is would you think it was a good idea to
close it or not? - A. Yes.

It was? - A. Yes.

Why do you say that, Chief Inspector? - A. So that the
people on foot were not hindered in getting to the
ground.

Do you think it could cause congestion at the main gate
though, they would be moved down much more quickly by
closing the road off.  That would create congestion,
I would have thought? - A. Well the evidence I can give
is there was no congestion until some time after 2.30
and we had to do everything we could to facilitate those
people getting into the ground.  If the traffic was still
flowing it would have slowed those people down and their
intention, they are looking at their watches all the time:
"We have got to get to the ground before 3 o'clock, before
kick-off".

So do you think it made their way easier when the traffic
was stopped? - A. Yes.

They had easier access.  Were there Officers at the
perimeter gates turning people without tickets away and who
were carrying alcohol, were they turning these people
away at the main gate? - A. Yes.
                                                            54

                                      R.W. CREASER


Q. You said that Officers thought a boy who was being passed
   over the heads of people in the crowd at the turnstiles
   wa£ dead? - A. Yes.

Q. Now did you see an Officer checking to see what the state
   of this boy was at that time? - A. I could see, I believe
   that he passed, I could be wrong in this it is a distant
   memory, but I believe he passed through the hands of
   Inspector Purdy who was one of the Inspectors there or
   certainly some other Police Officer and I didn't go from
   where I was because there was a Police Officer there who
   would see to his needs.

Q. But with an incident of this type occurring outside did
   you think it was quite wise at the time for the match
   to be delayed with this sort of thing happening? - A.
   It was round about that point and I am sorry but I can't
   be precise of the time but I thought that the Ground
   Commander who would have an overall picture, he would
   know what was happening at the other end of the ground,
   how the Nottingham Forest fans were getting in, he would
   have an overall picture of arrivals of coaches, it was
   a matter he should have brought to his attention and I
   thought by making the suggestion to him that he should
   consider delaying the kick-off,  if he had made that
   decision, and I am only saying if, if that decision had
   been made then perhaps that information could have been
   relayed to the people outside the ground and would have
   perhaps reduced their drive to get inside the ground for
   3 p.m.

Q. Thank you for suggesting this.   It was a very good move
   on your part.

         Now the tactics that you used for forming a cordon
   they did seem to be working very well for you and as you
   said your work was undone when a gate was opened.  Were
   you surprised to see this happening? - A. Was I surprised
   to see the gate open?

Q. Yes? - A. When I saw the state of the crowd situation
   outside the ground and I saw that somebody had taken
   the action to open the gate I remember thinking that
   was the sensible thing to do because I had stopped the
   crowd getting any bigger and it seemed the sensible
   way of relieving the pressure and preventing injuries
   or even deaths in fact outside those turnstiles.

Q. But you were preventing people from moving forward too
   quickly.  Somebody was increasing the rate of flow by
   opening the gate, weren't they? You were holding them
   back which I think was a sensible thing to do.  The
   other process would speed everything up. Would you agree?
   - A. Well I was not close enough to the turnstiles to see
   what the situation was.  I can tell you that if I had
                                    R.W. CREASER


been there and I had seen that there was a situation where
somebody stood a chance of receiving a serious injury and
by ''opening the gates that would alleviate that situation,
then I would have done it.

But some of the people outside were pushing.  Quite a
number of witnesses have said that, so to allow these
people in who were pushing wouldn't that be dangerous
in your opinion? - A. Well the alternative to that was
to leave them where they were and for them to push the
people who were pushing against a wall, so yes I agreed
with the decision to open the gates.  I agreed with it.
I thought it was a wise decision.

You don't think they could have moved from that area
into the sterile area past Gate C, for instance, that
long track where vehicles go?

      THE CORONER:  I think that is a surmise.  Do you
feel you can answer that question? - A. That would have
been a possibility yes, but it would mean that some
action would perhaps have to be taken to stop them
progressing too far down there because you are then
into an area where they could come into contact with
supporters of the opposing football team and that is
a prime rule that we try and segregate opposing fans.

      MRS. McBRIEN:   It is a long area though ....

      THE CORONER:  I don't think we should pursue it.
He has given you an answer.




              Q. MRS. McBRIEN:   You said
                                          R. W. CREASER




  , MRS. McBRIEN:    You said there was room, once they
went through the turnstiles, you agreed with the
decision, and there was plenty of room in the concourse
area once they had passed through the gates, I mean,
not the turnstiles.  I was just going back to the other
point, there was room inside but there was room outside
as well, wasn't there, not just by the turnstiles but
certainly on the outside of the ground, between the
river and the perimeter of the ground? - A. Yes, what
is described as the service road was declared - I think
the terminology was to be a sterile area, in that fans
would not go down there. One has to remember that
these decisions, although considered as carefully as
possible, were not considered with the great benefits
that we have here today, studying plans and photographs
and all sorts of other information, but my view is that
the number of people who were outside the turnstiles
could safely be accommodated in the concourse, and
there would be no danger that they would then mix with
opposing fans. So my answer to your question is I
believe that they could safely be accommodated in the
concourse area.

But should some of those fans not have been admitted at
all? We do know and there has been evidence in this
Court that some of those fans waiting to go in didn't
have tickets. Should they have been in that area, is
the question, in the concourse area? - A. Well, I don't
want to seem rude but you should address that question
to those people. Obviously the people without tickets
should not have been attending the football match, and
in ray view the Police did take a considerable amount of
action and effort to dissuade people not in possession
of tickets not to come to the match, but should they
have been there or not is something you will have to
ask them.

Yes, I do realise that they shouldn't have come but of
course they had had a very poor allocation of tickets,
hadn't they?

     THE CORONER:   I don't think the Officer is the
right person to answer that one either.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Would you agree that there were
problems outside the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

There were, and do you think it was a good idea to
transfer those problems that were outside through a
gate into the inside of the ground, or should they have
been dealt with outside?

     THE CORONER:   The Officer has already answered
that several times.
                                                                      57

                                                      R.   W. CREASER




               MRS. McBRIEN:   I am sorry.

                THE WITNESS:   I can ansi^er the question, sir. In
          ray opinion there was more space in the concourse where
n         those fans could be accommodated without suffering
          serious injury, so it seemed to me, although I didn't
          make the decision and I wasn't responsible for it, that
          it was a correct decision, because those people could
          be better accommodated and there would be less risk of
          injury, if they were located from the crush outside the
          turnstiles into the easy access and more room on the
          concourse.

     Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Would you agree that if fans
          filter in, in the usual way through the turnstiles,
          they are able to move back    off part ofthe terraces
          near the tunnel, once they    go into thepens,if they
          are filtering in, in the normal way? - A. Yes.

     Q. Normally is the tunnel left open to act as a vital exit
        route from the terraces, in the event of an emergency
        on the terraces? - A. Yes, it is. There are gates at
jQ      the pitch end of the tunnel and there are wooden doors
        at the concourse end, and those would be either locked
        or pinned in the open position.

     Q. Would you say that on 15th April, 1989, fans didn't
        filter into the pens at the correct rate, that they
        were going in there much too fast? - A. Yes.

     Q. And they were unable to retreat, of course, that the
        tunnel became blocked because of the numbers? - A. I
        wasn't there.

               THE CORONER:    He wasn't there.    I don't think he
          can say that.

     Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   I was just going to say again that
          I want to thank you for forming the cordon, for your
          part in trying to do something very positive, and also
          for trying to nave the game delayed.  I would like to
          say that. Thank you very much.

               THE CORONER:   Mr. Russell, before you begin, I am
          not trying to rush you but can you give me an
          indication of how long you think you are going to be,
          because then I can decide whether we proceed or whether
          we have luncheon?

               MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I have a very few questions,
          only a minute or two.

               THE COROWER:    In that case ....




H
                                                                58
                                                  8. 17. CREASER




           HR. PAYNE:   Sir,   it might help if I were to say
      that with your leave I   would be grateful if I might ask
      some more questions at   the end as well, arising out of
      new matters which have   arisen.
B          THE COROWER:   Yes. Mr. Russell, would it be
      inconvenient for you then if we start after lunch?
      Would that throw you in any way?

           MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I am in your hands.  I am
      quite happy to deal with it in one or two minutes now,
      or ....

           THE CORONER:   Okay, let's do that. Let's deal
      with you and then we will rise for lunch.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

    0. Chief Inspector, can I ask you to turn to page 16 of
       the Operational Order? Do you have it? - A. Yes, sir.

    0. You are shown there as the Chief Inspector in charge of
D      Sector IB? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. And you had under you seven Inspectors who themselves
       are responsible for batches, or in one case one, serial
       numbers? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Can you please help me with the means by which those
       Inspectors reported to you? For example, did you
       expect those Inspectors to report to you continuously,
       regularly and as a matter of routine throughout the
       day, or would tney only report to you when they had
       something it was necessary to report to you? - A. They
       would report to me if it was a problem that they could
       not deal with, which did not i^ant the immediate
       attention of the Ground Control.

    0. Because your Inspectors were quite far flung throughout
       the stadium, as you have identified by reference to the
       plan? - A. Yes.  If I wanted to speak, for example, to
       Inspector Woodward wno was in the North Stand, and then
       perhaps speak to Inspector Bullas in the v/est Stand, it
       would perhaps be five minutes walk through the
       different doors and round the stadium.

    Q. If you did not receive a report from, for example, the
       serials who were at the Penistone Road North
       turnstiles, those Inspectors which were under your
       control, you would assume that they had nothing to
       report and therefore that there was nothing which those
       Inspectors could not deal with? - A. Yes, sir.




H
                                                              59

                                              R.   W.   CREASER




Q. That was the pattern of communication from you
   downwards. Can I please turn briefly to the pattern of
   communication from you upwards, and would it be fair to
   say simply that it was the same? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You did not report to people above you, unless there
   was some matter which you either needed guidance on, or
   something which you were unable to deal with yourself?
   - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. The people above you, you have identified as being two
   in number, namely Superintendent Greenwood, insofar as
   matters were concerned inside the ground? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. And Superintendent Marshall in respect of matters at
   and outside the turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You also, it appears from your evidence, had a direct
   line to the Ground Commander in the Control Box? - A.
   Yes, sir.  I was equipped with a hand portable radio,
   as were all the Inspectors.

Q. And can I seek to establish the circumstances in which
   you would go to the Control Box, as opposed to the
   circumstances in which you would go to either
   Superintendent Greenwood or Superintendent Marshall, by
   reference to examples given in your evidence. You
   describe the function of Serials 20 and 21, they being
   the serials who were held in reserve in the gymnasiuia?
   - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Notionally, according to the Operational Order, they
   were under your control? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    But I think you told us that their use was in reality
     at the discretion of the Ground Commander in the
     Control Box? - A. The Ground Comnaander, if he had a
     situation which required Police attendance, would
     obviously use reserve serials, and if the need arose he
     would have used Serials 20 and 21.

Q.    If you had used those serials, as they were under your
     control in terms of the pyramid of control, you would
     have cleared it, would you not, with the Control Box? -
     A. I would, yes, sir.

Q. The second instance from your evidence I would like to
   touch on is when you spoke to PC Buxton and asked to
   use his radio it was to send a message to the Control
   Box, was it not, and not either to Superintendent
   Greenwood or Superintendent Marshall? - A. It was to
   send a message to the Control Box. The radio system
   would have been working on talk-through, which would
                                                              60
                                                R. W. CREASER




     mean that other Officers would have heard that
     instruction or that suggestion, and if they had so
     wished they could have put an alternative suggestion.

Q.   Finally, the words that you had with the Control Box -
     I ara sorry, the words that you had about pen filling
     was with the Control Box, or Superintendent Murray, I
     think .... - A. That was oral rather than radio, yes,
     sir.

Q. I think by a visit to the Control Box? - A. That is
   correct, yes.

Q.   Can you remember after this length of time what if any
     contact you had, or to what extent you reported, to
     Superintendent Greenwood after, say, half-past-2? - A.
     I had no connection or contact with Mr. Greenwood after
     that time, sir.

Q. After half-past-2? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Thank you.

          HR. MAXWELL:   Sir, before you rise I wonder if I
     might indicate to you in open Court, and in the
     presence of the Jury and on behalf of Sheffield City
     Council that we propose to re-organise our
     representation at this Inquest?

          Sir, what it means is that for a timeI shall not
     be attending on a daily basis but I will resume
     attendance when evidence that relates to the licensing
     aspect is to be given.  In the meantime, a
     representative of the solicitors who instruct me will
     be present daily with a watching and noting brief. The
     practical effect will be, as before, that it will be no
     questions from me and no questions from him.

           Sir, I mention this though in openCourt, and
     before the Jury, partly out of courtesy to you and to
     the members of your Jury, but partly also because I
     would not    want any adverse inference to be drawn from
     this.   Itcertainly is not    a mark of disrespect to
     those who    lost their lives or to the bereaved, and it
     certainly is not to be taken as indicating any lack of
     concern on the part of the Sheffield City Council.

          Sir, what we propose to do is partly by way of
     liaison with your Officers and partly by reference to
     the list of witnesses, to decide when we will re­
     appear. The decision will, of course, be entirely ours
     but we appreciate the assistance that has been given so
     far, by way of an indication as to when our evidence is
     likely to be required. We appreciate, sir, that you
                                             8. W. CREASER




are master in your own Court and that you will have to
reorganise as justice demands in this case, and that
the indication already given that that evidence may be
called in January, 1991, may even now have to be put
back further into 1991, but we will liaise with your
Officers, sir, to find out what is required.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you for letting me know and I
can assure you that I will not consider it a mark of
disrespect or anything improper if you do what you have
outlined.

        MR. MAXWELL:   Thank you very much, sir.

        THE CORONER:   We will come back at quarter-past
then:

Hr. Creaser, we need you back but hopefully not for
quite as long as we have had you up to now.  I think we
are coming to the end.

                  (Luncheon Adjournment)
                                                           62




                                                 R. W. CREASER



              Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. Mr. Creaser, you have given evidence this morning about
   your visit to what we are calling the control box where
   you saw Superintendent Murray and asked what system was
   to be used to fill the pens, or words to that effect? —
   A. Yes, sir.
Q.   You have told the jury that the effect of his reply was
     that the same system as in 1988 was going to be used and
     fans were going to be left to find their own level? - A.
     Yes.   This is a tried and trusted method which was found
     acceptable the previous year and there was an agreement
     that that was the action which would be taken, sir.

Q. Can you just explain to the court what that means, "find
   your own level"?    What is going to happen? - A. That
   the fans would not be denied access to all pens bar one
   and that each pen would not be filled progressively.

Q. They would not be denied access to all pens bar one, the
   one is that narrow strip, is it? - A. They would be
   allowed access to all the pens simultaneously.

0. What does it mean "find your own level"? - A. Well, it is
   perhaps not a very apt analogy, but as water is poured
   into a glass it will find its own level.

Q. How in fact was it envisaged that they were going to do
   that?   How would they find their own level in the
   different pens? - A. I can't follow.   They would walk on
   to the terraces and obviously if it was noted there was a
   problem with compaction at a particular area, then some
   action would be taken, but there would be no restrictions
   on the fans.   One of the prime reasons for which would
   be because this is what had taken place the previous
   year.

Q. Yes, I see.   Of course criticism is now made of this
   system, as you appreciate.   I would like to ask you
   this, Mr. Creaser:  before the 1989 event had anyone ever
   said anything to you to the effect that this system was
   not safe? - A. No, sir.

Q. Had you ever heard that said by anyone? - A. No, sir.

Q. Of course the ground belongs to the Sheffield Wednesday
   Football Club. - A. It does, sir.

Q. The layout of the pens is on the terraces of the club,
   obviously.   Had you ever heard anybody from the club
   saying this system was not safe? - A. No.   I can only
   assume that in consultation with the club, both the
                                                                 63




                                                      R. W. CREASER


         police and the club deemed it from experience to be a
         satisfactory method.
B   Q. Had you known it to be used on other occasion apart from
       1988? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.    Over what period of time? - A. It was certainly used in
         1987 for some time.I am aware      that different
         Commanders would adopt different tactics at different
         matches.    It is difficult to say that any two police
         operations are identical.    Football matches...

    0.    The jury is only really interested in over what period
         had this system been in use. - A. To my knowledge perhaps
         two/two and a half years.

    Q.   Disregarding the 1988 occasion had   anyone ever criticised
         the system in any context that you   ever heard? - A. No,
         sir.

D   Q.   Against that, and I ought to ask you this: did you
         believe yourself that the system would work? - A.
         Certainly, sir.   If I thought otherwise then I would
         have voiced those opinions.

    Q. Did you believe it was safe to let the fans find their
       own level? - A. Certainly, sir.

    0. Your attention has been directed by way of contrast to
       the nature of the policing at league matches and you have
       been asked about the practice of directing the fans to
       particular pens at league matches.   I would like you to
       explain to the jury what the difference is between those
       league matches and these big occasions in 1988 and 1989
       and the others that you mentioned? - A. The difference is
       a matter of degree.   The semi-finals were all-ticket
       matches.   In theory we knew exactly how many people were
       going to come because they were the ticket holders.   At a
       league match that is almost invariably not tne case.

    0. Just take it in stages.    At this match it was an all­
       ticket match? - A. That is correct, sir.

    Q.   The jury will hear in due course, and I think i t h a s
         already been mentioned that this particular section, the
         terrace, has got a particular safe capacity allocated to
         it and the jury will hear that it is in the Safety
         Certificate, that a particular number applies to the
         whole of the terrace.    When it is an all-ticket match, I
         suppose it follows that that number of tickets would be
         sold? - A. That number would be printed.    It doesn t
         follow that all the tickets would be sold.

    0.   But no more would be available for sale? -   A. No,   sir.


H
                                            R. W. CREASER


Than the safe capacity of the terrace? - A. That's
correct, sir.

Now go on, I interrupted you.   What about league
matches? - A. I appreciate you don't mean it to be, sir,
but it is a very wide ranging sort of a question.   If a
club from the south-west peninsular, Plymouth or
Portsmouth, or from that area, was attending at a league
night match, it is quite possible that they would bring
50, 100, 200 supporters.   The tactic to be adopted with
that is that we would not give them access to all the
pens at the Leppings Lane end.

Why not? - A. Because they are easier to control on
grounds of public order and safety in that particular
iocation.

That is the point I would like you to help the jury
about.   What is the purpose of having these separate
pens across this terrace?   What is the purpose of it in
the first place? - A. I didn't construct them and I
wasn't involved in the design of them, but presumably it
is to ensure the safety of the spectators.

In what respect, safety? - A. In that it is to stop
lateral movement.

Lateral movement?   What is wrong with that? - A. You
will have to address that question to an expert on
football ground construction.

On the occasion when league matches were being played and
people were being directed to particular pens, were they
divided up into categories in any way between the
different pens? - A. Categories...?

Of supporter? - A. Normally the tickets that would be
sold at that end if they were for away supporters, they
would be exclusively for away supporters if it was a
ticket match.   If it was a league match then it would be
segregated for the visiting or away fans to use.

What do you mean segregated?   Explain what it means. -
A. Well, the away fans would not be permitted access to
those areas of the ground where the home fans were.

How does that work then with the different sections of
that terrace, the different pens in that terrace? -  A. In
relation to that terrace that would presumably be...

I am sorry, don't presume.    You are very experienced,
as you told the jury, about going to these football
matches, what actually was done in the segregation? - A.
If you give me a set of circumstances of how many fans
                                              R. W. CREASER


are anticipated to arrive, from where, at what sort of
match, I will be specific, but if we are talking in the
generality of league matches, league matches range at
Hillsborough from, as at the moment, the average gate
must be 23,000 people.   There are some league matches
that will attract close to the capacity.   There have
been some crowds of perhaps 15,000.

How are the pens used for the segregation, that is all I
want to know? - A. They would be used exclusively for
visiting fans.   If the number of fans could be
accommodated in one pen they would be directed to that
pen.

One last separate topic.   The expression "full", w h e n a
pen is full, has come into your evidence and I would like
to ask you a question about that.   You said at one point
you would go to a side stand and look at the pens to
judge if they were full? - A. I might have said that.       I
would certainly go to the West Stand and look down on the
fans.

That is what you said, I beg your pardon.   Now what I
want to know is this:  what was your means of judging how
it was full? - A. There are no counting mechanisms, as
you will appreciate, into each pen.   It is difficult to
describe, it is an intangible.   It is experience of when
the ground is at a capacity of 50,000/52,000, then that
is the number of fans that occupy that pen.

Some witnesses have given evidence, experienced football
supporters, that they were in the central pens at about
three o'clock, that is, before the disaster occurred, or
while it was in fact occurring, and they thought the
situation was normal? - A. At that time I could not
observe the pens.   I was outside the ground.   So it may
or may not have been normal, sir.

Are you saying that this judgment of when a pen is full
depends just entirely on the visual impression of the
person who is actually looking at the pen, the impression
it makes on him? - A. Yes.   There are no mechanical
counting devices so it has got to be on visual evidence,
by looking at it.

That will depend to a certain extent on who it is that is
looking at it at any particular time, I suppose?    What
might look full to one person would not look full to
another? - A. I can't say I have known this situation,
but if - particularly if I was an Inspector responsible
for the Leppings Lane terraces - if I had radioed a
message to the control room and said, "This pen is full,"
then...
y                                                                  66




                                                        R. W. CREASER


        Q. That would be a matter of your impression if you happen
           to be the Inspector at that time? - A. That's right.    If
    B      I could continue.

        Q. Well, I only want you to help the jury about the meaning
           of the word "full", whatever it is.    The last question I
           want to ask you is about   stewards on terraces.   You have
           told the jury there were   no stewards posted on the
           terraces.   Were there any policeman posted on that
           Leppings Lane terrace? - A. No, sir.

        Q. Why was it there were neither stewards nor policemen?
           What is the reason for that? - A. Because that was the
           instruction I was given, sir.

        Q. But from your experience you can help the court about
           this.   Why is it that in fact nobody is put on the
           terrace? - A. Because, and I don't want to over-emphasise
           this, but there are certain elements of people who watch
           football matches, and I would stress they are in very
    D      much a minority, but there are certain people who are
           antagonistic towards police officers.   If, for example,
           there was a sole police officer on the terrace he could
           be surrounded by perhaps a group of twenty of these
           people and subject to physical assault.

                     Further Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

        Q. Mr. Payne had dealt with some of the matters I wish to
           deal with, but there are others.    We have indeed heard -
           you weren't here, Chief Inspector - from witnesses,
           including one in the West Stand nearby who actually said
           he wanted to get into the centre stand.     It was so
           friendly, there was such an atmosphere in there that he
           wished he could have got into it.    Does that accord with
           your knowledge of fans' desires? - A. The fans' desires
           on this occasion or in general?

        Q. In general. - A. I think I have said there is a
           preference - it is not exclusive - but there is a
           preference of many football supporters to have a view
           behind the goals.

        0. If we took an extremely cautious view, and if it were
           within your power and you decided to close off tne
           central pens when they were, say, 80% full, is there a
           possibility that other fans in other pens might think
           they would likely get in there?   I know it is all
           hypothetical, but we have had a lot of hypothetical
           questions.   What would you expect fans around to do if
           they could see there was room still in the central pens?
           - A. Yes, it is a hypothetical question.   They may speak
                                             R. W. CREASER


to the police officer and say, "Is it possible to go in
there?"    They may think the police have determined^that
that is full and so seek some other method of watching
the match.




               0. Have you seen the videos
fcf
 Hi                                                                 68




                                                         R. W. CREASER


          Q. Have you seen the videos of this match? - A. I have
             seen some, sir.

      B   Q. Did you see any where there were fans climbing over
             the radial fences to get into the central pens? - A.
             Yes, I have seen that, sir.

          Q. So if you had closed off the central tunnel early on
             and sent the fans round the side they would have come
             round the sides and into the side pens.  It is
             perfectly possible, and I put it no higher than that,
             for those fans to go into the central pens from the
             sides, either through the gates or over the fence? -
             A. Yes, the gates were locked open so that fans could
             find their own level.

          Q. That would be what you describe as fans finding their
             own level.  If they had wanted to go in there they
             would go in? - A. Yes, sir.

          Q. Have you experience of theory and practice being
      D      different in your career? - A. Yes, sir.

          Q.    I will not labour    the point because we do  notwant to
               be here for an hour.  I will give you two examples
               and you tell me what you think about them. At one
               time there was a problem with fans invading the pitch
               when those days were here in Sheffield? - A. Yes,
               sir.

          Q. Someone had the idea, which was pretty obvious, that
             to build a fence at the bottom with the top turned
             back making it very difficult to climb out would
             solve that problem. That was done, was it not? - A.
             Yes, sir.

          Q.    It solved that particular problem, did it not? It
               stopped them from invading the pitch.   We all know it
               created another problem for this match, did it not? -
               A. There was a problem, yes, sir.

          Q. Fans could not get out and many people were probably
             killed who would have been saved if those fences had
             not been there.   Do you agree? - A. I was outside
             the ground when these deaths took place.  I don't
             want to be evasive or sound it but I 3.
                                                   m not an expert
             on the construction of football grounds.

          Q. Another example, and this is the last one, is that
             the wooden gates at the end of the tunnel, it would
             have been perfectly possible to close those gates and




      H
                                                         69




                                           R. W. CREASER


  secure them so that nobody would go down the
  tunnel? - A. It would have been possible to stop
  people either entering or leaving by closing those
  gates.

Q. I will come to leaving in a moment. At the moment I
   am dealing with entry.  It would certainly have
   stopped people from entering? - A. That would be very
   undesirable but, yes, it could be done.

Q. I am coming to that. That would have cured the
   problem of people going down the tunnel and joining
   the crowd at the back, would it not? It would have
   cured that problem? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Supposing that instead of what did happen something
   else had happened? You remember the Bradford fire
   tragedy, do you not? - A. I do, yes.

Q. Suppose something like that had happened and it would
   have been necessary for people to exit from the
   tunnel in large numbers and very quickly? What would
   the effect have been then of those doors being
   closed? - A. The effect would be that somebody would
   have to open them or else people would not be able to
   get out.

Q. The pressure of the crowd, if a crowd had built up in
   the tunnel, what would the pressure of the crowd have
   tended to do? Close those gates or open them? - A. I
   am sorry, I thought you said the gates were closed.
   Assuming the gates or doors are closed?

Q. Yes, if they are closed and the crowd gets up against
   them, would that tend to force them open or would it
   tend to force them more shut? - A. I am sorry, I am
   not with you.  If they are shut, they are shut. So
   they can't be any more shut.

Q. It is a question of which way doors open? - A. Right.
   The hinges on those doors are such that those doors
   open inwards.

Q. Yes. - A. I suspect that if there is a large crowd
   pushing against them they would probably give way.
   The wooden doors at the concourse end .of the
   tunnel...

Q. It is the concourse end I am speaking of? - A. I know
   it is. They were duplicated by some wooden doors at
   one time at the Leppings Lane terraces end of the
                                              R. W. CREASER


  tunnel and they were removed because I think they
  were damaged by pressure from fans at a particular
  match and replaced with metal ones. To answer your
  question, to open those doors they have to open
  inwards towards the tunnel.

Q. Against the crowd if there had been a crowd there? -
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. It is all hypothetical but nevertheless solving one
   problem could have created another. You have to know
   what the circumstances are, is that right, before you
   can really solve the problem? - A. Yes, sir.

     MR. KING:   Might I ask just one question arising out
of my learned friend's question about previous matches
which had not come up before?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, and please be brief.

                Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

Q. Were you yourself present in the 1987 Semi Final,
   Inspector? - A. Leeds/Coventry, was it?

Q. I am not sure what it was.   Were you on duty then? -
   A. I believe I was, sir.

Q. Can you confirm that in 1987 that match was on a
   Sunday? - A. Yes, I think it was a twelve noon kick-
   off on a Sunday.

Q. Can you also confirm that in 1987 the kick-off was
   postponed for quarter of an hour because of late
   arrivals? - A. I cannot, sir.

Q. Finally, can you confirm this; the 1987 Semi Final
   and the 1988 Semi Final were the only occasions prior
   to 1989 when the Leppings Lane terraces had been used
   for the purposes, that is to say the turnstile
   entries, of filling the whole of the Leppings Lane
   standing terrace, the West Stand and the North Stand?
   - A. I don't know, sir.

              Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE:

Q. Chief Inspector, I have some points to raise out of
   the cross-examination by Mr. Payne. You have said at
   another place that the reason you went to seek
   instructions from Superintendent Murray was because
   you are a responsible Police Officer who wanted to be
                                                                71




                                                 R. W. CREASER


         101 per cent sure of what he is doing and what he is
         instructing his men to do? - A. I did say that, yes,
         sir.
B
    Q. That is the reason why you went to find out what the
       system was to be applied on this particular day for
       those particular pens? - A. I wanted to be absolutely
       sure that the actions I would be taking were correct,
       yes.
    Q. That is absolutely right.  In relation to other
       matches whichever system was going to be adopted you
       would want to be in the same position, would you not?
       - A. I certainly would, yes.

    Q. The system that would be adopted on any particular
       match would depend on the judgment of those Officers
       attending the match as to which is the safest and the
       best way of ensuring that those crowds come in and
       also ensuring public order? - A. Yes, sir. Each
       match is different. We had the considerable benefit
D      at this match of a match that was identical to the
       match the previous year.

    Q. The decision in relation to each match goes back to
       what we were talking about before, experience, the
       collective experience, of the Officers present in
       command of the ground at either end of the ground as
       to what is the best system to use? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.    You, as I understand it, have had no   role inliaising
         with Officers at the Club at all? You are strictly
         policing functions? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.    You took your orders from the Ground    Commander and
         whoever else was senior in rank to you? - A. That is
         right, sir, yes.

    Q. So when you were asked a series of questions about
       whether anyone had criticised to you the system that
       had been adopted on that day, in fairness, no-one
       would really have come to you to make any praise or
       criticism of that system? - A. When the question was
       addressed to me, I don't think it was specific, "Did
       you receive any criticism from the Club?" because it
       was from any source.

    Q. I accept that? - A. It is perfectly correct that if
       the Club were wanting to make comments on the
       policing arrangements they would not address them to
       me.




H
                                         R. W. CREASER



I think it is fair to say your evidence was that you
assumed there had been consultations at a higher
level but in fact you did not give evidence as to
whether any consultations about the system to be
adopted took place between the Club and the Police or
not? - A. I know it is common practice that
consultation does take place but I was not involved
in that.

You do not know the content of those consultations? -
A. No, sir.
               Further bv THE CORONER:

I think we made very heavy weather with the different
systems of filling the terraces. Can I put it to you
and see whether I have understood what you are
saying? Are you saying that when you have a match
where you anticipate relatively few spectators - and
by relatively few it might be a hundred, it might be
a thousand, it might be 2,000, it might even be 5,000
- and I am talking about terracing only, are you
saying in those cases because you do not want those
few people spread across the whole width of the
terracing it may be that the decision is taken to
direct them into one section of the terrace? - A.
That is correct, yes, sir.

You, in effect, treat that section as if it were the
whole terrace? - A. Yes, sir.

With that section, if I can use your own phrase, find
their own level, is that right? Within that section
which you have chosen? - A. If a decision had been
made...

They choose where they stand? - A. If a decision had
been made, for example, that at a particular match
the two central pens would be used then if it was
known the number of spectators who would be
travelling would exceed one pen then perhaps when a
decision would be made on the day that both those
pens would be open, within those pens the fans would
be permitted to find their own level.

Supposing that you had the information that there was
going to be 4,200 fans coming in round terms and the
decision has been taken to fill the centre, just to
use the two centre pens, the most popular ones, and
8,000 fans turn up unexpectedly, are you saying that
                                                         73




                                           R. W. CREASER


  then the Ground Commander would say, "We have got
  8,000 instead of 4,000. We had better open another
  pen"? - A. The decision would be, if the decision I
  gave in my example was that the first two pens would
  be full, if it came to the situation that they were
  full, and I accept there are different degrees of
  fullness but comfortably full for a normal football
  match.

Q. Whatever that means and we do not want to go into
   that. - A. The logical - and I anticipate that the
   majority of Ground Commanders would make the decision
   that if the two centre pens were full they would then
   open the South pen which is nearest to the Police
   Control Box and if that then became full then more
   fans arriving would be directed to the North pen and
   the elevated sections. So it would be a progressive
   filling depending on the numbers.

Q. The idea is to have the fans together basically
   rather than scattered widely and very, very thinly
   across the terracing? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. The difference then between that and a sell-out at
   League matches, if I have understood you correctly,
   is that you treat the whole of the terrace as if it
   were one pen? - A. Yes, but we would know in advance.

Q. Putting it in very simple and hopefully
   understandable terms? - A. Yes, we would know in
   advance that the terraces would be full because it is
   a sell-out match.

Q. If there were no radial fences then they would spread
   out laterally in exactly the same way they would have
   done and would go wherever they had wished as if they
   had been a smaller group within one of the smaller
   pens? - A. Yes, the lateral fences would tend to stop
   convergences towards the centre.

Q. I think I understood you to say is the fans finding
   their own level. That is the term you used? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. Because it assumes various things.  I think you also
   said to Mr. Payne, and I want to be sure I have got
   this right, does it mean when you use the term, the
   fans will find their own level, the Police and
   everybody else abrogates all responsibility for
   assessing the density of a particular area on the
   whole of that terrace? - A. What it means to me, sir,
                                        R. W. CREASER


is that on a match such as the Semi Final we will
give the fans the freedom to select from where they
wish to view the match. One of the options open is
that if a particular pen reaches the capacity then
there is an option open to prevent more people
entering that pen.

So everything hinges upon recognition of the filling
or the fullness, if you like, of a particular area? -
A. Yes, sir.

You were not there and so you did not participate in
that at all but I am just trying to make sure I have
understood what you are saying? - A. Yes, sir.

There are just two or three more things which are
much easier. You estimated 4,500 to 5,000 people
outside the turnstiles at about a quarter to three or
thereabouts? - A. Yes, sir.

At the worst point, shall we say.  I am not
interested whether it is 500 more or 500 less. What
I am interested in is whether you can tell me whether
the appearance of - and I will use the word "packing"
although I hate it - the packing of the crowd in the
area outside Turnstiles A to G was similar to the
appearance of the packing of the ground outside
Turnstiles 1 to 16 or was that area emptier than the
other? - A. I got the impression that the density of
the crowd was greater outside the turnstiles nearer
to the river, A to G.




                                 /Q. Mrs. McBrien.
                                                            75

                                       R.W. CREASER



Q. Mrs. McBrien was asking you about stopping the traffic
   ancl you said this facilitated the fans coming in. Is it
   also right that if you have a lot of fans in the road if
   you allow vehicles through that there is always a risk
   of contact between car and pedestrian? - A. Certainly sir,
   yes.
Q. Would that be a factor which would influence you, would
   have influenced you? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Finally, we have spent a great deal oftime and perhaps
   unfairly on going over the Operational Order with you.
   It is right, is it not, you did not draft it, you did
   not initiate it? - A. No sir.

Q. Somebody else did that and you received it and obeyed it
   to the best of your ability or disobeyed it as the case
   may be? - A. Yes sir.

Q. So you had nothing to do with its layout, its contents
   or anything else? — A. No, I would have the opportunity
   to read it and if I thought anything in it was contrary
   to the tried and trusted methods of policing then I
   would have made that observation.  I read the Order and
   I was satisfied that a very professional approach had
   been taken to this matter.

Q. But you didn't set it out, so to speak? - A. No sir.

Q. What you are saying is you had liberty at your level,
   and indeed I am sure anybody had liberty to say:  "Hang
   on, I don't like this"? - A. Certainly, yes sir.

         THE CORONER: Chief Inspector Creaser, thank you
   very much indeed. You have been .here a long time and
   I know you have been here on some abortive days as well
   I think when we did not call you. We very much appreciate
   your help. Thank you.

         CHIEF INSPECTOR CREASER:    I am obliged sir.

         THE CORONER:    We are now going to come back to
   Mr. McGauley.


                   JAMES ALAN McGAULEY Recalled

                        Further by THE CORONER:

Q. Mr. McGauley you have already affirmed so you are still
   on, I suppose, your affirmation is the correct term, so
   just bear that in mind when you answer questions.
                                   J.A. MCGAULEY


      What I propose to do is to read to you the transcript
of what you said and what everybody else has said so that
you get back into the swing of it because it reminds us and
also it is a little bit unfair on you if we just start off
cold because we stopped in the middle of a sentence, so
to speak. I will read it fairly quickly but if I go too
fast or if you can't hear me at the back there or down at
the end please say so.
      "Q. Good morning.   You are Alan James McGauley,
      is that right? - A. James Alan McGauley.

      Q. I beg your pardon. You live at|     Wadsley
      Lane, Sheffield, is that right? - A. Yes.

      Q. It happens that you are a Planning Officer,
      is that right? - A. Yes.

      Q. By chance you are in this building and we did
      not discover that until this morning actually,
      but thank you very much for coming at very short
      notice. I very much appreciate it. Wadsley
      Lane we have already heard about. Perhaps we
      could have 284 the plan up. What I want is for
      you to show me on the plan how high or how far
      down Wadsley Lane you live. - A. Do you want me
      to go across to the plan?

      Q. Yes, it is probably easier if you do that
      and just point to it. - A. About here.

      Q. So you are near the junction with Middlewood
      Road, is that right? - A. Very close.

      Q. Okay. Come back. You are not a football
      supporter, certainly not a Liverpool or Nottingham
      Forest supporter? — A. No, I am not a supporter
      of either team.

      Q. You are not a supporter? - A. No.

      Q. You have lived at this place about 2\ years
      now, 3 years? - A. Yes.

      Q. So you were definitely living there in 1989?
      - A. Yes, I was.

      Q. Were you living there in 1988, as a matter
      of interest? - A. Yes.

      Q. On 15th April 1989 you were at home, I think,
      is that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

      Q. I think you have got a child, have you not,
      a little boy, was it? - A. Yes, a little boy.
                             J.A. MCGAULEY


Q. And you were at home with him? - A. That is
right.

Q. Were you in the front room, the back room,
the kitchen, or where were you? The time I am
thinking about is between, say, 12 and 3, that
is the period? - A. From about quarter-past 1 onwards
I was at the front of the house.

Q. Quarter-past 1? - A. Yes, I actually came back
from Sheffield City centre at about quarter-past 1.

Q. How did you come back?   Were you on a bus? -
A. I came back by taxi.

Q. Did the taxi bring you down Middlewood Road?
- A. No, it went across Walkley and round the back
onto the Rive1in Valley and around.

Q. I see. So you missed that area? - A. I missed
the congestion, yes.

Q. Is it because there was congestion, or you
assumed there would be? - A. The taxi driver
assumed congestion.

Q. You never saw it? - A. No.

Q. Because you missed it? - A. Yes.

Q. So you actually came to your house from the
opposite end of Wadsley Lane driving down ---- ?
- A. Down into the Rivelin Valley and around.

Q. You went into your house and you were in
the front. Did you observe the road at all?
- A. Yes.

Q. We will take it in stages. Did you say
quarter-past 1? - A. Quarter-past to half-past 1.

Q. Between quarter-past and half-past. Let us
take that time: what was it like? - A. The road
on football matches is normally quite busy.   It
is congested with traffic, people are parked
on either side of the road. Indeed, when I came
down the taxi had to stop in the middle and
allow me to get out, get the pram out and
get my boy out to go across to the house. There
are normally people walking down at that sort
of time anyway, and certainly on that day there
were people walking down.

Q. Walking down towards Leppings Lane? - A.
Towards Leppings Lane, yes.
                             J.A. MCGAULEY



Q. Are you saying then that at quarter-past 1
to half-past 1 people were walking towards the
ground? - A. Yes, certainly.

Q. Were they in large numbers, small numbers?
1 am not trying to pin you at if it was 53, or
anything like that.  I just want to have a rough
idea. - A. There was a steady flow from about
half-past onwards, which then obviously built up
over the next half-hour, three-quarters of an
hour.

Q. So you are saying that between half-past 1 and
2 o'clock there was a steady flow which actually
increased? - A. Yes.

Q. Down towards Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, down
towards Leppings Lane.

Q. Did it then tail off, or what? - A. Actually,
the reason that I remember the incident is that
my small boy very often looks out of the window
when there are large crowds going past. He was
at that sort of age at that time, and he would
stand up on the window ledge, or be held up by
myself, and wave at people because he was just
under 2 at that time, and they would wave back.
We probably stood there, off and on, for half-an-
hour, 45 minutes, waving at people, and it is a
way to get him entertained before he has his
afternoon sleep.

Q. It makes him happy? - A. Yes.

Q. So that is why you actually remember it because
he was looking at the people waving, and you were
looking after him? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Does that mean then that at about quarter-past 2
you stopped looking out? - A. No, it was actually
slightly later than that.  I think I was doing a
few things in the house and then I put him to bed
around 10-to to quarter-to 3, something like that,
for his afternoon sleep.

Q. What I am trying to find out is you seemed to
be doing a few things around the house. You are
not expected to stand at your window for 2\ hours
to look out just so that you can answer questions
that I ask, but I want to know whether you were
looking out after quarter-past 2? - A. I would
say until about half-past.
                             J.A. MCGAULEY



Q. Okay. So we are now between half-past 1 and
half-past 2 we are talking about. Did you notice
any change in the flow rate over that period
then, apart from it increasing after 2 o'clock,
you said? - A. It was quite a steady level from
2 onwards.  You must appreciate that at normal
football matches at Hillsborough there is a steady
flow of people down there.  It is very rarely
overflowing onto the roads. People normally walk
down the pavements on either side, my side of the
road and the other side, and once those pavements
are full it seems a steady flow, and that is
certainly what it was on that day.

Q. Did you notice whether people were going the
other way as well, because I think there is a pub
just up the road from you, is there not? - A. Yes.

Q. I do not know if we have got its name. - A.
There are a number of pubs further up the road
- the Horse and Jockey, and I can't remember the
names of the others, but there are a few at the
top.

Q. Did you notice whether people were going up
the hill? - A. No. Earlier there were a few
people walking up, but I do not know, may be in
search of shops. There is a collection of shops
on the corner of Wadsley Lane that sell sweets,
and it   is quite common on a football match for
people  to go up to buy pies and that sort of thing
if the shops down at the bottom are congested.

Q. Was the crowd that your lad was waving to
and that you were watching a mixed crowd, in the
sense that it was youngsters and older people
as well, or was it predominantly one as opposed
to the   other? - A. It seemed an average crowd,
some youngsters, some older men. The reason I
remember it particularly is that people then
waved back at him, and he had a little performance
with them, but it was certainly a good-natured
crowd.

Q. A good-natured crowd? - A. Yes, certainly.

Q. At that time, the time we are now thinking
about,  half-past 1 to half-past 2 did you notice
anybody carrying cans of alcohol? -A. No.

Q. You   did not notice any? - A. No.

Q. You  did not notice any behaviour which you
found reprehensible? - A. No.
                                 J.A. MCGAULEY



    Q. Nobody tried to wee in your garden, if I can
    put it plainly? - A. No.  In fact, that was one
    of the things that did strike me, given that
    it was a large game, because as we are on the main
    road we sometimes have litter left in the garden,
    or people do do as you say.  That never happened
    on that occasion.

    Q. It did not? - A. No, and that was slightly
    surprising given the relative size of the crowd
    because it is a problem in the area that I live
    every other Saturday and mid-week games.

    Q. So it does happen but, in fact, on this
    particular occasion, as far as you were concerned,
    it did not occur? - A. It did not occur.   It
    has occurred in the past where people have left
    cans and occasionally car roofs have been bent,
    and that sort of thing, but not on that occasion."

A. Car aerials have been bent.

You continue:

     "Q. Can you help me with regard to the time
     between 2.3 0 and 3? I think you had put your
     lad to bed at that time? - A. Yes.

     Q. Did you observe anything of the crowd at
     that stage? - A. I went downstairs and then had
     a look out of the window.  Then I went into the
     dining room to do some work at a desk in there,
     so I just looked at the window and saw there were
     quite a lot of people still going down at about
     maybe quarter-to, and then I didn't return to the
     front room where the television is until maybe
     about quarter-past 3 when I had the radio on.

     Q. Then, of course, the event had already taken
     place, so to speak? - A. Yes.

     Q. So you really, in that other half-hour, only
     caught a glimpse of them at quarter-to 3 for
     a short period of time? - A. Yes.

     Q. Would that be fair? - A. That would be fair,
     yes.  We have not got any curtains on. We did not
     have curtains on at the time because of redecoration,
     so we had quite a good view out.  Every time I went
     into the front room you could see people going down
     the hill.

     Q. Did you notice any difference between the people
     between 2.30 and 3 o'clock, which I realise was
     just a momentary view, from the people you had
                            J.A. MCGAULEY



seen earlier? - A. No, no difference.   One thing
you do notice, certainly if you look after 10-to 3
on a normal day, people are running down very often
because they are late, particularly if they have
had problems parking.   There may have been a few
people running down a little bit quicker,
because one of the problems is that the whole
of Wadsley Lane would have been full of cars and
all the adjacent area going back maybe for half-a­
mi le or a mile would have been parked up, so they
very often have to rush down to get to the ground
if they can't find anywhere to park, particularly
if they don't know the area very well.   That is
not uncommon.




                 Q. You have mentioned
\j
                                                                 82



                                                 J. A. McGAULEY




             Q. You have mentioned that people were walking on
             the pavements.  Perhaps I have misunderstood you,
     B       or did not hear you properly.  Were you saying
             tnat on this occasion people were just on the
             pavements, or that they were also in the roadway?
             - A. Sometimes, certainly when a match has
             finished people walk on both sides.

             Q. lio, I am talking about on this day. - A. People
             were walking on the pavements on either side.
             That is what I am saying, there wasn't a mass of
             people, because when there are a lot of people the
             roads are also used.   So the flow was quite a
             steady one.   When any match is finished and people
             start to walk up S7adsley Lane, it is very often
             they then walk on the roads as well as the
             pavements because there wasn't physically enough
             room.   That was the point I was making.

             0. But they were not walking on the road between
     D       1.30 to 2.30? - A. No, on the pavements.

             0. On the pavements only as far as you are
             concerned? - A. Yes.

             Q. We heard a few days ago from soae police
             officer who was on point duty at that junction
             taore or less, or perhaps a little bit further
             down, and what he said was what he had noticed
             that the crowd were walking away from Leppings
             Lane, up Wadsley Lane, and then at about 2.30 he
             said it was as if a switch had been turned and
             they all turned and walked down, the crowd seemed
             to be coming down.   Did you have that impression
             at all? - A. iio, certainly not.  I did not see
             people walking up iiadsley Lane in large numbers.
             It would have been noticeable because they would
             have been going against the flow of other
             pedestrians.

             Q. So, as far as you were concerned, it was a
             steady flow frosn about 1.30 or quarter-past-1
             until 2.30 and then when you caught a glimpse at
             quarter-to-3 it was about the same? - A. It was a^
             steady flow down the hill.   Because of the size of
             the road and the relative size of the pavements,
             you would notice a large flow up at any one time,
             because there would be congestion either side of
             the pavements."

         And that is where I stopped.  Does that sound correct
         and has that refreshed your memory? - A. Yes.
                                              J. A. McGAULEY




Q. I will read you what everybody else asked you as well.
   It   is not as long. Mr. Payne asked you a couple of
   questions:

        "0. Your observation of the crowd between half­
        past-2 and 3 o'clock consisted of a glimpse at
        quarter-to-3? - A. Yes, a series of glimpses as I
        was passing in and out of the front room.

        0. A series of glimpses? - A. Yes."

And he sat down and Mr. King got up, and he said:

        "Q. Mr. HcGauley, for an hour you had a very good
        view of the state of affairs outside your window
        and the people passing by? - A. Yes.

        Q. You had a grandstand view? - A. Yes. That is
        one of the advantages and disadvantages of living
        on Wadsley Lane.

        Q. We have heard a number of witnesses giving all
        sorts of different accounts and so it is helpful
        to have an account from somebody who is looking
        out on the scene in this way. You are not a
        Liverpool supporters, are you? - A. No, I am not.
        I do not generally go to football matches.

        0. You have no particular reason to want to
        support Liverpool fans, or any other group of
        people? - A. No.

        Q. Is it right that you yourself wrote a letter to
        the Sheffield Star newspaper not long after the
        disaster? - A. Yes, I did.

        Q. Can I just show you a photocopy of what I
        understand was the letter which was published.    Do
        not read it out. Just tell me if that is the
        letter."

   It was given to you and you said:

        "A. Yes, that is ray letter.”

   Then I said:

        "What is it you want to put to the witness, Mr.
        King?"

   and ilr. King said:
                                         J. A. HcGAULEY




     "Sir, I want to investigate two matters. Might I
     just borrow the letter to make sure that I am
     expressing it correctly?"

And I said:

     "Yes, sure".

He said:

     "I am sorry, there are three matters. One is the
     impression of this witness as to the condition of
     the supporters passing his window, to w’
                                            nicn, sir,
     your questions have been directed in part.

                THE CORONER:   Yes.

          MR. KING:   His general knowledge of the area
     and parking facilities because you have
     investigated the reasons for people being late at
     the ground, not with this witness but as an issue
     before this Inquest. Thirdly, his experience at
     the ground itself on another occasion in the sane
     year before this disaster involving the Manchester
     United game, when he himself had an experience of
     the time fans arrived at the Leppings Lane end and
     an experience of difficulties or otherwise of
     getting fans in in time for kick-off. Sir, that
     third matter is, in my submission, very relevant
               ••
     • • • •



I am reading it all to you. You didn't say this, but
just so that you know where we got to. - A. Yes.

     "Sir, that third natter is, in my submission, very
     relevant because what we are investigating in this
     Inquest is in part expectations, what has happened
     in the past and what has riappened in the past has
     given rise to understanding, beliefs,
     expectations, upon wrtich planning is based, and we
     have heard this on a number of occasions already
     in this Inquest."

I said:

     "It is a very difficult problem, Hr. King, as I am
     sure you will appreciate, because if we start
     allowing in what happened at the Manchester United
     match, we will be touring the country before we
     know where we are with regard to what happens at
     other grounds, how many matches have been played
     where people have got in late, early, fast or
     slow.  I ara certainly very reluctant to go into
     any detail like that. I think one would have to
                                         J. A. McGAULEY




     be very, very careful because this Inquest is
     already long, complex and difficult enough, and
     also I think we are probably moving into a field
     waere I have difficulty sometimes justifying what
     we are doing to myself.  I think I would have
     great difficulty in justifying that. I am not
     wishing to restrict you, I am sure you will
     appreciate that."

Mr. King said:

     "In the light of your preliminary indication, and
     not wishing in any way to prejudice any further
     discussion of this issue, could I respectfully
     suggest that we invite the Jury to retire for a
     short moment so that nothing I say anyone along
     here could complain that I have in any way sought
     to influence the Jury."

I said:

     "Could you pop out for a few minutes".

And in fact we asked you to go as well (addressing the
the Jury) - we haven't written it down, but in fact we
did, and now we are back and we have resolved the way I
intend to deal with the matter.

     What I would like to do, Mr. King, is for me to
ask a number of questions based upon the copy
statement which you very kindly supplied to me, and
maybe anything else which occurs to me, and then we
will start again at the beginning, so to speak, and
work our way down in the usual way. Are you content
with that?

     HR. KING:   Very content, yes.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. HcGauley, before I come to the
copy statement which Mr. King very kindly let ae have
and which makes life easier for me, I just want to
check with you once more, because I have obviously had
a little time to think about it, have I understood you
correctly that what you are saying is that in your
perception of this crowd of people who were coming down
and I don't use that word in any pejorative sense, I
just mean numbers of people walking past your window
and who were waving to your lad, and whom you were
watching, are you saying that the noticeable tning as
far as you were concerned was how well behaved they
were compared with normal football crowds? - A. No,
they were well behaved compared to other crowds that
have been down Wadsley Lane at different times.
                                         J. A. McGAULEY




What sort of other crowds are you comparing them with?
- A. Other cup matches in the past, large league
matches where there has been more chanting.

So in other words you are comparing them with other
football crowds? You are not comparing them with, for
example, I don't know, let's imagine that there was a
religious convention down in Hillsborough, you are not
comparing them with a Sunday School crowd? - A. No, I
am comparing like with like.

So in other words, what you are saying is compared with
big football crowds whom you happen to have seen
walking down Wadsley Lane at times past? - A. Yes.

Tnis crowd was different in that it was better behaved,
as far as you could tell? - A. Certainly that they were
in better humour than many crowds, as witnessed by the
waving to my son and their general demeanour. They
appeared to be in a better humour.

Anything else - I am just trying to get it a little bit
more sharp - anything else about this crowd which
distinguished it, if I can use that word, from other
football crowds? I am not interested, as I say, in
Sunday School crowds, just other football crowds? - A.
No, not really. There was a general good humour and
they were obviously a larger crowd, and it was over a
longer period than, say, a normal Sheffield Wednesday
League match.  So it was a larger crowd, that was the
distinguishing factor.

I see. You have already explained to me that parking
is difficult. - A. Yes.

And that all the roads get parked up, that is right? -
A. Yes.

And you have given me an answer that people sometimes
seem to you to have to hurry because, in your
judgement, they have to park so far away? - A. Yes.

That is not because they have told you that, you have
just made a deduction, is that right? - A. It is also
based on personal experience.  If I happen to have to
go out shopping on a Saturday and come back around
2.30, 3 o'clock it is extremely difficult to park
anywhere near Wadsley Lane, and while driving round you
can see cars parked on the Wisewood estate, and even
around the Rivelin Valley area, which is a mile, a
mile-and-a-half away, so it is not unusual for cars to
park that far away.
                                                               87



                                               J. A . McGAULEY




Q. I see, yes. What I mean is when you see people running
   or walking past your house you, because you know they
   have to park a long way away, have put two and two
   together and said they have had to park a long way
   away, further than they anticipated, that is why they
   are a bit late and that is why they are rushing down,
   that is right? - A. Certainly if you see people at 10-
   past-3 on a normal Saturday that is the case, yes.

Q. On 11th February, 1989, you decided to go and watch a
   League match, I think? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. It was, I think, between Sheffield Wednesday and
   Manchester United? - A. Yes.

Q. Just to get this crystal clear you are not a supporter
   of either of those clubs either, is that right? - A. I
   would not call myself a supporter. When I was younger
   I followed Manchester United on the television but I
   have never had a great interest in football.

Q. In fact, you are not a regular attender at a football
   match at all, are you? - A. No.

Q. This was the first time you   went for how manyyears?      -
   A. At least ten years.  I have been to a few rugby
   league matches in the meantime, some large ones.

Q. But this was your first football match for ten years? -
   A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. Or thereabouts - it doesn't     have to be exact - and I
   think you were intending to     meet a friend, is that
   right? - A. Yes.

Q. You were intending to go into the Leppings Lane end, is
   that right? - A. Yes.

Q.   It is the Manchester United end in that particular
     instance? - A. Yes, he was a Manchester United
     supporter and we were going to go to that end.

Q. For various reasons which you don't have to worry
   about, you were delayed and you didn't get down to the
   ground until about quarter-to-3, is that right? - A.
   Yes, that      is correct.

Q.   When you got down there - you, of course, came down
     froia Catch Bar Lane, didn't you, from your house? - A.
     Yes, down Wadsley Lane and across the road.

Q. Then you have to turn right into the ground? - A. Yes.
                                                           88



                                            J. A. McGAULEY




Q. what met your eye? - A. There was a large group of
   Manchester United fans trying to get into the entrance.
   There was also the normal hot dog sellers and various
   other people, and also a couple of large coaches which
   had dropped people off, so it was actually a very busy
   scene, which slightly surprised me for quarter-to, now
   getting on for 10-to-3.

Q. Tell me, first of all give me your estimate of how many
   people you thought were there at that time? - A. My
   estimate would be in excess of 500, maybe more.

Q. Tell rae, as I have already said I am not pinning you to
   any particular number. - A. Yes.

Q. You have said 500 - give me what you think would have
   been the maximum that would have been there. - A. It is
   probably better explained by saying that when I came
   round the corner on the bridge, where the gates are,
   there were people either side in a large number, and it
   becarae clear, just looking at the group, there was no
   way that I would get into the game for kick-off.

Q. Did you actually attempt it? - A. No.

Q. Were you able to see the turnstiles? - A. No.

Q. Are you saying that the area between the perimeter
   gates and the turnstiles was packed with people? - A.
   It certainly wasn't strongly packed but it was very
   full. People weren't shoulder to shoulder but there
   was a large number of people that made it clear that I
   would have to queue for quite a considerable time to
   get into the match.

0. what about the area - how well do you know Leppings
   Lane turnstile area? - A. I have been there on two
   occasions, I think.

Q. So you don't actually know it? - A. No, I have been to
   a Sheffield Eagles match there.

Q. Turn round and look at the model. The Sergeant is
   pointing to the turnstile area A-G first of all, there
   is that area there, and then there is 1-16, and there
   is a whole load of turnstiles there, okay? - A. Yes.

Q. When you say that there was a crowd of people, where
   were they in relation to the turnstiles? - A. They
   would be backed up towards Leppings Lane, so they would
   be coming backwards towards Leppings Lane.

Q. In both areas? - A. I couldn't say with any certainty
   about the far area, but certainly the near area.
                                                                       89



                                               j.   a   .   Mc Ga u l e y




Q. You don't know what was happening at that far end? - A.
   I couldn't see that far. What I did was I walked round
   the inside, along the river.

Q. So you were able to walk past them without any
   difficulty? - A. Yes, I skirted along the inside,
   because obviously people were trying to get in that
   side, given that they were Manchester United fans.

Q. Because there is the little - perhaps you don't know -
   there is a little barrier there. - A. Yes.

Q. You stayed on the river side of that barrier? - A. I
   walked expecting to be halted because I wasn't sure if
   I could go through to the other end, so I walked
   tentatively down.

Q. Just as a matter of interest, did you see Police
   Officers and horses around that time? - A. There were
   some on the far side, towards the "S" of Leppings Lane
   (on the model), there were certainly some horses around
   there.

Q. There were sosne horses there? - A. And there were also
   Police directing the traffic as you walked down.   It
   was a fairly chaotic and busy scene, because there was
   obviously traffic and buses ....

Q. You felt you wouldn't get in so you decided you would
   go round the other side? - A. Yes, which I was a bit
   uncertain about because of ....

Q. In fact, you then entered through one of the Penistone
   Road ends? - A. Yes, I walked round.

Q. What time did you get into the ground? - A. A couple of
   minutes before the kick-off, two or three minutes
   before.

Q. So you have no idea what actually happened at Leppings
   Lane? - A. No.

Q. Having got into the Stadium you went, I think, into the
   Kop, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Standing? - A. Yes.

Q. Opposite end to Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

0. How high up were you? - A. I was behind the goals,
   maybe half-way, three-quarters of the way up.

Q. It is quite a big stand? - A. Yes, it is.
                                         J. A. McGAULEY




Was it full? - A. It was comfortable. There were quite
a few people there but I found no difficulty in getting
a standing position behind the goals.

It is quite a long way to see across, isn't it? When
you look across it is quite a distance, isn't it? - A.
Yes.
I mean, it is a football pitch length basically, plus a
bit more. Tell me what you saw at the other end? - A.
After the game started there were some Hanchester
United fans appeared below where I was, this is the
first time I saw them.

At the Kop end? - A. Yes, on the bottom part of the Kop
end. I don't know where they came from.  I assumed that
maybe they had got into the Kop end and had been
ejected but there was then a flow of people who came
under the Kop and then were escorted round and down to
what became the Hanchester United end.

So they were actually taken from - you don't quite know
where they appeared, but they appeared in front of the
Kop? - A. Yes.

And were walked round the outer edge? - A. That is
right.

While play was in being? - A. Yes. The reason I
remember it was because obviously there were whistles
from the Sheffield Wednesday fans.

And they entered ...? - A. The far corner of the
Manchester United end.

Which one, the northern end? Can you just show it on
the model? - A. They came in where you are pointing,
went round down the North Stand.

They went round the north? - A. Yes, and down into that
corner.

Just go up  there and show it yourselfbecause it will
be easier.   (The witness used the model todemonstrate
his evidence) - A. I was stood up here, so I saw the
fans here, they went round along and entered I believe
through a gate or some kind of entrance.

That looks like Pen 7 but don't worry about that. That
was - in round terms, how long had the match been in
play? - A.  Maybe five, ten minutes.

Fairly early on?   - A. Yes.
                                                              91



                                                 J. A. McGAULEY




    Q. No problems apart from the whistles and catcalls around
       you, so to speak? - A. No.
B   Q. Then I think you looked across and you noticed
       something else, is that right? - A. Yes, there were
       some in the far corner. Once again I would assume that
       they had either been put over the fence or there had
       been problems, and they were similarly escorted round.
       Now I believe that they came all the way round,
       although that might have been the residual fans from
       earlier, and they took the same route round and were
       entered into the pens at the far corner.

    Q. So there was another batch, so to speak? - A. Yes.

    Q. That perambulated the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q. These were relatively small groups, I think - 20 or 30
       people? - A. Groups of 20 or 30, yes.

D   Q. Not huge numbers? - A. No.




E




F




                  /Q. Did you observe




H
t/
9l
                                                                  92




                                                     J. A. McGAULEY


           Did you observe anything else of moment, apart from
           the game, of course, which is why you were there? -
           A. The only thing that caught my eye was that people
     B     were being pulled up once they had got in. They were
           being pulled up on to the terrace above the Leppings
           Lane end which I didn't quite know the reason for.

         Q. You did not know? -    No.

         Q. Do not give me a reason because you do not know it.
            What you are saying is that you actually saw that
            happening? - A. Yes.

         Q. I do not suppose you have got any idea how many there
            might have been? - A. No, it may have happened for
            the first five or ten....

         Q. Pardon? - A. It may have been for the first ten or
            fifteen minutes, I don't know.

         Q. It all happened when? - A. Yes, the first perhaps
     D      fifteen minutes of the game.

         Q. Everything else that followed was nothing of note
            apart from whatever happened at the match? - A. No,
            nothing of note.
                         Cross-Examined bv MR. HALE:

         Q. You will be pleased to know that the Police Officer,
            who has given evidence since you, did not differ very
            greatly from you in his estimation of the crowd at
            the time that you saw it? - A. Yes.

         Q. In comparison with previous crowds, may I just say
            this; do you know what a conditioned response is? -
            A. Yes, I believe so.

         Q. It is a response which you initiate and the response
            comes according to what you want it to be? - A. Yes.

         Q. You understand? - A. I do.

         Q. So putting a baby up in the window and waving to the
            crowd is more likely to produce a friendly response
            rather than the reverse? - A. Yes, that is right.

         Q. Had you noticed or have you much experience of people
            who have had a drink or two? - A. Yes, certainly.




     H
                                         iT. A. McGAULEY


I am not saying drunk but a drink or two? - A. Yes,
certainly.

Does sentimentality play a part in their attitude? -
A. I don’t think I am placed to comment on that.

            Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

Mr. McGauley, you are not placed - I am not
criticising you - to make any useful comparison, are
you, between what you saw when you went to that
football match and anything that happened on the 15th
April at the Semi Final? - A. What you are saying is
that the conditions at the Manchester United match
were different.

I am asking you whether you are in a position to make
a useful comparison? - A. The reason that I actually
mention that in my letter to the Sheffield Star is
because there were problems at that game with a much
smaller audience or crowd.  I believe that those sort
of conditions may have been prevalent at the
Liverpool match.

You have not got any idea. You have given evidence
that you were at home looking after your family? - A.
Yes, but the difference is that there is less than a
quarter of a mile from my house to Leppings Lane and
given the number of people who were going to that
match, and it was a sell-out match, there were almost
certain to be the same kind of problems at the
turnstiles if there are large numbers of people going
down there.

How do you know that? - A. If there are 32,000/33,000
people at the Manchester United match, there were how
many at the Sheffield Wednesday/Liverpool match?

I do not know. You are giving the evidence.    It
seems to me the evidence you have given is, and I do
not want to have to attack you because it seems quite
plain that you do not know anything about what
happened outside the Leppings Lane entrance on the
15th April because you weren’t there? - A. I find the
tone of your questioning a little difficult.   I am
giving evidence on the basis of what I have seen on
Wadsley Lane.

Quite. - A. And on what I have seen at a match I went
to.
                                                            94




                                                 J. A. MCGAULEY


Q. That is right. You are not able to make any useful
   comparison between the two, are you? - A. That is the
   opinion you are giving. What I am saying is that I
   wrote to the Sheffield Star saying that these things
   may have been similar.

     THE CORONER:   Can I just stop you? Mr. Payne, it may
be that you are guiding the witness to answers which I do
not think he is able to give.  If I can put your
question....
      MR. PAYNE:       I am sure you will put it better than me.

      THE CORONER:       No, no, Mr. Payne.

Q.    What Mr. Payneis asking you is this; you saw what
     you perceived when you went to the Manchester United
     match but you cannot actually say what the position
     was like on the 15th April 1989 because you were not
     there? - A. No, of course.

Q.   That is right? - A. Yes, that is common sense, yes.

     THE CORONER:        That is really the point you are
making, is it not?

       MR. PAYNE:      Much shorter than me.   Thank you.

                    Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:

Q. By the same logic you cannot say as a fact that the
   people you saw outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles
   did not in fact get in through those turnstiles into
   the match by kick-off time? - A. No, by the same
   logic I c a n ’t. I would say that given the numbers it
   would be unlikely they were which is why I made the
   decision to walk round to the other end of the
   ground.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Just a minute. That is an
     assumption. We cannot make any assumptions. All you
     can say, which is why I asked the question as to what
     time you got into the ground, you saw a crowd? - A.
     Yes.

Q. Which you did not like. Mr. Manning has asked you
   but you do not actually know what happened to that
   crowd? - A. No, I made an assumption that given the
   size of the crowd I would get into the ground by
   walking round to the other end, assuming I could get
   in, which is why I made that normal assumption.
                                                    J. A. MCGAULEY



Q.        MR. MANNING:    So we are   agreed then? - A. Yes.

Q.    You took exception to Mr. Payne because you said you
     had come to give evidence of fact and that is what I
     am asking you? - A. Yes.

Q. As a fact you do not know that those people did not
   get in for kick-off time? - A. No, as a fact, I
   d o n ’t .

Q. As a fact you do not know that the people who came in
   under the Kop, the Manchester United supporters who
   were led up to the other end, may not have been
   Manchester United supporters who had gained entry
   from the Penistone Road end and were then being taken
   up to the other end. You do not know where they had
   come from at all? - A. No, I don't.

Q. But you do know as a fact, first of all, that you had
   not been to a football match for ten years? - A. Yes.

Q. You do know as a fact that as you looked across, for
   whatever reason, people were climbing up into the
   stand above the terrace? - A. Yes.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. K I N G :

Q. Mr. McGauley, slightly more friendly bowling.

     MR. MANNING:        I would not like to be thought to be
unfriendly, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Manning was not unfriendly and Mr.
Payne was perhaps a little bit sharper than perhaps he is
most of the time but I am sure he was not intending to be
unfriendly.  I hope not anyway.

Q.         MR. KING:You had perceived a   problem to your
     eyes when you went to the Manchester United game
     outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes, that
     is correct.

Q. Can you just help me on this; you say there was a
   large number of people there, about 500 but were they
   spilt on to the roadway? - A. Yes, there were some
   people on the roadway on Leppings Lane.

Q.    Were they spilt on to thebridge which I think? -       A.
     Yes, there were people on the bridge in numbers.
                                        J. A. MCGAULEY


You were being pressed as to why you had remembered
this experience when you turned your mind to what had
happened in the Hillsborough disaster? - A. Yes.

Obviously you were not at the Hillsborough
disaster? - A. No.

You only know about it from what you have either read
in the papers or seen on the television? - A. Yes.

Obviously something which you had read or seen on the
television triggered off something in your mind? - A.
Yes.
What was it that triggered off in your mind about
what you had heard or read about the Hillsborough
disaster? - A. Given my limited experience of
football matches it actually occurred to me that the
sort of things that happened at the Liverpool game
could certainly have happened previously at the
Manchester United game given the large numbers of
people and given the fact that I am not a regular
football fan it probably stuck in my mind more
vividly than if I go to football matches every week,
which is the reason why it triggered my remembrance.

Had you heard suggestions after the Hillsborough
disaster that there were a lot of drunken fans about?
- A. Yes, certainly.

Was that something that triggered off your mind about
what you had seen? - A. Yes, certainly and that was
the reason I actually wrote the letter to the
Sheffield Star.

What was it that triggered you off then? - A. It was
both the coverage in the Sheffield Star itself which
on the whole actually covered the whole disaster
quite well.
To the suggestion that there is a lot of drunken
fans, what is your answer in your experience of what
you saw that day on the 15th April? - A. In my
experience of what I saw on that day there were no
drunken fans that I saw walking down Wadsley Lane.

           Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE:

Mr. McGauley, can I just go through my mind and the
Jury’s what happened at the Manchester United match?
                                           J. A. MCGAULEY


You went down to the Leppings Lane end and saw these
crowds? - A. Yes.

You took a decision that you were not going to get in
and you went up to the Spion Kop? - A. Yes.

Can you give a rough estimate of when you arrived how
long you were actually standing there? Was it quick?
- A . I sort of wandered perhaps thirty seconds or a
minute just to see that the crowd was moving.   I mean
you must understand I wasn’t sure whether I could
actually get in the Sheffield Wednesday end. Then I
thought, "I will walk up along and see if I can get
in further up" because it was my intention to go in
with the Manchester United fans.

You were there for about thirty seconds to a
minute? - A. Thirty seconds to a minute and then it
was obvious I wasn't going to get in and so I walked
round.

Just to follow on from the tone of things of what you
cannot say, you cannot say therefore when the fans
that you saw at the Leppings Lane end arrive? - A.
No.

How long at all they had been there before you? - A.
No.

You got through up to the Spion Kop end.    Do you know
how much it cost you to get in? - A. No.

You paid as you went through the turnstiles? - A.
Yes, I had the money ready.

It was a paying match? - A. Yes, there was hardly any
queue at all.

     THE CORONER:   I could not hear you? - A. I am
sorry, there was hardly any queue at the turnstiles.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: The only reason I draw that out
is that I do not know whether you knew that the
Hillsborough match was an all-ticket match? - A. Yes,
I realise that.

The other thing which you may not be able to answer,
have you ever been on the Spion Kop before? -A. No.

You have very fairly said you are not able to say why
people are being pulled up into the stands? - A. Yes.
Q. You have no idea whether that is a regular occurrence
   or not, have you? - A. No.

              Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Mr. McGauley, when you walked all the way round to
   the Penistone Road turnstiles by way of the sterile
   area, did anybody stop you from taking that route? -
   A. No.  I didn’t have any club colours.  I was
   dressed casually and so I just walked through.

Q. Do you think the fans who were being pulled up into
   the stands at the Manchester United match may have
   simply been trying to get a better view?

     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien, I am not letting this
witness why. He does not know. He was 150 yards away. He
can tell us what he saw but he cannot tell us why because
he has not got the slightest idea.   In fact, he has already
told us that.

Q. That is correct, is it not? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   He has no idea why they were pulled up
and so I am not allowing him to answer because it is not a
proper question as it would be an expression of opinion
which he is not qualified to give.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I am sorry about that.    Thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. McGauley, I am most grateful to you
for coming back.  I am sorry you have had this sort of
interregnum. Although it appears it has all been nicely
resolved now there was something we had to discuss. Thank
you very much for being here.

                     GORDON SYKES Sworn

                      Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You are Gordon Sykes, is that right? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. Of the South Yorkshire Police? - A. Yes.

Q. You are an Inspector I believe? - A. Yes.

Q. On the 15th April 1989 you had a job at Hillsborough
   Football Ground, is that right? - A. I was in charge
   of some serials at the ground.
Q.   Which particular bit of the ground were you covering?
     - A. I got the turnstiles at Leppings Lane.

Q.   What is it you are looking at? Is it a transcript of
     your notes? I do not mind if I know what it is? - A.
     That is my original transcript which I submitted to
     the Taylor Inquiry which is a summary of my evidence.

     THE CORONER:   Do you object to him using his notes?
It probably does not make much difference.  Does anybody
object? Do you object, Mr. Payne?

       MR. PAYNE:   No.

     MR. KING:   Did I hear the witness right when he said
it was his transcript from the Taylor Inquiry?

     THE WITNESS: No, that is the original statement that
I submitted to the Taylor Inquiry.

       MR. KING:    I have no objection.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Can I just look at it? Would you
     just pass it up to me so that I can see whether we
     are looking at the same thing? Yes, it has been
     retyped but it is basically the same. Obviously what
     I would like you to do is give your evidence viva
     voce, as you know, but if you need to refresh your
     memory there is no objection? - A. Yes.

Q. What I was asking you was which area of the ground
   you had responsibility for, through Chief Inspector
   Creaser first of all and then through him to somebody
   else, was it not? - A. Yes, sir, I got the turnstiles
   in Leppings Lane and the chain of command was in fact
   through Mr. Creaser to the Ground Control.

Q. When you say the turnstiles does it mean the inside
   and the outside or just the outside? - A. Just the
   outside.

Q. You I think attended the briefing at ten and you
   heard various instructions being given by Chief
   Superintendent Duckenfield and others, is that right?
   - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. In one sentence can you encapsulate what the
   instructions that you were given at the main
   briefing? - A. Mr. Duckenfield said that he was the
   overall Commander for the match that day and that
                                                          100




                                                         G. SEES
   /



  specific instructions would be given by other
  Commanders and that the safety of the public was
  paramount.

Q. Having had your main briefing, were you briefed by
   other people? Did you have another little meeting
   with Mr. Creaser? - A. On that particular day after
   the main briefing I had a main briefing with my
   Sergeant and the men under my control.

Q. I think you had three serials, is that right, 16, 17
   and 18? - A. And 19 as well.

Q. Yes, I am sorry.  I am not too concerned about who
   was in them but there are about eight to ten men or
   so? - A. There is one Sergeant and ten men in each
   serial.

Q. Then everybody had their meal break at about eleven
   and then you went to your stations, is that right? -
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. What did you tell your serials to do? How did you
   place them, that is what I am trying to find out? -
   A. Yes, sir.  I went through the match Order with
   each serial and made sure that they knew their
   specific duties.

Q. Tell me what they were? I do not want you to tell me
   what each man had to do but you had a serial outside
   the turnstiles, right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was their job? - A. If I can just refer to my
   notes because that is the reason why I brought them?

Q. Yes. - A. Serial 16, that is supervised by Sergeant
   Payne, they were responsible for the Turnstiles A to
   G. Serial 17, this was supervised by Sergeant
   Whitlam, and they were responsible for Turnstiles 1
   to 8. Serial 18, this was supervised by Sergeant
   Morgan, and they were responsible for the Leppings
   Lane Turnstiles 9 to 16. Serial 19, this was
   supervised by Sergeant Proctor, they were used as
   approach reception and just general.

Q. So they were distant to the ground? -.A. Yes.

Q. These serials which you have just mentioned, 16, 17
   and 18, did you position all the men outside the
   turnstiles or did you split them so that you had some
                                                              101


A
                                                             G. S&ES


      outside and some inside? - A. No, all our
      responsibility was outside the turnstiles.
B   Q. I beg your pardon, you did say that. Where did you
       position them? Where did you ask them to be in
       relation to the turnstiles, near to the turnstiles,
       distant to the turnstiles? Where were they to be? -
       A. They were near to the turnstiles.

    Q. Their task was what? - A. To ensure wherever possible
       that the people approaching the turnstiles got to the
       right entrance, to prevent access to the football
C      ground by people who were either drunk, carrying
       liquor, banners and that sort of thing

    Q. How did   they achieve this? Did they do it by just
       chit chat, searching or what? - A. Sight and
       searching.

    Q. I am sorry? - A. Either seeing people carrying
       objects or by searching.
D
    Q. When you first started at about 11 to 11.30, I do not
       know what time, what time did the turnstiles open?
       Can youremember that? - A. Not offhand.

    Q. When it  all began itwas fairly quiet, was it not? -
       A. Early doors 11 o'clock when we went outside there
       were a few people there but it was reasonably quiet.
£   Q. So the searching and looking was a relatively easy
       task, was it not? - A. At that time, yes.

    Q. Had you anticipated as time went on that numbers
       might increase and that it might not be possible to
       enforce rules and regulations quite as fiercely as
       you might otherwise have liked to? - A. Yes, sir,
       that is correct.  I anticipated on past experience
       that the numbers attending would get to a certain
F      stage where it would be physically impossible to
       search every person at the turnstiles and I briefed
       the men to that effect.




                                   / Q .You told them....
G
                                                           102

                                   G. SYKES



Q. You told them to be selective, is that what you are
   saying? - A. Yes sir and said we would have to relax
   the normal rules.

Q. The "normal rules" are what, can you tell me what the
   normal rules are? - A. That no person enters the football
   ground who is in the state of drink.

Q. How do you define the state of drink because everybody
   has defined it differently up to now? - A. Yes sir, it
   is just a case of looking at the person and if they are
   not in a state to control themselves then they don't
   gain access.

Q. Are you saying that if they are staggering about and
   slurring their speech they don't get in? - A. Yes.

Q. Any lower level than that, by "lower level" I mean less,
   I mean obviously a greater level you would not let in
   you know if somebody has been carried in because he can't
   walk you wouldn't let them in? - A. That is correct.

Q. But what I want to know in the normal, I am not talking
   about this match but in a normal match is that the level
   which you are aiming at, people who are staggering about
   and slurring their speech? - A. Yes sir.

Q. So mere boisterousness, you know high spirits may be
   helped along perhaps by a little bit of alcohol would
   not exclude somebody from a match in your book? - A. Not
   necessarily.

Q. Only if there was something else to go with it, so to
   speak? - A. If we considered that person would create a
   problem inside the ground through his behaviour then he
   would not gain access.

Q. Is it right that if you want to exclude somebody, I am
   talking about a normal situation because we then apply
   that, it is not just sufficient to tell him to go away
   you have to do something? - A. That is a matter of
   opinion by the Police Officer concerned.  If he thinks
   the person by his behaviour may cause trouble then he
   has got two options.  He may refuse him admission, as
   he is empowered to do, or if he is so drunk then he
   may exercise his powers of arrest and arrest him.

Q. But if you arrest somebody you then have to take him
   to the Police Room somewhere and you lose a strength.
   Is that right? - A. Yes sir, for everyone arrested you
   virtually lose two men.

Q. So you have got 10,000 people coming and you have got
   30 people there, you arrest 15, you have got nobody
   left? - A. I have absolutely no manpower left.
                                  G. SYKES


And that is what you meant when you said you might have
to relax your ... A. That is exactly what I meant.

Had you been at the match in 1988.   Can you remember?
- A. Yes sir, I was there.

Same place? - A. Exactly the same duties.

You yourself weren't actually doing this, you were
supervising, you roamed around if I can use that
expression.  It is just a term? - A. Yes sir, I got the
responsibility for all the serials at that location.

That means you were observing their activities.    Is that
right? - A. Yes sir.

Until what time did everything appear to you to be within
what I might call the "normal situation", in your judgement
- A. I think about 2 o'clock sir.  That is when I first
saw signs of abnormality.

What were those signs of "abnormality" if I can use that
word you observed? - A. I had observed people climbing
over the perimeter wall and I went inside to ensure that
people inside were in fact aware that this was happening.

And then the intention was they would all be chucked out
again as soon as they came off the wall.  Is that right?
- A. Yes, that is correct.

And presumably,   initially that happened didn't it? - A.
Yes.

Anything else that you noticed? - A. When I   went inside
my attention was drawn to the people coming   to the
turnstiles by the turnstile operators, that   people were
in fact climbing over the revolving barrier   and also
coming underneath.

Are you saying that was already happening at about
2 o'clock? - A. Yes.

Was there anything you could do about it? - A. Well at
that stage Police Officers inside the ground were also
aware of this.  They were ejecting the people straight
through the gates.

Did you then go outside again because that is of course
where your post was, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

And what else did you notice or observe? - A. As I
went outside the gatemen on Gate C asked my advice in
relation to visiting stewards.
                                                          104

                                    G. SYKES


Q. What was the query there? I don't want to go into great
   detail it is not terribly relevant but just very succinctly
   what was the query? - A. They were querying the numbers
   that had arrived and whether or not they should allow them
   in with the stewards' passes as opposed to tickets and my
   advice was not to.

Q. There were quite a few of them, I believe? - A. Yes.

Q. And then you went back out? - A. Then I went back outside,
   yes.

Q. What was it like then? What time was it first of all when
   you got back out?  I don't suppose you were standing
   there with your, but just approximate times? - A. I
   estimated at that time probably 2.15.

Q. And what met your eye if anything? - A. As I went back
   outside I could see that the build-up to the turnstiles,
   the actual turnstiles themselves the crowd there was
   building at that stage and I could see as I walked back
   towards Leppings Lane that the crowds coming on the roadway
   towards the turnstiles were far in excess of what I had
   anticipated.

Q. And what if anything did you then do? - A. I looked at
   the situation and I spoke to I think it was Mr. Hand-Davis
   the Inspector in charge of the horses and we decided to
   put a cordon across the mouth of Leppings Lane which
   borders the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground property.

Q. I want you to think carefully before you answer this
   next question because we have heard a lot about cordons
   and I want to try and get a correct answer as far as
   you are able.  What time would you say this cordon was
   placed? - A. I am going strictly on recollection and
   I seem to think it was round about 2.15 or slightly
   after.

Q. We have heard from Chief Inspector Creaser, who also
   talks about a cordon, but he timed his cordon at
   quarter-to-3 or thereabouts.  Are you saying yours is
   a different one? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember the one that Chief Inspector Creaser
   was talking about or do you not recollect that one?
   - A. No, things went hectic then and it was impossible
   to ....

Q. You say you put a cordon across with about how many
   horses would you say? - A. From recollection I would
   think there were about seven or eight.

Q. And what was the objective? - A. To try and slow the
   flow of supporters to the actual turnstiles.
                                                         105

                                    G. SYKES


Q. Did you close the perimeter gates at all at that time?
   -"A. No.

Q. So you put the cordon but left the gates open? - A. Yes.
   I think it would be impossible to actually close the
   gates because they open inwards.

Q. What you are saying is it would have been difficult to
   push them shut? - A. Yes.

Q. In fact we have heard from various people to say that
   they were shut but you are saying that you don't recollect
   them being shut at all? - A. The only gates that were
   shut that I recollect were the gates that lead down
   to the back of the South Stand.

         THE CORONER:   Can you put our usual shot up.

         THE WITNESS:  As you look at the photograph, sir,
   the gates on the extreme right and possibly the next
   two gates to it.

Q. Those you think were shut at some point? - A. They were
   shut all the day and should have been to create a sterile
   area down the ....

Q. No, I think you had better have another look at that
   photograph.  All those gates are shut.  You cannot get
   into turnstile area A-G at all so have a good look.
   Have a look at the model. - A. Those two.  They were
   open to allow supporters ....

Q. There are three gates actually, there is the left-hand
   gate, there is a centre gate and there is a right-hand
   gate? - A. My recollection is the right-hand gate and
   the centre set of gates were in fact closed.

Q. And the left-hand one was open? - A. For supporters to
   approach the turnstiles.

Q. That is your recollection? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And that was to enable them to get into the turnstiles?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see ticket touts or anything like that about?
   - A. Yes sir.   At one stage I was made aware that ticket
   touts were believed to be operating in Leppings Lane.
   Approximately 200 yards towards Halifax Road up Penistone
   Road I saw a large crowd of people gathered.

Q. How large is a "large crowd" in this context? - A. I
   think possible 150, 200 people all milling around one
   central point.
                                                        106

                                    G. SYKES



Q. You could not see what was going on? - A. No.
    /

Q. But you had a guess? - A. I suspected that is where the
   touts were operating from.

Q. But you don't actually know? - A. No.

Q. And then time went on, so to speak, did things change in
   any way? - A. Yes sir, the volume of the crowd was
   increasing all the time coming from both directions along
   Leppings Lane and it got to such a state that traffic was
   still moving along that road.  I saw Superintendent Marshall.
   I discussed the options with him and suggested that we
   close the road to vehicular traffic.

Q. And that in fact was done? - A. That was done and shortly
   afterwards the traffic stopped.

Q. Do I deduce from that that you are saying that the crowds
   are now so large that they were in the roadway? - A. Yes
   sir, as vehicles were coming along the road people were
   in danger of being knocked down. They were jumping in
   between cars. There were two things:   (a) I considered
   they were in danger and (b) we wanted to use the whole
   of Leppings Lane as a holding area.

Q. I have to keep coming back to times, I know it is
   exceedingly difficult. What time would you say you
   closed this? - A. Possibly going on 2.30 at that stage.

Q. I don't know if you can remember but do you recollect
   where you were at that time when the decision to close
   the lane was made? - A. Yes sir, I was on the roadway
   of Leppings Lane, there is a natural curve in the road
   and I was at the junction of the roadway and where the
   pavement would have been if it had been there.

Q. So you weren't actually near the turnstiles you were
   outside? - A. I was set back observing the people coming
   along Leppings Lane.
Q. Did you stay there or did you move from that position?
   - A. I was there a short while still observing the
   people coming along Leppings Lane and also observing
   the problems at the turnstiles.

Q. And what did you do then or what happened perhaps? “ A.
   I was asking for more men over the radio and I was getting
   no response at all.

Q. Are you saying they refused you or are you saying that
   you never got a reply? - A. I never got a reply.  I
   understand that the radios had in fact gone down.
                                                             107

A                                       G. SYKES


    Q. So you felt at that time extra men would have been helpful?.
       -'A. Yes.



B




D




F




                             Q. Having been unsuccessful




H
                                                            108



                                                   G. SYKES




Q. And having been unsuccessful with the radio, was your
   cordon still in place or had that disappeared by that
   time? - A. By that stage it got a bit ragged and
   disappeared.

Q. Where did all the mounted Officers go to? - A. They
   were there but the crowd was such, they had lost the
   cordon.

Q. what did you observe about the crowd at about that
   time? - A. It was the sheer volume of it, the amount of
   people approaching and the state of some of them, in
   that quite obviously they had been drinking.

Q. What was happening to your men by the turnstiles at
   this point? - A. At that stage I saw, I think,
   Inspector Bennett on the top of the turnstiles.

Q. So you saw him on the top? - A. On the top, pulling
   people up onto the top of the wall, and they were going
   over the wall into the ground.  I had completely lost
   sight of all my men at the turnstiles.

Q. So you don't know what was happening to them? - A. It
   was very, very difficult due to the restricted view.

Q. Did it look crowded in there? - A. Yes, sir, very
   crowded.

Q. Could you see from where you were - it sounds as if you
   were on the outside - could you see what was happening
   at the front? - A. Not right at the front. Obviously
   from the number of people approaching the turnstiles at
   that particular time and the actions of Mr. Bennett and
   the mounted men who I could see near the turnstiles,
   then obviously I knew there were problems right down at
   the front.

Q. I see. Again, you put two and two together and you
   realised there were problems? - A. Yes.

Q. What attempts if any were made to control the crowd at
   that point? What time are we talking about now, about
   quarter-to? - A. We are talking after half-past-2,
   going up towards quarter-to-3 time.

Q. What attempts if any were being made during   this period
   at controlling the crowd? - A. That is when   I saw the
   horses again, so I am presuming that is the   cordon that
   Mr. Creaser put in, which was after the one   that I nad
   done.

Q. Did you see a landrover? - A. Yes, sir, there was a
   Police landrover arrived and parked, as you look at the
                                                G. SYKES




turnstiles, more to the right of the turnstiles, and it
was broadcasting for people not to push and crush them.

Could you yourself see any pushing at all? - A. People,
not right at the front.

tfhen you say the front, you mean?- A. Right   at the
turnstiles itself.

You couldn't see them? - A. No, but people were in fact
coming down Leppings Lane towards the turnstiles and
pushing, due to the sheer volume of the crowd.

You said that some were the worse for drink? Can you
put a number of that at all? - A. No,sir, it is
totally impossible with the number of people who were
there, and the number of people tnat I actually spoke
to. They were asking me where Gate "0" was, which is
completely round the other side of the ...

Where the what? - A. Gate "0", which is in Penistone
Road, and I directed them there and they were going
straight towards the Leppings Lane turnstiles.  It was
that sort of thing that was happening and I could smell
drink on them.

what you are saying is that at this time people were
asking you where the pubs were, but weren t taking any
notice of what you were telling them? - A. No, not
where pubs where the entrances were.

The entrances - I misheard you, sorry.

     MR. KING:   Sir, it was important. The witness
said, "People were asking where Gate "0" was".

     THE CORONER:   Gate "0" - I thought you said Owl.

     MR. KING:   The witness indicated that Gate "0"
was the Penistone Road, north end.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mr. King:

Start this again. You were saying that at this time
people were asking you where Gate "0M was, is that
right? - A. Yes.

You told them and they carried on towards Leppings Lane
entrance? - A. To the nearest turnstile, as opposed to
going right round the ground.

Where is Gate "O"? Mr. King has told me, but you tell
me. - A. Gate "0" is the Penistone Road turnstiles.
                                                                  110



                                                         G. SYKES




    Q. That would be the Nottingham Forest .... - A.
       Nottingham Forest.
B   Q. Did you see any gates open? - A. Yes, sir. Whilst I
       was there, and I think the Police landrover was still
       there broadcasting, I suddenly saw Gate "A" open.

    Q. Gate "A" - can we put the plan up?

             HR. GRIFFITHS:     C256, sir.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   256. Is that the Gate A which you
         can see, alongside the side of the house there? - A.
         Yes, sir, that is Gate A.

    Q. Did you see Gate C open at all? - A. No, from where I
       was stood it is impossible to see Gates B or C.

    Q. So you were really on the side towards the sweet shop,
       is that right? - A. More to that side, sir.
D   Q. Did you see Inspector Waring at all? - A. Yes, I saw
       Chief Inspector Waring at that stage.  I cannot
       recollect what we said to one another.

    Q. It is 5-past-4 - I just want to ask one more question
       and that is on the loudspeaker. You told me that there
       was a Police van and it was broadcasting.  Did you hear
       any announcements about the mounted Inspector being
       required? - A. Announcements from ...?

    Q. Anywhere? - A. No.

    Q. Apart from the loudspeaker van, the landrover, did you
       hear any other broadcasted message? - A. Not that I can
       recollect.

    Q. I think we will stop at this point. We have got to
       carry on in the morning. - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Remember you are on oath so don't discuss evidence.
       You know the rules, I don't have to tell you. - A. Yes,
       sir.

              MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, before you rise, are you in a
         position to advise us whom you intend to call after
         Inspector Sykes?

              THE CORONER:     Have we got the provisional list
         for tomorrow?

              MR. GRIFFITHS:     No, sir.




H
     THE CORONER:     Can you go and ring and find out
provisionally what we have got. I think it is Mr.
Purdy, and then a series of Police Officers.

        MR. RUSSELL:     It assists those of us on this
side.

     THE COROUER:   Yes, if you remember I did say
first thing this morning that we were going to have
this available at this time, and we should have it but
we haven't, but the   Jury can leave us.

               (In the    absence of the Jury)

     THE CORONER:   The intention is to finish
Inspector Sykes, then Inspector Purdy, and P.C.
Huckstep, then another P.C. and then we are moving on
to the mounted Officers. That is the plan. We won't
get to all of them but we will get as far as we can.
Inspector Sykes, Inspector Purdy, P.C. Huckstep and
then P.C. Horsfield as a sort of reserve. That is the
plan anyway.  Is there anything any of you need to
mention to me? (Ho response) Can I just remind you
about the room tomorrow, that it is not available.
Thank you very much indeed. Good night to all of you.

            (The Inquests were adjourned until
             the following morning at 10 a.m.)
