                                                                                             M I R . 15




  OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and tim e raised     or              •        Number

           ZL <2?^
, T itle
                                  .G>~        C -3 -                                                      Q l M -O L v - ^    o

4^lpclui<je£Ource and any document number i f relevant)                3L<C£2-

  Receiver's instructions     - urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                                         Receiver




                                                                                                                             Indexer
   D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

   No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                     Statement Reader
   S tatem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                             Indexer
   Indexed as indicated                                CM
   No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                   SIO
   Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                             Indexer
   Further action No(s)


   When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master N um ber Form
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

             PET E R ANDRE W HARRISON




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre.
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

                 24th April 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                  INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                     B



                         OPENING BY THE CORONER

                     C   DR. JOHN CLARK Called

                            By THE CORONER

                         POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK Called

                            By THE CORONER

                     D   DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                            By THE CORONER




                     E




                     F




                     G




                     H

            j

J. L. Harphaln Ltd
Tuesday,    24th April,   1990

                  Inquest into the death of

                    PETER ANDREW HARRISON


            MR. FRASER:     Sir, the first dase on your list
   today relates to Peter Andrew Harrison.               I appear as
   a member of the steering committee on behalf of his
   f a m i l y ’s solicitors.    P e t e r ’s mum and dad are
   present in court.          They have travelled over this
   morning, sir, and they have with them a social
   worker.

        THE CORONER:   Yes.   Mr. and Mrs. Harrison, I
   assume you were not here on the first day so I will
   briefly outline for you the general format in which
   the inquests are being conducted so you can
   understand and also know what to expect.

        What I do is I read the evidence which was given
   at the opening last year when I dealt with the
   release of the bodies and then if there are any
   corrections that need to be made, because one or two
   of them have got some errors in them, I deal with
   that.

        Having, if you like, sorted that out, we then
   listen to the pathologist, and I usually give the
   blood alcohol level as well at this stage.   The
   pathologist then tells us what he found and then we
   listen to the West Midlands Police Officers who will
   read to me their summaries.   When we have completed
   that bit of the evidence we terminate and close the
   inquest at this stage.   I am not formally adjourning
   them until the last day and then I will adjourn all
   of them appropriately together.

        That is the format.    Mr. Fraser is, of course,
   well aware of how it works.     These ladies and
   gentlemen are the Jury.

        This then is a resumed inquest which was opened
   on the 18th of April, 1989.    On that occasion Neil
   Anthony Parkin, rny acting Coroner's Officer said:

           "The body which is the subject of this inquest
           has been identified to PC 779 Wheatley of the
           South Yorkshire Police as that of Peter Andrew
           Harrison, by John Harrison, his father.
                               He was 15 years of age, having been born on the
                               4th May, 1973 at Live r p o o l . He was a single
                               boy and he lived at                   _
                               in Liverpool.    He was a schoolboy.      He died at
                               H illsborough football ground following an
                               incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.

                    B          PC Wheatley caused the body to be moved to the
                               Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified it
                               to Detective Constable Simon Weigold who
                               subsequently identified the same body to
                               Professor Usher and Dr. Clark.

                                It is the family wish that the body should be
                                b u r i e d ."

                                Then I wrote to you with a form, I don't know if
                           you remember.   On the 26th of April, Mr. Harrison
                           you signed it and in fact you confirmed that all the
                           details - names, age, place of birth, and date of
                           birth were correct.

                                The blood alcohol levels were estimated by
                    D       Dr. Forrest and the formal evidence in respect of
                           those was given on the first day.   In respect of
                           Peter the alcohol was measured at 21 mg/100 ml.

                                You will find that virtually all the witnesses
                           don't take the oath.   That is because they have
                           already been sworn in respect of all their cases.
                           Now Dr. Clark.
                    E
                                            JOHN CLARK Called

                                             By THE C O R O N E R :

                                THE WITNESS:   I am Dr. John Clark,   forensic
                           pathologist, University of Glasgow.

                        Q. Dr. Clark, good morning.   Could you please (a)
                           confirm that you are satisfied that the evidence you
                           are giving me now relates to Peter Andrew Harrison,
                           which I think we have got recorded as case number 11?
                           - A. Yes, sir.

                        0. Could you please give me your findings? - A. The
                           cause of death was crush asphyxia.   The death
                           certificate is 1(a) crush asphyxia.

                           This was based on a finding of signs of asphyxia in
                           his face and internally, his face being rather
                           congested and cyanosed - a rather blue colour - and
                           petechial hemorrhages on the skin and also inside.

                    H
                                               -   2   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             That was consistent with his chest having been
                             crushed, preventing him breathing.

                             In addition to the asphyxial changes he had a
                             considerable number of injuries on his body.    A
                             large number of grazes and bruises, mostly on the
                             front of the body and on the surface.   In addition
                    B        to which he had a fracture of his left femur, in
                             other words, a broken left leg.   This would be
                             consistent with his having been forced against the
                             ground or some other object, presumably with
                             considerable pressure to break his left leg.

                             There were no other findings.    He was not suffering
                             from any natural disease which could have contributed
                             to his death in any way.   The only other thing I
                             should have mentioned   was there was some vornit in the
                             airways, occurring as a terminal event.

                        Q. On the whole, Dr. Clark, I think in most of your
                           cases and, indeed, in most of the other cases,
                           fractures of large bones were rare?   There were rib
                           fractures in some cases, but this, I think is the
                    D      only case of the femur? - A. Yes, that is right.

                        Q. You cannot give any more information as to how that
                           could have happened, from your post mortem findings?
                           - A. Not really.    It was possible he was forced
                           against perhaps a barrier and that produced enough
                           pressure.
                    E   0.   If there was petechial bruising one has to take it
                             that that happened either ante or perimortem? - A.
                             Yes.   Well, it certainly happened before death, but
                             he may well have been   unconscious at the time.

                        0. Yes, it is impossible   to say? - A. It is impossible
                           to say but that is certainly a possibility.

                        0. Hr. and Mrs. Harrison were not here so perhaps you
                           could just outline for them very briefly what the
                           general opinion of pathologists is with regard to
                           loss of consciousness in a crush asphyxia situation?
                           - A. Yes.   What we feel is that what is happening is
                           that the chest is being crushed and it is not being
                           able to expand and that prevents breathing so there
                           is no oxygen that gets into the body.   What will
                           happen there after about ten to fifteen seconds the
                           person will lose consciousness, so when the pressure
                           has been applied for ten seconds or so the person
                           will lose consciousness and if it is continued they
                           probably die within four or five minutes.   The bulk
                           of all the damage has probably occurred after he lost
                           consciousness.
                    H
                                                 -   3   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        0. Of course, once he has lost consciousness, even
                           though the consequences are terribly serious, he or
                           she does not know anything about them? - A. That is
                           right.

                                     THE CORONER:   I wanted you to know that because
                                it is so distressing to think of people suffering for
                    B           a long time.

                                     Mr.    F r a s e r , any questions of the pathologist?

                                     MR. FRASER:       The family have no questions,         sir,
                                thank you.

                                     THE CORONER:   Thank you, Dr.             Clark,   Now we
                                come to the Presenting Officer.

                                           POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK Called

                                                      By THE C O R O N E R :

                                     THE WITNESS:   I am Police Sergeant John Killock
                                of the West Midlands Police.
                    D
                        0   .   Could you take us through the summary, please? - A.
                                At about 1100 hours on Saturday, 15th April, 1989,
                                Mr. John Harrison saw his son, Peter Andrew Harrison,
                                leave his family home intending to attend the Cup
                                Semi Final football match to be played at the
                                Hillsborough Stadium.

                    E           Mr. Alan and Gerry Blayney, brothers, travelled by
                                private car to Sheffield together with Peter.    They
                                arrived near to the stadium at about 1400 hours.
                                Alan Blayney saw Peter enter the stadium via Leppings
                                Lane turnstile.  That was approximately 1430 hours.
                                They Blayneys had tickets for a different part of the
                                ground and did not see Peter again.

                                Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                                terracing, Chief Inspector Charles found a boy, now
                                known to be Peter, lying in the goal area at the
                                Leppings Lane end.   The officer was assisted to
                                carry Peter on a temporary stretcher to the gymnasium
                                where a mortuary had been set up.

                                Police Constable Wheatley was in the gymnasium when a
                                group of spectators carried Peter into the gym.   The
                                officer attempted resuscitation but without success.

                                Between 1550 hours and 1615 hours, Dr. Matthew Bull
                                examined a number of persons, including Peter.   The
                                examination was carried out in the temporary mortuary
                                in the gymnasium and life was certified extinct.
                H                                       -   4   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             At 2225 hours on Saturday, 15th April, 1989, Mr. John
                             Harrison identified the body of his son to Police
                             Constable Wheatley in the temporary mortuary.

                             I should point out, sir. at this stage that the
                             statement made by Peter s father, John, refers to his
                             son as Peter Frith.   I can offer no explanation as
                             to why that mistake was made.  It is, of course, not
                    B        correct.   It has caused considerable upset to the
                             family and Mr. John Harrison wants me to stress to
                             you that that was not his mistake.

                        Q.   In fact that statement was not taken by Police
                             Constable Wheatley - by somebody else? - A. By
                             somebody else, sir.
                    C
                             The officer later escorted the body of Peter to the
                             Medico-Legal Centre, where he confirmed the
                             identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

                             On the 16th of April, 1989, following identification
                             by Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. John Clark
                             carried out an autopsy and submitted A report giving
                    D        the cause of death.

                             Evidence is included, sir, regarding the analysis of
                             the blood sample taken from Peter where the presence
                             of ethanol was detected.   The witnesses proving
                             continuity for the blood sample are Detective
                             Constable Bardell, Detective Sergeant Turner and
                             Detective Sergeant Fletcher.   The analysis was
                    E        carried out by Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest.

                             That concludes my summary,       sir.     There is visual
                             evidence.

                        Q. Have we got Detective Constable Bardell's
                           supplementary statement yet? - A. No.
                    F             THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, this is another one
                             of these cases where we are waiting for an amendment
                             with regard to the pathologist's name.   Are you
                             content with that?   It is only a technicality.

                                  MR. FRASER:   I am, sir.           I will explain the
                             position to the family quietly,         if you like.
                    G             THE CORONER:   Yes, thank you.   I think this
                             young man has always been treated as a son of the
                             family, hasn't he?

                                  MR.   FRASER:   That is correct,       sir.


                H
                                                  -   5   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             THE CORONER:   With regard to.the name which has
                        already been mentioned, the surname.    In fact it is
                        right, I'll tell you, that although that name
                        appeared on that one statement it made no difference,
                        as it happens, because PC Wheatley, whom you also
                        saw, also signed a statement which is the one which
                        was brought to the Medico-Legal Centre.    I have got
                        it in front of me.   In it it quite clearly says that
                    B   the name is Peter Andrew Harrison and gives all the
                        details and if you think about it for a moment, the
                        pathologist had the right name, I have got the right
                        name and in fact I did not find out about this error
                        until very, very late in the day.    Although on the
                        face of it it looks serious, as it happens in this
                        particular case (a) no error was made and (b) we
                    C   actually have a supplemental statement.    Not all the
                        officers completed them properly because sometimes
                        they did not have the details, but as it happens PC
                        Wheatley did a really good job.    I have got a full
                        statement from him.

                             I would stop worrying about that.   It is
                        inexplicable.   I cannot understand how it happened
                    D   but sometimes these things do just occur, so please
                        don't distress yourselves any further.

                             We wanted to mention it because (a) it formed
                        part of the evidence and (b) we did not want you to
                        think we weren't telling you something which was a
                        little bit odd, but don t worry.

                    E        Mr. Fraser, I hope that will help.   It is
                        fortunate that in this case everything was well
                        documented.

                             Any questions of the officer?

                             MR. FRASER:    No,      thank you,      sir.
                    F        THE CORONER:   There was one other point which I
                        think worried the family and that was the question of
                        identification, but I think their solicitors may have
                        made a mistake because they have said that somebody
                        says identification was on the Sunday whereas the
                        summary quite clearly says it was on the Saturday,
                        which is what in fact it was.
                    G        MR. FRASER:   In fairness, sir, the copy of the
                        summary that I have does say Sunday the 16th, but the
                        officer has in fact corrected it.    In fact the
                        identification was most certainly on the Saturday.

                             THE CORONER:       That     is right.

                    H                       -    6   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                HR. FRASER:   It is a typographical error which
                           may have crept into the paperwork.   It has now been
                           corrected and the family are grateful for that, sir.

                                THE CORONER:   I am sorry if there was an error
                           with regard to that, but there is no question about
                           it, you are absolutely right.
                    B           Mr. Fraser, I have not called Dr. Forrest
                           because I did not think it was necessary, but he is
                           in the building if your clients wanted to hear him in
                           persona.

                                MR. FRASER:   Would you give me a moment please?
                           The family are grateful to the offer but there is no
                           need to call Dr. Forrest in this case.

                                DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                              By THE C O R O N E R :

                                THE WITNESS:   Michael Layton,         Detective
                           Inspector, West Midlands Police.
                    D
                        0. Yes, Officer. - A. Sir, an examination has been made
                           of visual evidence in respect of Peter.       He has been
                           identified alive in enclosure number 3.       Mr. John
                           Harrison, Peter's father, has viewed visual evidence
                           and confirmed the identification of his son on video
                           and photographic prints.   On a BBC video he is shown
                           alive in enclosure number 3.      The reference number
                    E      in respect of that video is M A P . 8, timed at
                           14.50.06.03.

                           Sir, on a photograph, Peter is shown near to the gate
                           in enclosure number 3 and this photograph is timed at
                           1505.      Sir, the reference for that photograph is
                           P R . 1/32A.

                           Chief Inspector Charles has identified himself on
                           video assisting with Peter on the pitch, again in
                           front of enclosure number 3.       On a BBC video,
                           reference M A P . 7, 15.30.02.05, the reference to Chief
                           Inspector Charles is actually shown on video.

                           Police Constable Walton has identified himself on the
                           same sequence of video helping to carry the stretcher
                           with Peter on.   There is a photograph showing Chief
                           Inspector Charles carrying the stretcher across the
                           pitch assisted by spectators and the reference number
                           for that photograph is TT.1/83.

                           Sir, Mrs. Harrison has also seen visual evidence and
                           she has confirmed the identifications made.
                    H                           -   7   _




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             Can I refer you to a plan which has been given the
                             reference number MWJL.17, which is a plan of the
                             terraces?

                        0. That is going to be C.66. - A. Also a further plan,
                           sir, MWJL.18, which is a plan of the pitch.

                        0. That will be C.67.         Could you demonstrate it? - A.
                    B      Yes.

                                  THE CORONER:   What happens now is that the
                             officer will show us on the big plans the locations:

                        Q. Yes, officer? - A. Sir, if we can refer to MWJL.17,
                           there are three points marked on that particular
                           plan.   If we look first of all at the video
                           identification already referred to, this is enclosure
                           number 3 and in respect of the video on MAP 1, the
                           BBC tape, we believe Peter is somewhere in this area
                           here.

                             There is a photograph, sir, which is not timed, which
                             is referred to as DBML.2/19, and that actually shows
                    D        Peter in this location h e r e .       Then, sir, there is a
                             further photograph, P R . 1 / 3 2 A , and the location where
                             Peter is shown is in fact h e r e .       All in enclosure
                             number 3, sir.

                        Q. That is the one that is timed at 1505? - A.         that is
                           correct, sir.

                    E   Q.   I realise it is exceedingly difficult, but your
                             judgment was that on all the three photographs he was
                             shown alive? - A. Yes.    Sir, if we can refer to a
                             plan of the pitch, in relation to the BBC tape,
                             MAP 7, actually on the pitch, the location we have
                             for Peter is in fact h e r e , just slightly to the
                             right of gate 3.

                             Then in respect of photograph TT.1/83, which shows
                             Peter being carried across the pitch, that is
                             actually about h e r e , so going towards the Spion Kop
                             end of the pitch.

                                  THE CORONER:        Any questions?

                                  MR. FRASER:     No questions,    sir.

                                  THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, Dr. Clark is going to
                             be in the next case, but he will be available if you
                             think your clients might want to have a private chat
                             with him.   I am sure, Dr. Clark, I can offer your
                             services in case there is something they want to go
                             over with you.    The only thing is if they would be
                    H
                                                  -    8   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        kind enough to let me have Dr. Clark initially, and
                        then he can join them, if that is what they would
                        wish.

                             MR. FRASER:   Indeed,     sir.

                             THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs. Harrison, I am most
                    g   grateful to you for coming.   It is very, very sad
                        that you have lost a young lad like this.  Of course,
                        in this particular tragedy so many young people lost
                        their lives, but he was one of the younger ones, not
                        the youngest but one of the younger ones and our
                        hearts go out to you in this tragedy which has hit
                        the family.

                             I have told you that we are going to stop at
                        this stage and our normal practice is for me to rise
                        to enable everybody to stand and sort themselves out
                        and then we will proceed.    Mr. Fraser will explain
                        everything else that needs explaining, but thank you
                        very much indeed for coming.

                             (The Inquest into the death of PETER ANDREW
                    D        HARRISON was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    E




                    F




                    G




                                           -   9   _




J. L. Harpham Ltd
