HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)
                                            50
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           14th February, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                               Pflge
STEPHEN ELLIS

     By THE CORONER                               1.
                                                  8.
     Cross-Examined
     Cross-Examined
                      by MR. PAYNE
                      by MR. KING                10
                                                 13.
                                                       .
     Cross-Examined   by MRS. MCBRIEN
     Cross-Examined   by MISS ADDLEMAN           16.
     Further by THE   CORONER                    24.

TREVOR HICKS

     By THE CORONER                              24,

ALAN KEITH SEAMEN

     By THE CORONER                              28.
     Cross-Examined by   MR. MAXWELL             47.
     Cross-Examined by   MR. PAYNE               50.
     Cross-Examined by   MR. KING                78.
     Cross-Examined by   MR. CATCHPOLE           90.
     Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN             100.
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE    103.
     Further Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN     105.
     Cross-Examined by MR. FOSTER               110.
     Further Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN     112.
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING         114.
                                                      * $
                                                    S. ELLIS


               FIFTIETH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

              THURSDAY,   14th FEBRUARY 1991

                  STEPHEN ELLIS Sworn

                     By THE CORONER

I believe it is Stephen Ellis,     is that right? - A. That
is right.

Is it still                                 in Sheffield?   -
A. It is.

You are a freelance photographer, I believe, is that
right? - A. A freelance photographer for Sheffield
Wednesday, but I work fulltime for Sheffield
N e w s p apers.

It is right on 15th April 1989 you attended the match
at Hillsborough? - A. Yes.

You were   the photographer who was postioned on the
Leppings   Lane end of the pitch, that is right, isn't
it? - A.   Yes, the North Stand side of the Leppings Lane
end, the   goal.

This was not the first time you had been in that
position? - A. No.  I would not be in that position
every game, but vary it from one game to another.

You had been there often enough to be able to recognise
the gate Officer? - A. I have been club photographer
for 16 seasons.

So you knew who the Officer on that ...? - A. Not so
much name wise, but you get to know the faces from week
to week.

What I am trying to find out is did you know his name?
- A. Not until after the disaster.  I knew he was John
but I did not know his surname.

But you now know it, don't you? - A. Yes.

It is John Illingworth,    isn't it? - A. Yes.

What I am trying to ascertain from you is whether from
your previous experiences at the field, not on the
15th, John Illingworth was the Officer who was normally
in that situation? - A. They varied round the track in
different positions but normally John would be
somewhere, and the other five or six Officers, would be
                                                                 2
                                                            *t
                                                       S.    ELLIS


   in different positions round the track, but not in the
   same position each week.

Q. Not necessarily that position, yes, I understand.         - A.
   Yes, but they would be on the track.

Q. We are going to get you to show us on a plan in a
   moment where you actually were, but describe it in
   words initially.  I think you took up your position at
   between quarter-to and 10-to-3, is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Because basically you were there to take pictures of
   the match, weren't you? - A. Yes.  I was actually at
   the game earlier than that but I didn't actually take
   my position up behind the goal until that time.

Q. Yes, I knew that but you came out onto the field, so to
   speak, and where did you actually place yourself in
   relation to the Leppings Lane end at that time? - A. As
   you look towards the West Stand, from the players'
   entrance, I was to the right of the goal mouth.

Q. There are a number of gates there with numbers on them?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Do you remember which gate you were near? - A.      I think
   it was gate 3.

Q. You had better show us on a plan.  It might help you.
   I think you said a slightly different gate in your
   statement.  (The witness marked Exhibit C 4 7 1 ) You are
   pointing towards gate 5, in fact.  Were you sitting or
   standing? - A. Sitting.

Q. On a stool? - A. On a camera box.

Q. Were you right up against the fencing? - A. No, up
   against the advertising hoardings, behind the
   advertising hoardings.

Q. So you were on the pitch side of the advertising
   hoardings, would that be right? - A. On the track side,
   not actually on the pitch.

Q. No, I said on the pitch s i d e .   You were not right hard
   against the fence? - A. No.

Q. There was the fence, then there was the advertising
   hoarding .... - A. There was the track, then I was sat,
   and then the advertising hoardings.

Q. Where were you in relation to the advertising
   hoardings? - A. Right up against the back of the board.
                                                       *t
                                                  S.    ELLIS


But on the track? - A. Yes.

I have understood you now, thank you.  Where was the
Officer at that point or a few minutes later? - A. He
was slightly behind me, nearly up against the fence,
sat on a stool.

Did you by any chance see a couple of Sheffield
Wednesday ball boys around at that point? - A. I can't
remember that, sir.

You don't remember seeing them? - A.    I don't remember
that, sir, no.

You positioned yourself, no doubt got your camera out,
tried to get your angles right and so on, and do you
remember the players coming onto the pitch? - A. I did
not actually see the players run out.

But you saw them on the pitch? - A. I saw them on the
pitch, yes.

Did you see them on the pitch before game had kicked
off? - A. No, sir.

Did you see the kick-off? - A. Yes,    sir.

Are you saying that was, in fact, the first time the
players impinged upon your consciousness? - A. Yes.

You are quite satisfied that you saw the kick-off? - A.
I am just trying to get the time, that is all? - A.
Yes, sir.

Let's take kick-off then, all right?   Before that,
after you had taken your position and up to kick-off,
did you hear or see anything untoward or otherwise? -
A. The first thing that I noticed that was untoward
was, when I was walking round to take my position up
behind the goal, was that the spaces on each side of
the Leppings Lane end of the goal, and I remember
sitting down and turning round to who I now know is
John Illingworth and saying, "That space is unusual,
John".  He didn't hear me.

Was that because there was a lot of noise? - A. It was
just the general noise,  yes, and he was half turned to
the crowd as well so I don't think he had heard what I
had said to him.   Then I was just trying to concentrate
on taking pictures of the game, but it was increasingly
hard to do so because of the commotion that was going
on behind me.
                                                     *t
                                                S.   ELLIS


What sort of commotion was that?  Was it after the game
had started, you are saying? - A. Just slightly prior
to the game starting and as the game started.

So what happened, tell me?  I want you to tell me in
your words. - A. As I say, as I sat down, I mentioned
this to John, and obviously with the game starting your
job is to take pictures of the game, but your head was
being turned away by the general noise from the crowd,
and particularly two girls that were screaming that
were pressed right up against the fence, and as the
time gradually went on people were trying to come over
the top of the fence, and it was round about that time
that the Officer was trying to push them back in, stop
them from coming onto the pitch.

Tell me a little bit more about that? - A. As I say, as
I was turning round and you could see particularly, as
I say, these two girls pushed up against the fence, and
people behind, obviously you couldn't hear anybody
saying a specific sentence but it was just the whole
noise, that you could tell it was something not right,
and people were trying to get from one pen into the
other pen.

From which pen into which pen? - A. From the centre
pen, there is a sort of metal barrier, and they were
climbing over there to try and get into the pen that
was quite relatively empty.   As time wore on more
people were trying to get up onto the fence and over
the fence, and the Police Officers on the front were
trying to push them back, but then it got more and more
people that they couldn't help but they started coming
over the top of the fence, because of the amounts of
people that there were there.

I don't suppose you looked at your watch, but can you
relate these events to anything which was happening on
the pitch? - A. I remember one incident where I think
Liverpool were attacking the Kop end of the goal.   As I
say, it was very hard to concentrate on the game
because of what was happening round about you, but I
remember somebody shot and it must have hit the bar, it
just went over the bar, and then there was a surge, a
sudden surge from the crowd, and then the noise got
worse and worse from that time on.




        /Q. Are you saying
                                                    St *ELLIS


Are you saying people at that point were being
discouraged and pushed back into the pen or was that
earlier when you saw that happen? - A. It sort of just
happened after kick-off time that people were trying to
get over the fence and they were being discouraged from
trying to get over the fence.

Did you see the gates of either pen 5 or pen 4 open or
shut at any point? - A. Pen 5 was shut.   That was the
only one I saw.

You didn't see the gate at pen 4? - A. No, sir.

Did you see that gate at any point? - A. No, sir.

You didn*t notice it? - A. No, sir.

Did you see any Officers come round the North Stand, in
particular a Serial led by a Sergeant? - A. That wouldn’t
be until the players were taken off the field.

You didn't see that? - A. No, because my first reaction
was there were only four or five Officers and they were
struggling to control the crowd and I couldn't understand
why any reinforcements hadn't been brought round.   This
is while the game was actually taking place.

So you would be very surprised if you saw photographs of
people there earlier than before the game had finished? -
A. I'm sorry, sir?

You would be surprised if there was visual evidence to
indicate there were more than five people on the track
before the game had finished? - A. Police Officers?

Yes. - A. As I say, there were five on that Leppings Lane
end of the game when the game started and then when
people started coming over the fences I didn't see any
reinforcements come from the North Stand side of the
ground.

You didn't? - A. No, sir, not while the game was taking
place.

I just want to come back to this business of the crowd
noise and what you heard.   Did you hear fans calling out
for help specifically? - A. Not, "Help” , as such, just
screaming.

At what point did you hear that? - A. Sort of straight
away after kick-off.
                                                 S*.»ELLIS


Does that mean you didn't hear that before kick-off?
That is what I am trying to find out. - A. I don't think
I did, sir, no.

You mentioned that you saw Officers push fans back.  Did
you see any other activity from the Officers in relation
to the crowd within the pen? - A. As I say, John was sat
on his stool when I took my position up.   Then he stood
up and was looking at the crowd and then eventually he
stood up on the wall and was sort of hanging over the top
of the fence, either pushing people back or telling them
to get back.

That is what I am trying to find out because there is a
difference between telling people to get back and pushing
people back.  I want to know what in fact you saw. - A.
At first there were definitely people trying to get over
the fence and they were pushing them back.

How long did that go on for? - A. It is difficult to tell
in actually time.   To put an actual time on is
difficult, sir.

Did it appear to you to be a long time or a short time?
I am not asking you to tell me twenty three seconds, or
anything like that, or three minutes.   I want you to
tell me whether it appeared a long or short time. - A.
What was happening was that five or six people were
trying to get over the fence and they were pushing them
back.   Then it got to the stage where there were too
many people for them...   It sort of overtook them and
the crowd eventually did get over the fence.   To put an
exact time on it is difficult.

You saw PC Illingworth - John as you know him.   How many
other Officers did you see on the railings? - A. Near to
me, just John Illingworth.

Was he opposite pen 5 or opposite 4 or opposite pen 4, or
pen 6? - A. He was, I would say, five yards maybe from
pen 5, because he was behind me.

Towards the centre of... - A. Yes.

I think you have told me you have no recollection of
seeing the gates open at any point? - A. No, sir, because
as more and more people were coming across the fence you
couldn't see eventually.   It was just a mass of bodies,
so I didn't actually see the gate being opened.

Did you hear any requests for the gates to be opened? -
A. No, sir.
                                                     S i *ELLIS


You didn't hear that? - A. Not in a specific, "Can you
open the gate?", no.

I don't mean in those words, but... - A. No.   It was
just a mass of noise and it is very difficult to make out
a specific sentence, unless you are really right up
against the fence.   It is like walking into a pub and it
is like a hubbub of noise.   It is very, very difficult
to make a specific sentence out.

You didn't see   the two ballboys   either? - A. No, sir.
Not that I can   remember.

When I say ballboys, they are young men, of course.
They are footballers. - A. Yes.

Do you know the Sheffield Wednesday footballers? - A.
Well, they alternate them each game.

If I mentioned a couple of names would you recognise
them? - A. I might recognise their faces.

Mr. Dickenson, does that   ring a bell? - A. No,    sir.

Mr. Lysett? - A. Lysett, yes.

Do you remember whether he was there? - A. I knew he was
there obviously after, but I didn't know he was there
before, sir.    Now that you mention their names, they are
not actually ballboys, they are   Sheffield Wednesday
apprentices.   There is a difference.

They are footballers.    They were were acting as
ballboys? - A. Yes, sir.

It may be I misled you.    Let's re-phrase it. Did you
see those two lads at all? - A. I can't recall that, sir.

You certainly didn't see them near you before kick-off? -
A. The only time I saw them, sir, was when they were
helping to carry injured and people on the advertising
boards.

One final question.   You have already told me when you
walked round you noticed this disparity in density, shall
we say, and that you mentioned it to John, although he
didn't appear to you to hear it.    What was it that you
noticed?   Was it the lack of people in pen 6, or the
excess of people in the centre pens? - A. No, it was just
the lack of people in the end pens.    Normally at a semi­
final there is no space at all and it hit you straight
away from doing previous semi-finals, the emptiness.
                                                 S». »ELLIS


             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Does it follow from that that you did not, when you first
arrived, notice anything unusual about the crowd in the
centre pens? - A. No, sir.

That is correct, is it? - A. Yes, sir.

You have mentioned your surprise that no Police
reinforcements arrived when at first the Police were
stopping people from climbing over the fence? - A. That's
right, sir.

What did you think the reinforcements were needed for? -
A. Well, at first maybe three or four were trying to get
across the fence and then more and more people were
trying to get over the fence and you could see these five
Officers were struggling to have any control over the
crowd and I was surprised that no reinforcements were
brought round.

What to help the Police? - A. To help the Police, yes.

To stop the people coming over? - A. Yes, sir.

That is what you thought at the time? - A. Yes, at the
time, sir.

What did you think these people were doing at the time
when they were trying to climb over the fence? - A. I
don't know, sir.   It is your normal reaction that fans
should not come on to the pitch.   It is instinct that
you think they are trying to stop them getting on to the
pitch.

That is what you thought at the time? - A. That's what I
thought, yes.

When was it you first realised that this disaster was
taking place?   This crushing disaster.   When did you
first become aware of that? - A. Not really...   Well, it
must have been an hour afterwards, the severity of what
was happening.




          Q. When did you first become
When did you first become aware there was a risk of
injury to people in relation to the time of the kick-
off? - A. The first people coming over the fence were
not injured. There was maybe only three or four that
were injured. As time gradually wore on you could
see that people were injured but not that there were
actually people killed. As people were coming over
the fence at the beginning I had no inclination that
there was any injuries because people did not look
injured, the first ones that came over the fence.

Did you realise at that time that within the pen,
just a short distance from you, people were being
crushed? Did you realise that at the time? - A. As I
say, what I saw was two girls screaming.  From where
I was sat you could not see that they were injured,
no, sir. They were just screaming.

How often have you attended footballmatches? - A. As
I say I have been Club photographer for sixteen
seasons.

Is it correct that immediately before the kick-off at
big matches there very often is a big crush behind
the goals, a crush of people, and then as the match
kicks off the crowd settles down? - A. I wouldn't say
that, sir, no.

You have not noticed that? - A. Not a crush, no.

Let me just try once more. Can you say when it was
that you first realised there was something very
unusual happening in relation to the time of the
people coming over the fence? - A. I am sorry, sir.
Do you mean in regard of injuries?

Yes, something seriously unusual happening? -A.
Certainly not until the players had been took off the
field.

What was your number? - A. I cannot recall that, sir,
I am sorry.

     THE CORONER:   What did you say?

     MR. PAYNE:  I was just trying to identify him by
his number because the photographers all have a
number.

     THE CORONER:    Because you wore a tabard? - A.
Bibs, yes.
              Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

Mr. Ellis, you have told us that you did not realise
something really serious had happened until the
players had gone off the pitch? - A. Yes, sir.

Do I take it that until the players went off the
pitch, for the most time you had your back to the
terrace and you were facing towards the pitch? - A.
When the game was actually being played I was sort of
alternating between trying to take pictures and, as I
said, reacting to this noise from behind.

I say that because it is a matter of perception the
whole time.  I wonder if you could just look at a
series of photographs which need not necessarily go
on the board, sir. They are the series C.326.

     THE CORONER:  It is just as easy to put them up
so that the Jury can see them. Mr. Griffiths is so
quick.

     MR. KING:  It is a series of photographs, Mr.
Ellis, which takes us through the first few minutes
of the game and begins with C.326A. The first
photograph, Mr. Ellis, is just before or just at
kick-off. Do you have that in front of you? - A.
Yes, sir.

Just have a look at it for the moment and I will not
ask you any questions about it. Turn the page and
you come to C.327 which is about one minute past
three, just after kick-off. Do you see that one? -
A. Yes, sir.

It should be in order? - A. Yes, sir.

We turn the page again to three minutes past kick-off
and again the game has not been stopped yet, C.328? -
A. Yes, sir.

I might tell you, Mr. Ellis, that there is another
three minutes to go approximately after this
photograph before the kick-off is stopped. Turn the
page again to C.329? - A. Yes, sir.

Which is five minutes past three. Going through
those photographs you can see now, can you not, that
an awful lot was going on behind you while the game
was still playing? - A. Yes, sir.

Were you conscious of all that happening behind you
at the time? - A. Oh yes, sir.
Did you not, for example, going to C.328 at three
minutes past three, think there that something
seriously wrong was happening if you saw that
scene? - A. Yes, but, sir, most of these people on
the track were not injured.

It is all right.  I just wanted to understand what
your own perceptions were. That is very helpful,
thank you. Can I ask you about another matter then?
At the time you told us when you could see two girls
pushed up against the fence and you said you could
hear screaming, your words to the Coroner were,
although you could not hear the exact words of what
was being said you could tell that something was not
right. Those were your words to us? - A. Yes, sir.

The game, I take it, was still playing when you
realised something was not right? - A. Yes, sir.

When you realised that something was not right, what
did you mean by that? - A. Because of the unusual
amount of noise coming from the crowd.

What was it about the noise which made it different
from a normal game where obviously you get a lot of
noise? - A. Because there was a lot more screaming.

What was it about the screaming which made you think
it was not right as opposed to just screaming and
shouting that you get at a normal football match? -
A. You don't normally get screaming at a normal game.

So screaming said to you what? What was the message
which went into your head when you heard screaming? -
A. I looked round and something was untoward.

You thought something would be untoward? - A. From
the screaming, yes, sir.

At the time of the screaming were people trying to
get over the top? - A. Yes, sir, and across the pens
inside.

At the time of the screaming, whenever it was, were
people being pushed back in as you have described? -
A. Yes, sir.

At the time when people were being pushed back your
own perception was that something untoward was
happening in the pens? - A. Yes, sir.

Let me go further back in time if I may. The word
untoward has come in earlier on in your evidence when
the learned Coroner asked you, before kick-off did
                                                     S. ELLIS


   you see or hear anything untoward? You made the
   point that when taking up your position you noticed
   this unusual space on either side of the centre pens?
   - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You have told the learned Coroner it was not the
   condition of the centre pens that was concerning you
   it was the space itself? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Had you been to many big games as a photographer? -
   A. It depends what you call big games, sir.

Q. Have you been to Semi Finals? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You would be taking up your position at about what
   time? At about what time would it be when you were
   noticing these spaces? - A. As I walked round from
   the players' entrance to take my position up would be
   ten to three, ten to or five to three.

Q. What was it, therefore, that you were saying to
   yourself about the spaces which did not fit in with
   what you normally expect at a Semi Final? - A. My
   first reaction was that some of the fans must have
   been delayed in some way.  I do not know. My first
   reaction was that a train must have been late in
   arriving because of the unusual amount of space there
   was in the side pens, not the fact that the centre
   ones were too packed.

Q. I understand that.  In other words, if you see large
   spaces in the side pens at a time when you expect
   them to be full you would say to yourself that there
   was a lot more people still to come? - A. For a Semi
   Final, sir, yes.

Q. It may be common sense but you are a man who goes to
   a lot of matches.  You know from previous Semi
   Finals, I am sure, that the crowd builds up and gets
   larger and larger, does it not? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You do not expect, do you, if everybody has arrived
   to have large spaces at a Semi Final, do you? - A.
   No, sir, because you know the game is a sell out from
   a ticket point of view and so you expect that ground
   to be at capacity.

Q. So if you do see large spaces one thing you can say
   to ^yourself is that there may be a lot more people
   still to come? - A. As I say, sir, my first reaction
   was that a train must have been delayed or something
   of that kind.
It is a good clue as to whether or not people have
arrived or not, is it not? - A. For a Semi Final,
yes, sir.

           Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Ellis, you obviously realised that something was
very wrong when you saw the two girls screaming. Did
you feel at that time that the people in the pen
needed help to escape out of there? - A. Quite
difficult. Obviously you could tell something was
wrong because they were trying to escape from
actually inside the pens across into the empty
spaces, so yes.

Did it surprise you to see fans being pushed back
instead of being helped out of that situation at that
time? - A. It did not surprise me, no.




                       /Q. You thought that was the.
                                                              14


                                           S. ELLIS
                                           --------      »f


Q. You thought that was the right action to take? - A. That
   was not for me. I was not there to judge whether that
   was the right action or not but certainly you know that
   fans are not allowed on to the pitch so you just presume
   that the Police Officers were doing the right action.

Q. Yes I appreciate normally they are not allowed on to
   the pitch but in a situation like that where they
   desperately needed help to escape out of that situation
          • • • •



           THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, you have got to be a
     bit careful because you can't tell the witness what
     answer you want otherwise it is not very valuable.
     You are quite right to ask him what he thought and you
     are quite right to ask him the second question which is
     was he surprised, but I don't think you can put to him
     what you are trying to put to him because you are going
     to get an answer but we don't actually know whether
     that answer is in response to what you have told him
     or what he thought at the time. What we have got to
     try and find out is what was in his mind, what was he
     thinking, what did he see, what did he say on the
     15th April 1989.  It is difficult actually. Try again.
     I am not going to stop you but try again in a slightly
     different form.
           MRS. McBRIEN:     Would you like to put the question
     sir please?
Q.         THE CORONER: What Mrs. McBrien is asking is trying
     to explore with you again. You have told us three things
     as I understand it basically. One, that at some point
     you heard screaming and that this alerted you and you
     saw these two girls? - A. Yes.

Q. And this alerted you to the fact that something was wrong
   - A. Yes sir.
Q. You also saw people going into the sides and over the
   tops which you thought well they are trying to escape,
   something is wrong. That is the first point. The
   second point is that you saw Officers as you describe
   pushing people back or signalling? - A. Yes sir.

Q. The third thing that you said was you weren't surprised
   at that. Now what Mrs. McBrien is trying to find out
   is why were you not surprised that they were doing what
   they were doing as opposed to doing the opposite, which
   is getting the fans over. That is right, isn't it?

             MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, thank you.
                                      S. ELLIS


      THE WITNESS:    Because sir it is not normal that
fans are allowed on   to the field when the game is being
played.  I am not     a Police Officer. It is difficult for
me to say what they   should have been     doing.

      THE CORONER: And is it also right that in fact
the fans whom you   observed coming over, those fans
initially you saw   appeared to you to    be   okay? - A.There
was only one particular fan that vomited in front of
me and I called across to the St. John Ambulance to come
and see him, but after that my first reaction was I moved
from the position I was across to the North Stand
because I was sort of in fear of my equipment because
the fans weren't injured, they were just sort of in
boisterous mood. There was no inkling at that time
how serious the situation was.

Forgive me, Mrs. McBrien, I will just finish and then
I will let you corae in. Are you saying you were getting
mixed signals in effect?   Do you understand what I mean
by "mixed signals"? - A. Well my signal at first was
there were not a lot of people injured because as I say
the first ones that came over the fence were not injured
at all except for this one young lad. I asked him what
was wrong and he vomited at the side of me and I called
but 90% of the people that came over first were not
injured.

      THE CORONERt  Now,Mrs. McBrien, carry on.    I have
tried to help you a bit.   I hope I have done it right.

      MRS. McBRIEN:    Oh yes, yes, thank you.

What time would you say that was when you thought the
ones who came out were not in a bad state? - A. They
weren't in a bad state?

Yes, what time was it? - A. When the game was playing.

You can't be more precise than that? - A. From sort of
kick-off time.

Somewhere in those five minutes? - A. From kick-off time
to when the actual players were taken off most of the
people that came over were not injured.

So would you say those people were reacting quickly to
making their escape, the ones that you saw. They knew
they were in a difficult situation so they acted as fast
as they could? - A. Yes, yes.

And the situation could have been different if things
would have moved faster altogether?
                                                          16


                                       S. ELLIS



        THE CORONER:  I don't think he can answer that.
  Don't attempt to answer that question.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Alright sir, thank you.   Thank
  you, Mr. Ellis.

               Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN:

Q. Can I ask you first of all, Mr. Ellis, you have mentioned
   the Officer on the track who was a regular, John Illingworth.
   Can you tell me how you knew his name was John? - A. As
   I said to the Coroner, these Officers work Hillsborough
   every wefek and I work Hillsborough every week so you just
   get to know them by first name terms.

Q. I see, you can remember specifically who may have said
    that was John? — A. Well no. As I say I know him as
   John.  I did not know his surname.

Q. Subsequently clearly you got hold of a surname somehow
   or other. How did it come about that you found out the
   second name was Illingworth? - A. Well because I had
   taken a photograph with John Illingworth on and during
   statements I gave I pointed this Officer out who identified
   him as John Illingworth.

Q. Could you describe him for me please? — A. Medium height,
   blondish hair and a moustache.

Q. It may be, Mr. Ellis, in due course the jury will be able
   to see Mr. Illingworth but would it surprise you to know
   that his first name is David and not John? - A. I knew
   him as John.
Q. When you pointed this Officer out the person with you
   looking at the photographs did they say:  "Oh that is
   John Illingworth"? - A. There was one specific photograph
   of the Officer that was sat beside me who I knew as John
   and I pointed him out and somebody said:  "Well that is
   John Illingworth".

Q. Do you remember who that somebody was? - A. I can't
   recall that, no.

Q. Now to go to the events of the 15th of April now. You
   have said that it was really after kick-off that you
   began to notice that events were amiss.  Is that correct?
   - A. Yes.
Q. And at that time, so far as your recollection serves you,
   Gate 5 was shut, you did not notice the others? - A.
   It was shut.
                                                           17


                                       S. ELLIS-



Q. Can I ask you to have a look again please, Mr. Ellis,
   at C326A. Have you got it there? - A. Yes.

Q. The timing of that photograph, Mr. Ellis, is 1-minute-to-3.
   Could you look at the perimeter fencing and the gates
   there? - A. Yes.
Q. Do you notice there that Gate 5 is open along with Gate 4
   and 3? - A. Yes.
Q. Having looked at C326A now do you remember any scene like
   that? - A. Sorry, I don't understand the question?




                    Q. Having looked at the photograph
                                               S.   ELLIS


Having looked at the photograph now, does it refresh
your memory?  Do you recall seeing a scene like that
from your vantage point? - A. Well obviously I wasn't
at the angle from where that picture was taken.  I am
looking at it from a different angle, from the track
side.

Yes, I do appreciate that.  So clearly you would accept
that your recollection is incorrect, certainly so far
as gate 5 is concerned? - A. I can recall looking and
gate 5 was closed when I looked across.  It might not
have been at 2.59.

Can you tell me this?  I expect that on the day your
attention was attracted to various places on the
perimeter track, as well as the pitch, I suppose, would
that be correct? - A. Specifically to the pitch at
kick-off time, because that is what I was there for, to
take pictures of the game.

So you are in something of a dilemma, do I state it
correctly, Mr. Ellis, that whilst you knew you were to
concentrate on your job, take pictures of the pitch,
what you were doing, was it, was glancing at the
terraces and at the same time trying to keep your eye
on your job, on the pitch? - A. Yes.

So that it is natural perhaps that there would be gaps
in your knowledge of what was going on, on the
terraces? - A. Yes, because I wasn t totally looking at
the crowd.

If that be right, as you have fairly said, Mr. Ellis,
it must follow, must it not, that you would not know
what Mr. Illingworth was doing all the time? - A. No,
not the full time, no.

Could I ask you to look at another photograph? If you
will bear with me just one moment --- I will find the
photograph in a minute, but I will try not to hold
matters up.  Can I ask you this, and it might short
circuit things - did you notice at any point Officers
who appeared to be ferrying people from one part of the
terraces to another? - A. Sorry, do you mean during the
game?

Yes, from 3 o'clock onwards and just before.  Do you
have a recollection during any of that time of Officers
walking along the perimeter track, accompanying fans to
another part of the terracing? - A. No.

You don't remember anything like that at all? - A. No.
                                                       S . ELLIS


     THE CORONER:   You don't mean within the terrace,
you mean on the outside?

       MISS ADDLEMAN:    No, sir, on the perimeter track.
I am    sorry if I didn't make it clear.

     THE CORONER:       Is that clear, what Miss Addleman
isasking? - A. Yes.      No, I didn't see it.

     THE CORONER:   I think I know what you are         looking
for but I can't remember the number.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Yes, sir.  I am having difficulty
but I think it certainly is a photograph that has been
before the Jury.

     THE CORONER:    What I am not sure about is whether
it is a photograph or whether it is on a video, what
you are thinking of.

       MISS ADDLEMAN:     It may well be,    sir.

     THE CORONER: One of the Jury           is shaking his head
and saying it is a photograph - one         of the photographs
Mr. Doyle ....

       MR. GRIFFITHS:     462, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Put it up and let's have a look.
Is that the one, Miss Addleman?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   I think not, sir.  There is one
which I have found which may be of limited use - C360:

Here, Mr. Ellis, we have a view of pens 2 and 3 and you
will notice on the perimeter track there, there are
three Officers and people who appear to be accompanied
from the right of the picture to the left, to the gate
in pen 2.  Do you recollect anything like this? - A.
Well, that was the other side of the goal to where I
was sat.

Yes, I do appreciate that and I know that this
photograph would only be of limited use, but did you
have a view like this from where you were sitting? - A.
I didn't see anything  like that being carried out, no.
As I say, I was on the other side of the goal from
where that is being carried out.

It occurred to me perhaps, Mr. Ellis, you may have seen
the beginnings of this crocodile, as it were, going
along the perimeter track? - A. No, I am sorry, I
didn t see that.
                                                       S.   ELLIS


          MISS ADDLEMAN:   The timing of this photograph,
     sir, is 15.03, therefore 15.02 - 2-minutes-past-3.

Q. Mr. Ellis, you have mentioned that you saw, is it
   Officers plural or an Officer standing on the fence? -
   A. Just an Officer, where I was sat, yes.

Q. Which pen are we talking of?  Where did you see this
   Officer standing on the fence? - A. Where I was sat,
   nearly alongside gate 5.

Q. So we are talking about pen 4.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Pen 4 is the one nearest to the
     goal, to your right? - A. If that is what you are
     saying, sir.  I don't know it as pen 4, but gate 5
     certainly, yes.

Q.        MISS ADDLEMAN:   It was gate 5? - A. Yes, where I
     marked at the beginning.

          THE CORONER:   Do you want him to go up and show
     us on the plan where he saw the Officer?

          MISS ADDLEMAN:    I think that is wise.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Just walk up to the plan and point
     to where you saw the Officer.  (The witness used
     Exhibit C471 to illustrate his evid e n c e ) - A. This is
     where I was sat, sir.  The Officer was behind me.

Q. Further away up towards the corner, you are saying? -
   A. No, just behind me, where this Officer is now.

Q. Almost directly behind you, you are saying? - A. Yes.

Q. But slightly to your .... - A. If I am sat th e r e , where
   this Officer is now, further towards the fencing.

Q.        MISS ADDLEMAN:   And slightly further away from
     gate 5? - A. I was right up against the hoardings and
     the Officer was sat on his stool, about that distance
     away from me.

          THE CORONER:   That is four yards, would you say?
     Would you agree with that?

          MISS ADDLEMAN:    I would agree with that,   sir.

Q.        THE CORONER:   And slightly to the rear and behind
     your right shoulder, isn't it? - A. That is right.  I
     had to turn that way to talk to him.
                                                   S . ELLIS


     MISS ADDLEMAN:   I think you said, correct me if I
am wrong, Mr. Ellis, that the Officer was either
pushing people back or trying to get them to move back?
- A. Yes, it was difficult to tell what he was ---
obviously at first you could see that some people were
being told to get back in, or pushed in.  It is
difficult to recall but he was trying to keep fans,
either pushing or demonstrating, from getting over the
fence.

I see.  For the benefit of the shorthand note, the hand
motion which you just carried out was one where you
were sweeping your arm, palm upward, away from you? -
A. Yes, "Get back", yes.

The only thing I am trying to establish, Mr. Ellis, is
this, that you fairly said it was difficult to know
exactly what interpretation to put on those movements
that the Officer was making? - A. He obviously was not
trying to help people over the fence.

Yes, I agree. - A. So he was either verbally telling
them to get back, or pushing them back in as well.

You can't say? - A. It is very difficult to actually
recall and say, "He pushed a fan back", but he was
certainly trying to keep the fans in.

Thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Miss Addleman, do you want to try
and find this photograph which you were looking for,
because we could always ask Mr. Ellis to hang on for 20
minutes or so, and then if you have found it well and
goo, and if not we will let him go.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:     Certainly,   sir.

     THE CORONER:     Would that help you?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   I could make the attempt.  Sir,      I
don't want to hold Mr. Ellis, because the photograph
clearly, if it can be found, is an exhibit which is
before the Jury.

     THE CORONER:   What we can do is rise for coffee.
That won't hold him up that long and if you have found
it by the end of the break well and good, and if not,
as you say, if it is in the exhibits the Jury will be
able to look at it for themselves in due course.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:     Sir,   I am very much obliged.
                                                 S . ELLIS


     THE CORONER:   It seems this is the most
convenient way of doing it.

Mr. Ellis, if you would be good enough to stay.  Don't
discuss the evidence because you are still technically
on oath, and immediately after the coffee break we will
bring you back and deal with this point. - A. Yes, sir.

                (Short A d j o u r n m e n t )
                                                  St *ELLIS

     MISS ADDLEMANs   I would like to ask you to look at
a number of photographs to see if your eyes were in^these
particular directions at the relevant times.   See if it
jogs your memory.   Can I ask you first to look at a new
exhibit.   It is PR1.26A.

     MR. BEECHEYs   That will be C.472.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Here we have the other end of the
pitch, the extreme right there of the terrace.   You can
see two Officers, one Officer appears to be holding
someone, taking him along.   The timing on this
photograph is three minutes past three.   It says 15.04
on the frame.   Do you recollect any scene like this? -
A. That would have been behind me where that was
happening, so I would not have seen that.

You wouldn't have turned and looked there? - A. No.

You don't recollect either of those Officers, do I take
it, walking along from your direction, perhaps past you,
in the direction we see on the photograph? -A. No.

For the sake of completeness, do you recognise either of
those Officers?   I know it is very difficult. - A. No, I
couldn't identify anybody from that photograph.

Would you look now at some earlier ones.    The first is
already exhibited C.367, and thereafter, Sergeant, we
will go to the next two frames.   This is at three
o'clock and we see there the gate to pen 4.    You see
there a number of Officers around the gate.    Do you
recollect anything like this? - A. Obviously I recollect
people coming - as that picture shows, somebody coming
over the fence.   I recall that, but not actually the
gate open, no.

The next one along, not exhibited yet, DB.17, frame 15.

     MR. BEECHEY:   That will be C.473.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   We have got a frame here, the same
timing, which shows gate 5 as well as gate 4 . ^ Where are
you at this time? - A. What time would this picture be
taken?

The same timing, it is three o'clock. - A. I would be to
the far side of the goal, to the right.

Again we have got Officers in this photograph, and again
I know it is difficult, do you recognise any of them from
the back view? - A. No. As I said, I was positioned
further to the right.   That is actually taking place
from the far sat of where I was sat.
                                                  S% *ELLIS


In that event I don't think the next frame will assist us
very much.   Thank you.

               Further by THE CORONER:

You are saying you were sitting off the photograph, so to
speak, towards the wall? - A. You see the goalmouth here,
I was at the far side of the goal, which is not on the
picture.

You can't see the goal, of course, but you can see gate
5, and you showed us you were sitting in line with gate
5.   Can you show Mr. Ellis gate 5?   It is difficult to
orientate yourself on these photographs.  We are getting
better at it.   That is gate 5.   Now you were
sitting...? - A. Towards the advertising hoardings.    The
trouble is, I would think, on that type of picture it is
taken on a long lens and all the distances are
foreshortened so it is difficult to tell the actual...
It all looks as if it is all together but it might not
actually be like that.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Ellis, thank you for your help.
I appreciate your coming.

     Shall we deal with Mr. Hicks' point?   I don't think
it is going to take very long - I hope not anyway!
Mr. Hicks has already been sworn.   We will treat you as
still being on oath, Mr. Hicks.

                TREVOR HICKS Recalled

                   Bv THE CORONER:

Mr. Hicks, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury, can I
explain why I have asked you to come back?   The reason I
have asked you to come back is when I was taking you
through your evidence I was asking you a question about
what you had been telling Lord Justice Taylor.   The
comment I made was, "I think it was Mr. Collins who was
questioning you at that time."   Perhaps I had better
read you a little bit more to put you in the picture.   It
is at Day 31, page 49, at D.   You in fact read it.    It
reads:

     "'At about 2.30 when I looked across, it was
     obviously starting to get quite busy then, and I
     kept looking over because obviously I hadn't
     realised when I had come round the side and I
     didn't, in fact, until later, that there was what
     looked like a solid barrier...'"

This is a quotation from... - A. Yes, from my statement.
                                                 T».*HICKS


Then there is a comment:

     "That is obviously the radial fence:

     '...between Pen No. 4, I think, - the nearest one to
     me...

     Q. 3 in fact.  A. 3, I am sorry, Pen No. 3, and the
     one that I was in - the corner.   I would say at
     around quarter to three, something like that, it was
     starting to look extremely busy and people were
     showing obvious signs of distress then.

     Q. You were aware of that - this is before the teams,
     have come out, is it? - A. Yes, they had come out.

     Q. They had had their warm-up but - A. They were
     warming up.

     Q. Before they had formally come out. A. Before they
     had formally come out.   I think during the warm-up
     - I can't be absolutely certain, to be fair, but it
     was obviously looking extremely packed then.'"

     Then there is a question:

     "Q. I think it is Mr. Collins who was questioning
     you at that point.   What he meant by formally I do
     not know? - A. This is the thing I was saying
     earlier where they come round and have this warm up,
     kick around, and then they go back in and usually
     about ten minutes to three they formally come back
     out.  For a big game they would line up, swap
     banners, toss the coin for which team kicks which
     direction."

I then commented, and this is the reason I have asked you
to come back:

     "I think the teams did come out twice but I think
     the first time was about twenty past two.   It was
     very, very early on."

Then Mr. King makes a comment.

Having looked at that video, do you remember, when
Mr. Motson was here - perhaps you weren't here? - A. I
wasn't here then.

Having looked at the video on that occasion I noticed in
fact the team, or the players, were out at about twenty
to three, maybe between twenty to three and quarter to
three.   They may well have been out earlier as well, in
fact I know they were from other papers, but I may have
                                                 T%*HICKS


misled you with my comment there.   All I want to do is
to make sure that your replies - that you weren't thrown,
if you like, by that comment.   Are you with me? - A.
Right.

     THE CORONER:   That is why I have asked Mr. Hicks to
come back because I may have misled him and I didn't want
to do that:

We were actually working our way through the transcript
because we were trying to sort out the various timings if
you remember. - A. Right.

Can you again tell me, your reply which I read
immediately before my comment, namely:

     "This is the thing I was saying earlier where they
     come round and have this warm up, kick around, and
     then they go back in and usually about ten minutes
     to three they formally come back out."

Now what period were you actually referring to when you
were telling Mr. Collins about that? - A. As best I can
remember I believe it was the warm-up at around twenty
minutes to three.

That warm-up?   So in other words, when I said to you it
was "very, very early" that was in fact not what you had
in mind? - A. In fact I have no recollection of the
earlier coming out.   I think I said last time it was
around 2.30 or so when I heard the team announced, and it
was some time just after that when they actually came
out.  I can't remember whether Hanson came out as well at
the time.

Your recollection is that the teams had come out, had a
kick around, had gone back in... - A. That's normal
practice for almost every game.

Then they came out again at some particular time.    We
know what time they came out, "formally" - we will use
that word for the sake of the argument.   It is that
twenty to three time you had in mind? - A. I don't have a
strong recollection of the formal coming out.   I think I
said that last time, which is why I know it was the kick-
around time because it was after then when I was paying
less and less attention to what was happening on the
pitch.
                                                   T . HICKS


     THE CORONER:      I am quite satisfied with that.  Is
there anything arising out of that?      No.   Thank you,
Mr. Hicks.   I just wanted to be sure we knew what we
were talking about because we spent a lot of time on your
timings and I di d n ’t want a mistake over that very thing.
Thank you, Mr. Hicks.

     Now we will turn to Mr. Seamen.




              ALAN KEITH SEAMEN Called
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


               ALAN KEITH SEAMEN Sworn

                    Bv THE CORONER

I do not know your first names, only your initials? -
A. Alan.

What is the K for? - A. Keith.

You are Alan Keith Seamen? - A. That is right.

What is your correct designation because I do not
know? - A. I am an assistant Chief Fire Officer and
my main reference is fire prevention and fire safety
matters.

I think you were unlucky in the sense that you
happened to be on duty on 15th April 1989? - A. That
is right.

That is why you have been landed with preparing
documents, statements, coming here and going to Lord
Justice Taylor's Inquiry and so on, is that right, or
is it because you have specific knowledge of previous
events? - A. I think the main reason I attended as a
witness was because of the Fire Service's involvement
as part of the Officers' Working Party rather than
the operational attendance on the day although I did
go to the incident.

I am less concerned about what happened on the day
because by the time the Fire Service had arrived in
the sense we are passed what the Inquest is dealing
with? - A. Yes.

I am not hopefully going to go over the whole range
of everything that happened in the Officers' Working
Party and the Safety Certificate but what I want to
pick out is one or two more things related to you and
which may be interesting and relevant to the Jury,
okay, and we will try and do it that way? - A. Right.

The Officers' Working Party was the body which had
been set up — and I want you to confirm that I have
got this right — by South Yorkshire County Council
when the licensing of the ground under the Safety at
Sports Ground Act 1975 was being implemented in about
1979 or thereabouts? - A. Yes, that is correct.

We have heard already from several people about this.
There were several parties on this Officers' Working
Party? - A. Yes.
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


One of them was the Fire Service, is that right? - A.
Yes, that is right.

Each of the various parties had primary
responsibility, so to speak, is that correct? - A.
Yes.

The Fire Service's responsibilities were what? - A.
The Fire Service's main responsibilities were the
means of escape and fire precautions in general.

When the Safety Certificate was first being
implemented or introduced I think I am right in
saying — we are only interested in the Leppings Lane
terrace. We are not interested in any other part of
the ground? - A. Right.

That terrace was not divided by any radial fences, is
that right? - A. That is correct.

You in the Fire Service were of the opinion that the
terrace, being a concrete structure, presented a
relatively low fire risk, is that right? - A. That is
correct as well, yes.

When you were assessing it from the point of view of
means of escape, what were you looking at, at that
time? - A. The ability to evacuate people within a
reasonable time within the guidelines set out in the
then 1976 edition of the Green Guide which made a
recommendation that it should be possible to evacuate
any part of the ground in not more than eight
minutes.  It also said that if there was any risk,
generally in terms of fire risk, that might require
that the ground needed to be evacuated more quickly
than that then that had to be determined and it could
be between two and a half minutes at the low end and
eight minutes at the high end.  It could vary from
parts of each ground according to what the particular
hazard was.  In that part of the ground, because of
the non-combustibility of the stand, it was concrete
terracing, it was in the open air, it was felt that
eight minutes was an acceptable time to set for that
proportion of the ground.

Although there were no radial fences the perimeter
fence was already in place at that time? - A. It
already existed prior to the Club needing to apply
for a Safety Certificate.

Can you tell me this; when you work out the
evacuation times what do you do? Very briefly
because I do not want you to give me a mathematical
method, just tell me how you set about it? - A. The
                                               A. K. SEAMEN


Green Guide which had been issued gave guidance on
how capacities should be calculated and there were a
number of capacity calculations. One was on the
holding capacity of the terrace which was dependent
on the condition and pitch of the terrace and the
number and condition of crush barriers.   That was the
holding capacity. The other capacity was that based
on the means of escape available from the terrace
itself or from a stand had it been a stand. The
Guide then gave recommendations which said that for
each unit of exit width, which was 550 mm, 60 persons
per minute could be assumed to pass. Therefore, if
you calculated the width of each exit, in relation to
how many units of exit width you have provided,
multiply that by the 60, the flow per minute, and
then again by whatever time you had set for the
evacuation time, in this case eight, it gave you a
figure. For each component in an evacuation route
the controlling factor for capacity would be the
narrowest point.

So in other words, if we were to look at this room
for instance? - A. Yes.

Actually it has got two doors but if we forget about
that one door for the moment and that we only had
that one door for the moment for simplicity's sake? -
A. Right.

One might   be able to work out how many people you
could get   in for a holding capacity but when you came
along you   would look at the amount of people you
could get   out through that door? - A. Correct.

If the figure on your computation was greater than
the holding capacity then it would be the holding
capacity that would be the figure? - A. Yes.

If it was less than the holding capacity you would
say, it does not matter how many you can get in, we
say that you may only have the smaller number in? -
A. They would have had to have provided additional
means of escape if that was possible in order to
match the higher figure.

Or reduce the numbers? - A. Or reduce   the numbers,
yes.

In those days, 1979, what were the means of escape on
which the computation were based if you can remember?
- A . In 1979 the whole of the terrace was undivided
and there were three access and egress points on to
the terrace. One was the central tunnel to the
centre of the terrace behind the goal. One was to
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


the north end of the West terrace and one to the
south end of the West terrace. So round each corner
and through the centre.

Would I be right in thinking all those points were
behind, at the rear of the people? - A. Yes.

That is correct, is it not? - A. Yes.

Would it be right — and I am talking about 1979
now — that whatever perimeter gates there might have
been, I think there were a few but not all that many
at that time, they were not taken into account in
your computations? - A. They were not taken into
account when we calculated the capacity of the exit
routes. We never said they could not be used because
we always recognised that they might need to be used
in the case of some emergency that might arise but in
terms of calculating how many exits and how wide they
needed to be off that terrace we did not count those
gates. To have counted those gates might have meant
that someone could have said, "We need less escape
from the rest of the terrace". Those were not
properly designed as exits that took people out of
the ground.

You are quite right in saying that if you have got a
gate there you may want to use it. For the purposes
of calculation you did not take account of them? - A.
No.

It is right, is it not, that you were relying upon
the egress from round the sides and through the
tunnel in 1979? - A. Yes.

What, if any, was the hazard which was in your mind
when you were considering this? I think I know the
answer to this but I just want to hear it from you.
What was the hazard which you were considering when
you were thinking about the escape from those
terraces? - A. Basically the means of escape remit
that we had had to encompass anything that might
happen on that terrace and so it was not just fire.
It could be a fight, it could be any number of things
that might happen. You had to decide whether or not
there was a reasonable provision for escape.

What I want to ask is this; at that time and never
mind about what we might know now, bearing in mind
that these routes were at the rear of the terrace and
that the events that people were coming for were
happening in the front, did that affect in any way
your thinking about the effectiveness of the routes
of escape? - A. To answer that I would have to say
                                             A. K. SEAMEN

that the Green Guide gave fairly comprehensive
guidance in a whole range of aspects which all needed
to be taken together which created a package which
created a safe situation. From the outside of the
ground, the feeding into the ground, the condition of
the terraces, how many crush barriers were provided,
the correct control of packing of spectators,
stewarding, policing and everything else went into
that package.

     So in addition to that we would take into
account any obvious fire risk. For example, had
there been a very combustible stand made of timber
which was the case at Sheffield United's ground, for
example, in that case then we would take that very
much into account in deciding what the evacuation
time that we would set would be and that would cause
a reduction in the spectator capacity. Having borne
everything in mind, all those factors, it was
concluded that the terrace as it stood was acceptable
and that is why it was accepted.

In 1981 and then again in 1985 a number of radial
fences were proposed and indeed installed, is that
right? - A. Yes.

In fact, the terrace initially was divided more or
less into three equal units? - A. Yes.

The radial fences went right up to the back wall but
had a gate? - A. Yes.

I think it was 1.55 metres or something of that
order? - A. Yes.

That, of course, changed the configuration of the
terrace? - A. Yes.

What happened so far as the Fire Service were
concerned in relation to that? - A. At that time the
officers who looked at it were concerned to ensure
that it did not affect the means of escape which
existed from the terrace which is one obvious reason
why the gates were required in the radial fences
because there needed to be an ability to move
laterally from whatever pen they might need to in
case there was ever a need. Should, for example, the
tunnel become unavailable for whatever reason then
you still had to be able to evacuate the people in
the centre pen. So, therefore, there was a need to
maintain that gate. There was a need to check to see
if there was going to be any effect overall on the
adequacy of the existing means of escape
arrangements.
                                             A. K. SEAMEN



     In effect the introduction of the fences would
not have had any effect on capacity as it existed.
It should not have increased it and, therefore, the
means of escape in our view would continue to remain
adequate.  It was important though that the radial
gates were manned so that if ever it was necessary
for them to be used in an emergency, bearing in mind
part of the proposal was to have both home and away
supporters in those pens to give some flexibility of
use but on occasions you could have home and away
supporters next to one another, that there had to be
someone on those gates if they were not available so
that they could be used for evacuation purposes.
They were the main factors that were taken into
account by the Fire Service at that time.
                                                        34


                                          A.K. SEAMEN



Q. If you take the centre section, because initially that
   was not divided into two pens, are you saying that the
   main route of escape was through the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. In fact that had not altered in any way? - A. No, it
   hadn't .
Q. And assuming that all the other routes were of the same
   capacity and the terrace had been divided into equal
   thirds, that should have been sufficient to cope with
   the numbers that you would normally expect in that section.
   That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, if I could explain a
   little bit further on that. Using the tunnel that bit
   of the terrace could be evacuated in about five-and-a-half
   minutes.   In fact the whole of the terrace in 1979 was
   about five, five-and-a-half minutes the evacuation time.
   It was less than eight simply because the width of the
   routes was wider than the holding capacity allowed for
   and so there was an over capacity on means of escape.
   If it had been narrower we could still have been in a
   situation where it was acceptable for means of escape
   purposes, but the Green Guide required that in case the
   major normal escape route became unavailable for any
   reason there was an alternative route and when the radial
    fences went in that had a potential effect on that ability
    to move in a lateral way towards the corner exits and
    therefore the requirement for the radial gates was to
   maintain the ability to go towards the corner exits
    should it ever become necessary.

Q. Assume for a moment that the tunnel was sealed off
   because somebody put a bomb in it or something and you
   could not use it or there was a fire in it, a more
   mundane situation, are you saying that all things being
   equal you could have got the people out of the centre
   pen through the gates at the back within the six minute
   or eight minute period that you had allowed as being
   the safe evacuation time for that terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. That is right, isn't it? - A. That is right.

         MR. ISAACS: Sir, before you ask any further
   questions, could you ask a question which would help
   me I know a great deal because it is something I am
   not sure about?

         THE CORONER:   Yes, certainly.

         MR. ISAACS: Is this Officer speaking from personal
   experience because you have been talking about, asking
   him "you", I just don't know, was he on the Officer
   Working Party during this period.  I just don't know
   and it may be of some assistance, certainly it would be
   to me sir.
                                                          35



                                         A.K. SEAMEN
                                                    ' *$


Q.         THE CORONER: Can you answer that question? - A. No,
     I was not personally involved. The knowledge I have
     comes from questioning Officers that were involved at
     the time and from the files that we had.

Q. A study of the evidence within the Fire Service? - A. Yes.

Q. But the principles which we are talking about, you know
   the calculations and so on, those are just general
   principles? - A. Yes, they are general principles.

           THE CORONER:   Does it help you, Mr. Isaacs?

           MR. ISAACS: I am very grateful. Thank you very
     much indeed.  I was not sure what the position in fact
     was.
           THE CORONER: That is what I tried to cover in
     my introductory comment to this Officer but obviously
     unsuccessfully.
Q. Let's get back to these gates, those gaps or gates at
   the back.
           You have mentioned that if the terrace was used
     by opposing - shared shall we say ~ if these enclosures
     had been used by opposing teams, then what I think you
     are saying is the problems of segregation can occur.
     That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes. Our understanding
     was that the main reason that the Police had wanted to
     put those radial fences in was to give them improved
     crowd control.
Q. Are you saying that your understanding was in a situation
   where the terrace was being shared by supporters from
   different teams, it was necessary to have Officers on
   those rear gates in order that they could direct or
   otherwise act in cases of emergency? ~ A. No, I am not
   saying that.
Q. What are you saying? - A. What I am saying is irrespective
   of whose spectators, whether they were a mixture, whether
   they were all of one Club support, it made no difference
   to whether or not someone was required on those gates.
   They were needed to be there to ensure there was an
   ability to direct people's attention to those gates in
   case it was ever needed to evacuate.  It made no
   difference whether or not the gates were open or closed
   there needed to be someone on those gates. The whole
   essence of the change that took place once you put
   radial fences in, is the control of numbers in each area.
                                    A.K. SEAMEN   .*
                                    —             **


You are talking about the gates in the radial fences.
Do I deduce from that that you are not saying that you
needed Officers at the previous exits, the tunnel and
the exits round the wings? - A. Well they would not
be gates, would they, they were openings. There was
no physical barrier there.

That is the bit that I am finding difficult to understand.
I quite understand if the gates are shut, if the gates
are shut and you are filling up the terrace, that if
that is the method that you wish to employ you have to
have somebody there who could open them in an emergency?
- A. Yes.
That is right, isn't it, but if the gates are open what
is the difference between those open gates and for example
the tunnel mouth, if you are concentrating on the centre?
- A. Well first and foremost the tunnel entry is the entry
by which people have come in by and they know about it.
Whether it is the tunnel or whether it is round each side
they know the route. Like you go into a shop and you know
the way you went in. You don't necessarily know the way
that you went out, the emergency way that you might need
to go out by. In this particular case because of that
situation those gates were in the radial fence. They were
not going to be immediately obvious to people in the
situation that obtained. There were questions of how
the terrace was going to be controlled which were dis­
cussed by the Officer Working Party at the time the
proposals came up and aspects of how this was going to
be controlled were discussed and assurances were given
to the Fire Service Officers that the gates were going
to be manned for emergency purposes because it was
stressed there was a need to ensure that those gates
were available and that attention to them could be drawn
if it was needed. That was the understanding that our
Officers had.
What you are saying is that was the understanding
within the Fire Service? - A. Yes, and if we had thought
it was going to be other than that then we would not
h&ve accepted that situation.

What would you have put as an alternative? - A. As an
alternative it may well have been that you had to consider
whether it was acceptable to instal the radial barriers
in the first place. It might have been a question of
deciding whether it was possible to provide an exit
somewhere else.  In that particular case it would probably
have had to have been a planned exit for evacuation
purposes to the pitch perimeter itself, but that would
have created other problems because you would then have
had to have a route off the ground so you could direct
people round the pitch and out of an exit ultimately.
That is what the Green Guide would have required.
                                   A.K. SEAMEN   ^#



In fact there were of course no gangways on that terrace
but this was a point which had been carefully considered
I think. Because of slope and size it was felt that
it was not necessary. Would that be right? — A. I think
if i remember rightly in 1979 Dr. Eastwood, who was the
Club's representative, he did an assessment of the ground.
He did a report.   For that end of the ground he made the
point it would be difficult to provide gangways and because
of the shallow pitch of the terrace and the fact it was
not very deep that the exits off were well distributed,
he put to the Officer Working Party that it would be
reasonable to follow another section of the Green Guide.
Again it is the bit that talks about calculation of
capacity of the standing areas and based on crush
barriers and condition, which says that you could make
an appropriate reduction in a case perhaps where there
were no gangways and it was that aspect, I believe,
that was followed, so that activated a reduction I think
of about 10% to allow for the non-provision of gangways
in the standing capacity of the terrace.

And that of course brought it well within your escape
calculations? - A. It just improved an already over­
capacity situation. The other thing I would say about
these radial barrier fences, the whole aspect of it as
we understood it was that that was going to improve the
ability to control the crowd, have an improving effect
if you like on safety because there had been a crushing
incident at the semi-final in 1981 which led, we
understood, directly to the proposals for the radial
fences with the objective of securing better control
over spectators, so when we looked at the means of
escape aspects of that we were looking to see if we
could maintain reasonable means of escape once those
radial fences were erected.

Would you agree with me on this: if an emergency had
occurred which had blocked off for instance the two
radial gates, whether an Officer was there or not,
okay? - A. The two radial gates?

Yes, one on each side? — A. One from Pen 3 and one from
Pen 4?
That is right, yes.  I am talking about the situation
before the central fencing was in because it does not
actually make any difference I don't think, or not
much difference to the principles of the matter. Yes,
you want to come back. Go on? — A. I am not quite sure
I understand what you mean?

Well I will come back to this in a moment. Let's bring
ourselves right up-to-date. Okay? - A. Right.
                                                      38


                                       A.K. SEAMEN   #



Q. In 1985 the terrace was further sub-divided? - A. Yes.

Q. At least two more fences were put in, one was to divide
   the central area into two which we now know is Pens 3
   and 4. That is right? - A. Yes.

Q. And then a corridor I think was constructed between
   4 and 6. Do you want to have a look at the plan to
   refresh your memory? - A. No, I know what you are talking
   about. It is the very narrow gangway.

Q. And the arrangements with regard to the gates at the
   back of these fences was exactly the same, namely that
   there were gates at the back. Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Your understanding, if I understand your evidence
   correctly, is that you would have expected that those
   gates, all of them would be manned by someone? - A. Yes.

Q. And you would say that would be applicable whether or
   not the gates were locked, open or not? - A. Yes.

Q. Now the question I want to ask you is this: which of
   these modes of escape i.e. the tunnel, I am thinking
   of the central area because that is the bit we are
   really interested in? - A. Yes.

Q. i.e. the tunnel or the side gates, both were unblocked,
   had not been obstructed by fire or any other hazard,
   which of them would you have expected people to use?
   - A. The tunnel.




                       Q. The tunnel
                                           A. K. SEAMEN


The tunnel? - A. Yes.

I think you said that as far as you were concerned,
whatever the Fire Service's view as to the manning of
the radial gates was concerned, you did not consider it
was necessary to man the tunnel exit, because that was
the known ingress and egress route to the people? - A.
Well, whilst there were gates on the tunnel entry
point, because there was a gate at the bottom of the
tunnel where you went into pen 3 and 4.   I believe it
was the Police practice to decide which pen for certain
matches depending, I think, on the number of supporters
they were expecting, to decide which one they wanted to
use.  They could use one or they could use both of
them.  Now, those gates, if they were in use, would be
locked back in the open position, and if you look at
the photographs of those gates you will see that there
is a mechanism there for it to be locked back, on the
photographs of the gates actually locked back in that
position on the day.  That being the case, if it is
locked back in that position and it is the normal exit
route out, it is not a route that would only be used in
an emergency, as the other gates in the other radial
fences would be, then no, I don't believe that you
would need someone there.

That is what I thought you had said.  Now, what I am
trying to ascertain from you is this, that if in fact
the tunnel exit route was open - I mean by that the
gates were locked in the locked open position - there
as no fire in the tunnel, there was no bomb explosion,
it was available - and if the radial gates were also
open, and let us just for the sake of the argument
assume that they were manned, for the purpose of this
question, would I be right in thinking that the egress
time, assuming that you wanted to evacuate that pen
using both routes of escape - tunnel plus - would in
fact be halved, approximately? - A. It would be
something of the order of just under three minutes.

I want to move on slightly, because I don't think I
need to explore this point any further at this stage
anyway, to the rationale of putting the gates in the
radial fences at the back rather than in the front, or
halfway down.  Do you understand what I am thinking
about? - A. Yes.

What I want to know is, is there a rationale for having
gates at the back rather than, say, in the front? - A.
Certainly if you look at the Green Guide it gives
absolutely no guidance whatsoever as to whether it is
better to have one at the back or at the front.
Obviously each individual situation needs to be judged
on its own merits.  If we look at this particular
                                                   » $40
                                            A. K. SEAMEN


terrace my view is that the obvious position to have
those gates is at the back.   It was not a steep pitched
terrace, it was a fairly shallow terrace.   I think it
was only about 14 metres, or something of that order,
from the front to the back of the actual terracing
itself.   In using the gate in the radial fence for
evacuation purposes, were that necessary, then one
consideration is that the people that would be right at
the back, it would be easier for them to move, perhaps,
than it would be for someone lower down, bearing in
mind that you have got crush barriers, and if as in the
case that happened on the day, people at the front were
under terrific pressure - that shouldn't have happened
if the numbers had been properly controlled - but it
was the people at the back that were able to move and
it would never have been the people at the front, or
perhaps halfway down, that could have started to move
through those gates, because of the situation which
arose.  My view is, and I have seen nothing or heard
nothing that would change that view, that it is better
to have the gates at the rear where they were, in that
situation.

Can you repeat that answer because I have not quite
followed it?  It may be that my concentration lapsed.
Just try again and explain it to me once more, what the
rationale is for having the gates at the back. - A. Let
me set off and start from coming through into the
ground then.  Applying the Green Guide and its
principles, and each one has to be followed, that said
first of all there would be turnstile controlled flow
into the ground; that the area and the capacity of each
area would be within limits in a set capacity that can
be controlled; and that the crush barriers and the
condition of the terrace itself is able to contain
within safe limits any pressures which are generated,
providing that the terrace is not over-crowded.   In
those circumstances there should still be relatively
free movement of the crowd in the pen.

You then have to decide if something does go wrong, and
you have got to choose where a gate needs to be, first
of all how many do we need for means of escape
purposes.  We only needed the one in order to be able
to satisfy the requirement for an alternative in case
the tunnel became blocked.  On the original plans it
was shown at the rear in the position that it is.  The
determination was whether or not that was acceptable in
its existing position.  It was determined that it was.
My view is that in a situation where there is a build
up of pressure it will be at the front of the terracing
and the people under least pressure will be at the
rear, because there is nobody behind them to put them
under pressure.  So if it is necessary to start to
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


 evacuate then the gate is better at the back because
 the people there are able to move.  As they move
 through the gate and reduce the pressure inside they
 create the space for others to flow up to it.

 It certainly would not have been the case on the day
 that that could have happened if the gate had been
 elsewhere in that pen, in my view.

. One more point I want to explore on this:    is it your
  view that putting a gate further forward, and assuming
  for a moment that something happened on the terrace,
  whatever it might be - I am not talking about blocking
  the tunnel or anything like that - is it your view in
  fact you create a greater risk by having gates further
  forward because people will move towards it, than by
  having them at the back, where people perhaps will be
  less inclined to run towards it?   That is what I am
  trying to find out. - A. I think it is a bit
  hypothetical.   It is a difficult one to answer because
  it depends on the circumstances that arise.    On that
  terrace it was considered that what was provided was
  reasonable, providing the terrace was used as it was
  intended in accordance with the planning of the Green
  Guide.   There were the gates in the pitch perimeter
  fence, which were seen as something which could be used
  in an emergency, and the sort of emergency - it would
  never have been envisaged, for example, it would ever
  be necessary to evacuate the whole of that terrace in a
  forwards direction.   Something very serious had to go
  wrong for that to happen.   You have got turnstile
  control, you are controlling the numbers of people in
  the pens, the crush barriers and everything else that
  went into it.

 So the need for an additional gate in the radial
 fencing in that situation I don't think arose from an
 escape point of view, but I do know that in 1985 the
 original proposal in the April of '85 was for discreet
 turnstiles feeding into sections, and the Police had
 been party to those discussions.  The Officer Working
 Party met to discuss them and at that time the only
 additional fence that was proposed on the West Terrace
 was the one between, I think, pen 4 and 5, to create
 pen 5, the narrow gap.  When the Officer Working Party
 met it was suggested by the Police that the centre
 fence, making pens 3 and 4, was put in, and they also
 suggested another fence to the right hand side of the
 North Terrace.

 We will put the plan up because it is easier for you to
 see - C274. - A. If you can see where pen 5 is?
                                           A. K. SEAMEN


Yes. - A. If you go north of pen 5 into pen 6, in the
middle at that point, at that meeting, at that Officer
Working Party meeting in April, the Police also
suggested an additional radial fence at that point,
from the perimeter fence right up to the back.  They
suggested at that meeting the centre one that dissected
the tunnel and an additional one at that point, and
they also said that if they go that one then they did
not need the extra fence to create the narrow gap - it
was an alternative way.

They also asked, as I understand it, for an additional
gate in each of those fences at the front, that is, one
in the new fence that did not, in fact, go in, in the
end, so there would be a gate at the back that we
wanted for egress purposes, and there would also be a
gate at the front that the Police wanted for access
into the crowd for crowd control purposes etc.  It
wasn't a consideration of evacuation, it was the Police
that asked for it.

I want to go into this because I know there was some
confusion.  When the results of the Officer Working
Party were reported by David Bourne from South
Yorkshire County Council, to Dr. Eastwood, he wrote a
letter back because he presumed that it was the Fire
Service that had asked for an extra gate at the front,
when in fact it was the Police.  David Bourne wrote
back and explained that situation to him, and I believe
the Police had indicated that they were not going to
push the need for those gates.

What eventually went in was that the 2 metre wide gap
was maintained and the other suggested fence to the
north side of that never went in.

So what you are really saying is that from the fire
point of view, there was no need to have perimeter
track gates at all?   That is what you are really
saying? - A. We are not saying that we did not think
there was a need.   We recognised there was a need to
have something in there but we were only looking at
local emergencies not mass evacuation of the kind which
was necessary on the day.

If for instance the Police had taken the view, or
indeed the Club or anybody had taken the view, that we
can manage without a gate leading onto the track, you
would not have raised any objection to that because you
would have said you had enough capacity to get the
people out either through the tunnel or the other exit
routes round the side, or through the radial gates at
the back? - A. No, we wouldn't.  We would have wanted a
gate onto the pitch perimeter to comply with the Green
                                           A. K.   SEAMEN


Guide and to take account of any local emergency.    I
think we are getting mixed up.   The two gates that I am
talking about, the additional gates that were asked for
by the Police, were not between the pitch perimeter and
the terrace, they were in the bottom of the radial ---
in the fence, in the same plain as   the ones at the
back, so they weren't going directly to the pitch.

I don't know whether you objected to those gates? - A.
We didn't object to them, no.

Could you see any objection to those gates from the
point of view of crowd safety when  it comes to
evacuation? - A. No.

So you did not think that there was a risk if one had
put those gates in that one could have had pressure
effects if people moved forward rather than back? - A.
You would have had a dual situation because you would
have still had your gate at the back as well.   It
certainly would not have worsened the situation.   What
we were looking at was what did we need to satisfy the
requirement.   At the Officer Working Party meeting the
Police suggested the additional gates and the Officer
Working Party backed that.   When that was reported to
Dr. Eastwood by the County Council they objected to
that gate.   They said, "If you are going to have
another gate there, and it is for exit purposes, if it
is the Fire Service that are asking for it, it will
have to be manned, it will have to be stewarded", in
fact, confirming our reasoning for needing the gates at
the back.  That wasn't the case.   It was for the use of
the Police that those gates were asked for, not by
ourselves.   We would have been perfectly happy if the
gates had gone in.   If the Police had insisted and said
they wanted them they may well have gone in, I don't
know.

There is something in the Green Guide that says anybody
on a terrace is supposed to be within 25 metres, or
something like that, of a recognised exit route? - A.
It actually says they should be within 12 metres of a
gangway.

That, in fact, is not the case, is it, with the gates
as they are?  I am not criticising you in any sense of
the word, all I am asking you to do is to tell me
whether there was any reasoning for deciding that that
particular aspect, in this terrace, could be
overlooked, if I can use that word. - A. The reason for
that 12 metre guideline in the Green Guide is in
relation to the siting of gangways, and it said that
from any point on a standing portion of a terrace a
spectator should be within 12 metres of a gangway.
                                           A. K. SEAMEN


That meant if you had got gangways that the widest
section of terrace you could have would be 24 metres
because from the centre of it you would have to have 12
metres and 12 metres.  There was no distance that you
had to be away from an exit.  That could be half a mile
away if the terrace was that big although in a football
ground clearly it would not be.  Once the decision was
taken that there were going to be no gangways on that
terrace because of this 10 per cent reduction in
capacity that rule no longer applied.




        Q. I see. - A. It was no longer
                                                a. k   .» Se a m e n


I see. - A. It was no longer relevant.   What was
relevant is whether or not the risk on that terrace,
bearing in mind all the safety precautions that were
being taken, was adequate.   I think the distance to the
nearest exit from almost any point was something of the
order of about 14 metres, originally.   The effect of the
radial fences - barriers - when they were put up, could
in fact, if you imagine them on a diagonal run, have
increased the distance somewhat, but there was no set
distance it had to be.

In other words, what you are saying is that because there
were no gangways, as such, there was no place you could
measure from in effect?    That's right, isn't it? - A.
All the 12 metre rule did is tell you where you needed to
have gangways.   It wasn't related to how far it was from
an exit in any way.    If you were looking at a seated
stand, then that has got different rules.    It tells you
how many seats you can have in a row.    It tells you how
far from a seat to an exit on the stand it has got to be.
It is a different set of circumstances for a different
situation.

I want to ask you one other question which I am
interested in.   It is not related to any...    It is
related to the tunnel actually.    It depends which way
you look at the tunnel, but when you enter the tunnel
from the turnstile area there is a set of big blue gates?
- A. Yes, I know the ones you are talking about.

In fact there is another set of gates at the pitch side.
- A. On to the terrace.

I am not concerned about those gates.   I am interested
in the ones at the concourse end.   I will remind you
that these gates actually open - they are locked back
against the walls and therefore they open this way.
They are shut against an exiting crowd? - A. Yes.

What I am interested in is purely from a Fire Service
point of view.   Have you any view on the shutting of
those gates when the terrace is full?   I don't mean
overcrowded or anything like that, simply when it has
been assessed as having reached its stipulated capacity.
- A. Can I answer this in two parts?   First of all, as I
understand it, those gates were provided for security
when they ground wasn t in use to stop people going up
that tunnel.   On match days the gates were o p e n e d a n d
fastened back in position by padlocks.   Now that is
something you will find in many public buildings, places
of entertainment, where the outer storm door, if you
like, in that situation, is fastened back and then the
actual exit door you will find opens outwards.       That
would be the normal situation in which it would be used.
                                             A . K . * IE A M E N


I don't know if you are alluding to: could the doors have
been safely closed against the rush of people coining off .
the terrace?

Yes, I am asking you for your opinion as to the   safety
aspects of closing those gates when the terrace   is in use
and has already been filled*   That is all I am   asking
you* - A* Because you don't want anyone else to   go into
the terrace?

For whatever reason* Well, if you like, for that reason.
- A. In my view if someone had taken a decision there was
a need to do that, it would have been safe to have closed
those gates off, providing the gates were then manned.
The reason for that is if it ever did become necessary to
evacuate the terracing in an emergency - I can't quite
remember how long the terrace is but it is a fair number
of metres, it is a fair distance.    If ever there was a
need to evacuate down that route there would be plenty of
time to open the gates again before the crowd got to the
gates because of the distance.    It would also obviously
be possible to prevent further access in another way -
barriers, or Police horses or many other ways in which
you could do it.

Your answer proceeds on the assumption that the people
who man that gate which has been closed receive the
intelligence that a crisis is occurring and the people
are going to turn out, before the people on the terrace
actually make the move in any substantial numbers?
Would that be right or is that wrong? - A. Not
necessarily.   You could put the same situation into the
context of stewards who were on an external gate from a
ground because they would have a flow of people coming
towards them.   If there was a relatively short distance
from the point at which they would see a crowd coming
towards them that they had got to be able to open those
gates in, because the gates are normally closed during a
match...

The stewards you mean at the external gates? - A. Yes.
Then a factor in determining whether or not it is
acceptable is how far away are they.  How long would it
take them to reach that point and do the stewards, or
whoever were on the gates to the tunnel, have time to
react.   My view is they probably would have had time to
react had that situation ever arisen, which again we felt
was very, very unlikely because of the lack of the fire
risk in that part of the ground.

I don't want to get too deep into this argument but I
just want to put this one further point to you.   Do you
see any difference between an enclosed tunnel with the
gates opening inwards and external doors which bound
                                             A . K .jJlEA M EN


walls in open spaces, as, indeed, the concourse? - A. The
point I would make is that although those gates opened
inwards, it was the standard practice to lock them back
all the time they were in use.   It wasn't the situation
that they could have been closed, somebody would have had
to physically unlock them.

I am not suggesting for a minute that you would have
recommended that that should happen, or, indeed, that you
even contemplated it. What I was asking you was what
your view was as an experienced Fire Officer.   I didn't
ask you - how many years service have you got? - A.
Twenty-five.

Yes, an experienced Fire Officer - as to what your view
was as to the safety aspects of closing the gates with
people on the inside? - A. I think it was possible.    If
there was a need to do it, provided it was done in a
properly planned way it could be safely done.   I am not
saying it is something I would like to see as a regular
practice, but had the need arisen, provided the correct
precautions were taken, it could have been done safely in
my view.

            Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL:

Mr. Seamen, you are a Fire Service spokesman for the
purposes of these Inquests? - A. Yes.

Just as you were before Lord Justice Taylor? - A. Yes.

You speak having read all the documents that the Fire
Service has got in their possession at least? - A. It is
a long time ago now, but yes.

And having spoken to all the Fire Officers who were
concerned with the relevant Officer Working Parties? - A.
I have spoken with the majority of them, not all of them.

What you are telling this jury is based upon your
understanding of all those facts and matters? - A. Yes.

Those are Officers who did attend the Officer Working
Parties and whose thoughts were put down on documents
relating to the transactions of the Officer Working
Parties.   They were all relatively senior Fire Officers?
- A. Yes, they were.

Men with good records and commonsense? - A. Yes.

Deciding whether a ground is safe or not, for the
purposes of the Ground Safety Certificate, is a matter of
judgment, isn't it? - A. Yes.
                                                   a   .   k .»Se a m e n


Q. It involves assessing risks? - A. Yes.

Q. You can't guarantee the safety of persons attending? - A.
   No.

Q. But you must not expose them unnecessarily to risk? - A.
   There must be a reasonable provision.

Q. That is the way the Green Guide encourages persons in
   such as an Officer Working Party to look at matters? - A.
   Yes, it is.

Q. In 1976 the advice then was:

           "Deviations from individual guidelines are possible
           without necessarily detracting from the overall
           safety of the ground.   A flexible approach should
           be maintained to take account of the particular
           circumstances of individual grounds."

  Again:

           "It should be borne in mind when using the Guide to
           assess whether existing situations provide
           adequately for the safety of spectators, that the
           criterion is that of a reasonable degree of safety.
           It would be unreasonable, even if it were
           practicable, to seek the absolute safety of anyone
           attending a ground."

   That is what you had in mind in saying what you just
   said, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. In the judgment of the Fire Service, was that ground
   reasonably safe?- A. The arrangement which was approved
   by the Officer Working Party in July 1985 was judged to
   be reasonably safe, yes.

Q. If somebody had asked you or any other spokesman on
   behalf of the Fire Service on the 15th of April, 1989,
   "Is there any danger that affects these spectators
   attending this match?" would your answer have been, "None
   that I am aware of."? - A. Yes, because we would have
   anticipated that the ground was being used as approved in
   July 1985.

Q. If you had been aware of any risk or any danger that
   would have affected those spectators attending on that
   date, you would have done something about it, wouldn't
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. You are given specific powers to do something about it if
   you feel that the Safety Certificate either has got
   something in it which shouldn't be there, or hasn't got
                                             A . K .» &EAMEN


something in it which should be there, or if you think it
should be amended or replaced?    You can apply to the
Courts, can*t you? -A. Yes.    The Fire Service status is
one of an interested party, but in the case of something
arising which was regarded as a dangerous condition, then
there was provision for the Local Authority to act under
Section 10 of the Safety at Sportsgrounds Act, which
would have been a more immediate thing.    The sort of
interested party situation that you refer to would be if
there was an obvious disagreement with something which
was proposed and then an interested party could go to the
Courts if necessary.

Over the period of years from 1979, looking at the
documents, it is quite apparent that the Fire Service was
satisfied with the standard of safety being secured at
that ground? - A. Yes, but over the period of time we had
made some fairly extensive comments about aspects within
the ground.   In fact I think in 1986 we sent a very long
letter to the Local Authority dealing with a whole range
of matters, following the Local Authority*s request to us
to look at the ground again.   We did our best to try and
make sure that anything that needed looking at was looked
at.

On the 15th of April, 1989, if a large group of
spectators had gathered outside the turnstile gates, who
did you expect to be responsible for controlling and
supervising them and looking after their safety? - A . I
would have expected that that was a matter for Police
control.

Once they were admitted into the ground, who would you
expect to be responsible then for controlling them and
supervising them and looking after their safety? - A. I
think the club has the responsibility for stewarding
people once they are inside their premises, but there are
some parts in grounds where it may well be by arrangement
between the Police and the club that it is done by the
Police or stewards.   It certainly would be the club and
the Police between them who would be controlling things
at a match.

Therefore a matter for direct management on the day? - A.
Yes.




          Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
                                               A. K. SEAMEN


              Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

Mr. Seamen, forgive me if I go over one or two points
that have already touched upon just to bring out
other aspects of your evidence and as a point of
reference, as the Coroner has done, I wonder if you
would be kind enough to look at C.274, the overall
map of the ground? - A. Yes, I have got that.

In order to envisage a situation as it was in 1979,
just to run briefly over the history, one knows that
one has to knock out the radial fences except for the
one at the far left end as we look at this plan, the
north fence, do we not? - A. Yes. There are two
fences.

Which ones are you referring to? - A. There is the
one towards the south end that went in 1981. None of
those were there in 1979.

None of those that we can see across this terrace? -
A. None of them existed in 1979.

What, not even the fence at the far end, as we look
at the diagram now, the left hand end of the terrace,
the north end, not that one? - A. Can you just point
out which one you mean?

Yes, that one (indicating plan on screen)? - A. Yes,
that existed I believe.

That did but apart from that the others were not
there? - A. I am sorry, I had not read that as a
fence. No, they were not.

We know, I hope without looking it up, that the
combined certified capacity of the whole width of the
terrace at that time in the Safety Certificate in
1979 came to 10,100.

Do you want to be reminded of   that?

     THE CORONER:    We know it and I think you can put
it to the witness.

     MR. PAYNE:   The Jury are quite familiar with
that figure.

You can take it from me that figure? - A. I think
that included the upper part of the terrace as well.

Yes, it included the whole width as we are looking at
it. The left hand    end by the lighting tower, as we
are looking at it,   that white shaded area was
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


certified as 2,900 and the balance was across what we
can see are the steps of the terrace.  The means of
escape you have covered through the central tunnel
and round left and right ends of the stand? - A.
Correct.

So at that time the terrace was being treated as one
terrace with the people able to escape by any of
those three routes? - A. Yes.

The capacity of those routes in 1979, was that
calculated? For example, how how many people could
get out, was that calculated by the certified
capacity of the whole terrace? - A. I think I come
back to what I believe what happened in 1979 which
was that the report which I referred to earlier which
was submitted by Dr. Eastwood went over the capacity
figures based on the area of the terrace and
concluded what the figures should be and that is the
bit when he talked about reducing by 10 per cent to
allow for the lack of provision of gangways.   It was
based on that figure that he proposed, which was
accepted by the Officers' Working Party, that the
capacity would be judged by.

Yes, but to provide an adequate means of escape you
have got to know how many people are going to want to
escape, do you not? - A. No, not necessarily.

What? - A. To calculate how many people could be
potentially accommodated on a terrace you calculate
the width of the exits in terms of how many units of
exit width there are. The Green Guide gives a flow
of 60 persons per minute off the terrace per unit of
exit width and it gives a maximum time which can be
allowed for evacuation of eight minutes.  That can be
as little as two and a half minutes if there is a
risk which might cause the Fire Service to judge it
was necessary to evacuate quicker than that and....

I am sorry to interrupt you but are you saying that
working out the means of escape pays no regard to how
many people have got to escape? - A. The Green Guide
is —

Is that what you are saying? - A. I am not saying
that at all.

No, I did not think you were. - A. No.

I think we are at cross purposes.  In order to work
out whether you have got enough means of escape you
need to know how many people are going to have to
escape, do you not? - A. Let me turn it the other way
                                                          **      52

                                                      A. K. SEAMEN


         round. We need to know how many people the means of
         escape will cater for. That is the first thing we
         need to work out, how many will it cater for.
B
    Q. You found it would cater all right for 10,100? - A.
       Can I just refresh myself on this? I think the
       10,100, part of that, was containing people on the
       upper terrace and the upper terrace had separate
       means of escape provision and so it was not part of
       the flow that was required to be taken by those three
       exits off that terrace.

    Q. I am just trying not to spend time on points which,
       it may be my fault, I would have thought were
       obvious. The actual division in the 1979 Safety
       Certificate is West Terrace, that is the striped part
       as we look at this diagram, 7,200 and the North West
       Terrace, that is the top white corner by the lighting
       tower, 2,900? - A. Yes. The point I am making is
       that that North West Terrace had individual stairways
       off it. It did not feed down on to the terrace below
       it and then off.

    Q. So we can leave that out? - A. So 7,200 was the
       maximum figure that we were catering for.

    Q. So the striped area, you were catering for that to
       hold 7,200.? - A. Yes.

    Q. You worked out that the means of escape were adequate
       to cater for 7,200 people wanting to escape? - A.
       Yes, it could be evacuated in about five and a half
       minutes on the notional calculations.

    Q. That was on the basis that it was an open terrace as
       we know it was at the time? - A. Yes.

    Q. I want to move on now then to 1985 where you have
       referred to the Officers' Working Party meeting in
       April? - A. Yes.

    Q.    If you open up the black folder at C.392 you can find
         the minutes of the meeting that you were referring
         to, if you would be very kind please? It is C.392.
         Are you able to find it? - A. These are not minutes.
         It is a letter from Eastwood and Partners.

    Q.    C.392, that number has been given to a letter from
         Eastwood dated 9th April and also the minutes of the
         meeting, 18th April 1985? - A. C.393 might be.

              MR. CATCHPOLE:  I apologise for interrupting my
         learned friend but I checked this during the break.
         Unfortunately the documents that I handed up which
                                               A. K. SEAMEN


form C.392 and C.393 have not somehow found their way
into that bundle. What I have had prepared is a
series of documents which are all the relevant
documents in one bundle and perhaps they could be
exhibited as C.393A. They are just running in
chronological order and they are the same minutes and
the same letters as were exhibited previously.   They
are not actually in that bundle because I asked
Sergeant Griffiths to check and I saw it myself.
There is only one letter and one set of minutes and
so somehow there has been a mistake.

     MR. PAYNE: I think you can just be provided
with a copy just for the purpose of these questions.
Mr. Catchpole's intervention is very helpful but I
think there is another copy which can be handed to
you.

     THE CORONER:     These are what?

     MR. PAYNE: The minutes of the meeting of the
18th April 1985.

     THE WITNESS: Can I say I have got that?      It has
got 168 at the bottom.

     MR. PAYNE:     That is it? - A. Right.

That should be marked C.393? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:     It is marked C.393.

     MR. PAYNE: These are the minutes and just
remind yourself, Mr. Seamen, of this document. It is
headed:

       "Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, note
      of a meeting with Officer Working Party,
      Sheffield District, held at the Police,
      Sports and Social Club, Niagara,
      Sheffield, on 18th April 1985".

It then shows who are present, a representative of
the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council,
the South Yorkshire Police, South Yorkshire County
Fire Service, three more Policemen, one person from
South Yorkshire County Council and finally Mr.
Vickers from South Yorkshire County Fire Service? -
A. Yes.

Do you see that the purpose of the meeting was to
consider the letter dated 9th April and plan from
Messrs. Eastwood and Partners relating to the
proposals of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
construct two new banks of turnstiles, various runs
of fencing and new gates in order to achieve
segregation of visiting supporters at the Leppings
Lane end of the Hillsborough Stadium? - A. Yes.

     MR. PAYNE: I wonder if I can introduce now
please the plan which is referred to in that
paragraph as a new document.  It has been copied,
(handed)

     MR. BEECHEY:   The C number, sir, is C.474.

     MR. PAYNE: Mr. Seamen, just to confirm the
evidence that you gave and the accuracy of your
memory, if you look at the minutes of the meeting
while you are holding the plant in front of you as
well, the minutes of the meeting C.393 of the 18th
April 1985, paragraph two, consideration of
proposals, do you see that? - A. Yes.

It reads:

      "The Police representatives pointed out
      that the proposals had been prompted in
      the main by comments they had made to the
      Club."

Do you see that? - A. Yes.

That corresponds with what you said earlier.  I would
like you now to look at the plan which shows these
proposals, C.474 and just to spend a minute on it
because it is a new document to the Jury. Do you see
that in the bottom right hand corner it has got the
number 6705/2? - A. Yes.

Dated March 1985? - A. Yes.

It is prepared by Eastwood and Partners, consulting
engineers, and its title is "Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club pic, possible modification to entrance
routes at Leppings Lane end"? - A. Yes.

If you start at the top of the diagram, do you see
the bank of turnstiles which we know as 1 to 16? - A.
Can I just say, before we go any further, I am not
entirely sure that this is the actual copy of the
plan that came with Dr. Eastwood's letter.  I know
that in the Fire Service bundle the correct plan is
there and I think this is a different plan.

Can you just look at the document in the bundle,
C.392, which should be adjacent to those minutes, the
letter from Eastwood dated 9th April which is
                                                   A. K. SEAMEN


referred to in the first paragraph of the minutes
which we were just looking at just now? - A. Yes.

Do you see that is a letter dated 9th April 1985 from
Eastwoods? - A. Yes.

It is to South Yorkshire County Council:

         "The Club is anxious to segregate the
         visiting teams' supporters as they enter
         the ground."

        MR. PAYNE:     Sir, I hope that the Jury have got
this.

        THE CORONER:    Yes, they have.

     MR. PAYNE:   This is just to identify the
drawing, that is all.  It continues:

        "The Club wants to segregate the visiting
        teams' supporters as they enter the
        ground and to enable the Police to
        control their exit at the end of the
        game. We have prepared the scheme shown
        on the attached print of our drawing
        6705/2."

That, in fact, is the number on the document I have
just handed to you but it may be that there is
another edition of 6705/2.

     MISS SINCLAIR: Sir, if I can just interrupt to
help my learned friend on this point, there is
another edition of a plan. This, in fact, is a
drawing and not a plan. There is a plan of the same
number and so far as I know it shows virtually the
same thing.  It is prepared slightly later.   It is
prepared in April.  If my learned friend wishes I can
find him a copy as soon as I can root it out.




                         /MR. PAYNE:   I am very grateful.
                                       A.K. SEAMEN
                                                     * |

     MR. PAYNE:      I am very grateful.

      THE CORONER:     You are saying it is substantially
the same?

      MR. PAYNE:     That is certainly my recollection.

      THE CORONER:     It should be if it has got the same
number.
      MISS SINCLAIR: Sir, I believe it was the practice
to have internal drawings numbered in the same series
numbers as plans for ease of identification.  I don't think
sir that that implies that exactly the same thing was
shown on the drawing which would be a full size as
compared with the plan which would be of course a much
larger engineer's paper.

      THE CORONER: Miss Sinclair, may I just ask you
this because we don't want to spend an enormous amount
of time arguing on the technicalities. You have seen
the drawing, I take it, you have got them?

      MISS SINCLAIR:     Yes.

      THE CORONER: And indeed I look at Mr. Catchpole
as well at the same time.  If the plan as opposed to
the drawing is substantially the same then I think we
might as well proceed with the drawing because it is
a very convenient way of doing it because (a) we have
got it and (b) it is a correct size for our bundles.

      MR. CATCHPOLE: Perhaps I can help.   I think what
my learned friend is saying, Miss Sinclair is saying,
is that we are not certain that the plan would have
been submitted to the Local Authority would have been
the same as any internal drawings.

      We have had this problem before.   We had it at
the Inquiry. The internal drawings do not necessarily
represent the information that would have been provided
on a proper engineer's paper to the Local Authority
and I would only ask if we could have the luncheon
adjournment and perhaps we can see whether we can check
whether the plan and drawing is the same and we won't
start confusing everyone as has happened in the past.

      THE CORONER:     I am glad you looked at the clock.

      MISS SINCLAIR: Sir, just finally so as to wrap
it up as it were on this matter.

      As far as I can see from a purely visual and
quick check of the plan and the drawing, for present
purposes they are the same, so on this particular one
there isn't a problem.
                                        A .K .   SEAMEN   *|

      THE CORONER: Well we are going to stop for lunch
and that gives, I hope you will have time to eat something,
all of you, if you wish that is of course, but I hope it
will also give you time to sort out amongst yourselves,
if I can put it like this, which drawing/ plan, we are
going to use. What I don't want to do, we don't want
to have three or four plans and drawings which are
numbered identically and which for all practical purposes
are the same as exhibits because we are going to be
confused enough as it is. I don't mind which we use
whether we use this or a large sized true plan,it does
not matter to me, whichever is convenient.

       MISS SINCLAIR:     Sir, we will endeavour to sort that
out.
      THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, that is satisfactory to
you as well I take it?

       MR.   PAYNE:    Yes.
      THE CORONER: Now then, Mr. Seamen, we are going
to adjourn for lunch. Please remember you are on oath,
technically you are still in the witness box during the
lunch hour but you are allowed to eat and we see you
after lunch at 2 o'clock.

                      (LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT)


       THE CORONER:     Have you got the plan sorted out?

      MR. PAYNE: We have and I wonder if the authorised
version can now be circulated please. I have given one
to Mr. Seamen?
      THE CORONER:      Do we want to discard the one that
you ....
      MR. PAYNE:  I think that would probably be the
easiest thing, yes.
      THE CORONER: Let's do it because we have not
really begun to use it yet so we will substitute this
authorised version. What number is it, I have forgotten.

       MR. PAYNE:     Give it the same number.

       MR. BEECHEY:      47 4 sir, the same number.

      MR. PAYNE: Now just go round this plan so that
everybody has a chance to look at it, Mr. Seamans.
Do you see the big bank of turnstiles 1-16, top right-
hand corner of this plan 6705/2? - A. Yes.
                                    A .K .   SEAMEN


The right-hand access way to the home supporters,
North Stand? - A. Yes.
Then there is a line with dots along it indicating
some kind of segregation or fence or division between
that and the next segment of the concourse. Do you
see that? - A. Yes.
With a couple of doors in it shown opening by
Turnstiles 7 and 8? - A. Yes.
Then the next segment is labelled "HOME SUPPORTERS
NORTH WEST TERRACE"? - A. Yes.

And you can see the access where that goes round to
the back of the North West part of the terrace. Then
there is another dividing fence or line on the map.
Then there is "HOME SUPPORTERS WEST STAND" and we can
see where they go up the steps into the West Stand.
Right? - A. Yes.
Then there is a dividing fence down the middle or some
kind of separation with a sliding door, folding door
in it marked "8.25m". Then there is a bank of five
turnstiles for "VISITING SUPPORTERS CENTRAL TERRACE"
leading to the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Then there is another bank of turnstiles part of which
give access to "VISITORS WEST STAND" up the steps.
Right? - A. Yes.
And the other part, four turnstiles for "VISITING
SUPPORTERS SOUTH WEST TERRACE"? - A. Yes.

Now I think we can in fact take it that this was the
drawing which was submitted to the Officer Working
Party with Eastwoods' letter of the 9th of April and
is the drawing that was considered by the Officer
Working Party on the 18th April 1985? - A. Yes.

Just with that in front of you, Mr. Seamen,  I wonder
if you would be kind enough to help the jury to put
it in context of the Green Guide that you have mentioned
and in the Green Guide, of which I will ask Sergeant
Griffiths to hand you a copy, can you turn to paragraph 44.
Under the heading "Ingress", paragraph 44:

       "Where admission to a ground or parts of it
       is controlled by turnstiles, these by their
       number and location control not only the
       rate of admission but to a large extent the
       dispersal of spectators within a ground to
       their particular sections.
                                    A. K.   SEAMEN



      Turnstiles should be of such numbers as to
      admit spectators at a rate whereby no
      unduly large crowds are kept waiting for
      admission and yet at no faster rate than
      the arrangements for distributing
      spectators within the ground permit."

Now if this poefible modification, Mr. Seamen, had been
put into effect as outlined on this drawing, would that
then have put into effect the guidelines in paragraph 44
about turnstiles controlling the dispersal of spectators
within the ground to these new particular sections? - A.
Yes, I think it would.

And the new particular sections, if we look at 474 one can
 see on the left-hand side the "VISH3NG SUPPORTERS TERRACE”
 fed by the turnstiles to the left, as we look at this
 diagram.  "NEUTRAL AREA OR VISITING SUPPORTERS TERRACE"
 in the middle with its own separate set of turnstiles
 and then "HOME SUPPORTERS TERRACE" to the right.

       Now I would like just to draw attention before we
 pass on to the reaction of the Officer Working Party to
 this document and I don't think we need to read out the
 whole paragraph "Consideration of Proposals" the jury
 can read it at their leisure and if anybody wants to
 refer to it they can, but can you go straight over the
 page on our Minutes of the Meeting C393 headed:

       "The County Fire Service saw no objection in
       principle to the proposals subject to a more
       detailed investigation into the means of
       escape aspects.

       The Building Authority similarly saw no
       objection subject to submission of detailed
       plans and calculations under both the Safety
       of SportsgroundsAct and building regulations".

 I am sorry to ask you to do this. Could you just turn
 back to the previous page, the first page of the Minute
 just to see the"Police reaction. Under "Consideration
 of Proposals" in the middle of the page, paragraph 2.
 We have looked at the first paragraph.

       "The Police representatives pointed out that
       the proposals have been prompted in the main
       by comments they had made to the Club.

       At one time both the West Stand and Terrace
       had been regarded as exclusively for the use
       of visiting supporters.  With recent patterns
       of attendances at the Stadium made it necessary
                                    A . K.   SEAMEN


      to allow for some element of use by home
      supporters as well.

     The proposals now outlined by the Club were
     generally acceptable to the Police represen­
     tatives subject to various points that they
     ma k e ."

That is what I am not proposing to read out and anybody
else is free to do so if they want to.

      So generally the point I would like you to get and
help the jury about, is in general this proposal was
given a favourable reception by the Officer Working Party,
wasn't it? - A. Yes sir.
Subject to each party having its own minor qualification
within its own special interest? - A. Yes.

One knows in fact that although further fences were put
in, radial fences, were put in on the terrace after this
1985 exercise, in fact there was no reorganisation of
the turnstiles behind the West Stand. That is right,
isn't it, Mr. Seamen? - A. There was a change in July
which was different to the proposal we are looking at
now. It was a different way of feeding into the ground
the one in fact that was building the wall from the
turnstiles to the rear of the West Stand.

Yes, the one wall was built which we can see on 274 if
Mr. Griffiths would be kind enough to put up 274. The
wall which divides the concourse and we can read marked
with the Portakabin against it and an access gate,
that is what was put in, right? - A. Yes.

But the layout of the turnstiles was not changed? - A.
I don't think it was.  I can't be exactly specific but
I don't think it was.

I don't know Mr. Seamen whether you can answer this
question. Looking at the plan which is now on the
screen, C274, are you able to say whether after these
1985 alterations had been completed, the Officer Working
Party then gave any consideration to the particular
capacities of the new pens which resulted from the 1985
alterations? - A. The Working Party as a whole in terms
of setting new capacity figures for the pens no, no
figures were set. In terms of the Fire Service involvement
in checking the capacity of means of escape to make sure
that there was adequate exit from the pens, then yes that
was done by the Fire Service and we wrote to David Vaughan,
who was the Licensing Officer for South Yorkshire County
Council at that time informing him that we had checked
those calculations and for means of escape purposes we
would be happy.
                              Q. Do you mean
                                              A. K. SEAMEN


Do you mean by that answer although the Officer Working
Party did not calculate the capacity of the new pens,
the Fire Service did so? - A. We looked at the terrace
as now divided up; we knew that the means of escape
already existing was adequate; the proposal which we
are now looking at is a different proposal to the one
we have just given to the Jury; that was approved with
segregated turnstile feeds into the ground.  Then the
Club abandoned that and Dr. Eastwood cam back, on
behalf of the Club, with the arrangement that is now
shown on that drawing, so that entailed that the thing
had got to be looked at afresh.

The actual arrangement of barriers, radial barriers, on
the terrace itself was basically the same as had been
agreed in the April 1985 proposal.  What was different
was the escape from the terrace itself to the outside
of the ground, because you had no longer got a
dedicated feed into each section of the ground, and so
at that time it was necessary to check the further
proposal, to make sure that the exits out of the ground
were adequate to carry the number of people they were
likely to have to carry.  Those calculations were
carried out.

I probably did not put the question clearly enough.
What I am asking about is this:   you have told us that
the Officer Working Party did not consider the
capacities of the individual pens which resulted from
the radial fences put in, in 1985, so far as you are
aware? - A. So far as I am aware.   The Officer Working
Party obviously considered the proposal;, the Fire
Service role in that was to consider the capacity of
the means of escape.

Please direct yourself to this particular question; it
is not difficult, I think.  Are you saying that the
Fire Service considered and worked out the capacities
of the new pens? - A. No, I am saying the Fire Service
worked out the capacity, the carrying capacity of the
escape routes.

Okay, in that case I   would like you to look at a
drawing .... - A. If   I can just say, and from    the
calculations carried out we were satisfied that the
conditions of the Green Guide, in terms of evacuation
time, were satisfied.

I am not leaving this topic but    I would like,    in this
context, you to look    at another drawing which    is
already in the file at 390.   Just familiarise yourself
with this drawing.   Do you see it is entitled   Ground
Layout, 1987"? - A. Yes.
                                            A. K. SEAMEN


Drawn by Eastwood and Partners? - A. Yes.

If you look at the Leppings Lane end, do you see that
each section of the Leppings Lane terraces has been
given a number which looks like a capacity number? - A.
Yes.

So far as you are aware was that drawing ever placed
before the Officer Working Party? - A. No.  Until after
the disaster had occurred I had never seen a plan at
all that showed any capacities at that end of the
ground.

That is all I want to ask you about that then, if you
can't take that any further.  Please put that back into
the file.  The situation which was reached in April
1989 was as we can see on 274, now up on the screen,
and the Fire Service had considered the consequences of
the introduction of the radial fences and decided that
no further means of escape were necessary to be added
to what had existed before 1985, is that right? - A.
No, because this was a changed layout.  We looked at
the new layout that was proposed to see if we
considered that it was then adequate.

And you did? - A. Yes.

I just want to understand this.  Is this because the
view of the Fire Service was that since there were
gates being built at the back end of the radial fences,
these gates would provide sufficient means of escape in
an emergency for the people in the individual pens, if
necessary? - A. Yes.

Was that the view of all the members of the Officer
Working Party? - A. Yes.  So far as I know there was no
one that had a different opinion but for the egress
portion of it the Fire Service were the main givers of
advice, and I have no indication was anything other
than happy with it.  The only stipulation which we have
said before is that it was absolutely essential that
the gates were manned or stewarded, so that in the case
of a need to evacuate then the emergency evacuation
procedure could be activated.

Are you aware of any minute or record where it was ever
recorded that it was said to be absolutely essential
that the gates should be manned? - A. Yes, there are
letters that went in response to the meetings that took
place at that time that made this point.

Don't the letters says that those radial gates should
be under the control of the Police, meaning that the
Police should decide when they should be opened and
                                           A. K. SEAMEN


when they should be closed, depending upon the
allocation of home and visiting supporters?  That is
what those letters say, isn't it? - A. No, I don't
agree that it does.  I have had the opportunity of
speaking to the Officers that actually attended those
meetings, and to ask from them what their understanding
was of what had been agreed.

Are you saying that it was fundamental then to the
scheme, from the point of view of the Fire Service,
that when the pens were crowded those gates should
actually have somebody standing by them, meaning manned
- somebody should be standing by those gates? - A. Yes.
What we are saying is that because of the introduction
of the radial fences, then that prevented the ease of
lateral movement that was there before they put the
fences in and would have been the case had they not
been erected.  The Green Guide required that there was
an alternative means of escape provided in case of
need.  We sought, with the introduction of the radial
fences, to maintain that ability to move, and in the
circumstances the gates were along the terrace, at the
back of the terrace, and were not in a position that
was an obvious exit or one that would be normally used
or wanted to be used, and therefore in those
circumstances the Officers concerned addressed their
minds to how effectively an evacuation procedure could
be made to work.  It was absolutely essential in their
view, and I have spoken to the individual Officers that
those gates were manned, policed or stewarded it didn't
matter which - the only difference could be whether or
not the Police felt that it was something that needed
to be done by the Police because of the type of
supporters - but there needed to be someone there as
part of the emergency evacuation procedure, should that
be activated, and that entailed using the public
address system to direct the crowd and give them
information.




         /Q. Let us concentrate
                                                             64

                                                 A. K.*£EAMEN


   Let's just concentrate on the manning point.  If there is
   some document which expresses it as you just have, then I
   would be grateful for an opportunity to look at it.    I
   don't expect you to produce it now, but an opportunity
   will arise later in the Inquests and if there is such a
   document which expresses it as you just have, then
   perhaps it could be produced. - A. The wording is talking
   about the gates being manned and controlled.

   Very well,   I would be  grateful to see that. Do you say
   that in fact if there    were a Policeman or asteward
   stationed beside one of those gates that would in fact
   make any difference once the pens are full, to the
   ability of people to use the gates?    Would it make any
   difference whether a Policeman was there or not? - A.
   Yes.

   Just look at a couple of photographs by way of example.
   Try C.360.

        THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, have a look at 389,
   paragraph C.   It is a 1981 letter but I think it might
   just help.    We might   just be able to dispose of this
   point now.    Mr. Catchpole   will help you. It is the
   letter of the 14th September, 1981 - 389 - which talks
   about the radial fences and these gates.   It is the
   wrong year but it is the same point.

        MR. PAYNE:   That is what I had in mind and that is
   certainly not it.

        THE CORONER:   Why don't just let the Officer read
   that through and see whether that is what he means when
   he says...

        MR. PAYNE:   I have just asked him about "under
   Police control", and he says no, it went much further
   than that and particularly referred to manning.

        THE CORONER:   Well I would suggest you draw this
   letter to his attention and see whether in fact he says
   there are other letters which go further than that.

        MR. PAYNE:   Do you see the passage the Coroner is
   referring to? - A. Yes.

Q- Do you see it says "Under Police control"? - A. Yes.
Q. That is what I put to you just now, and your answer is
   there are documents which refer to manning, it being
   absolutely essential.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   Could I interrupt my learned
   friend?   Perhaps he could leave this topic for the
                                                 a   .   k .*Se a m e n


moment.   I have spoken to my learned friend Mr. Maxwell
and there are certain letters being photocopied at the
moment.   Unfortunately I have stolen his copies of those
letters, so we don't have them to hand, blit there will be
documents which I can show to my learned friend.     I also
will be addressing questions on those documents.     I am
sure my learned friend will do the same.

     MR. PAYNE:     Yes, thank you.

     THE CORONER: Then move on to the photographs.

     MR. PAYNE:     I have asked the question.

     THE CORONER:     I was merely trying to help -
unsuccessfully!

     MR. PAYNE:   Now this is on the question of whether
or not there is any record of it ever being said to be
absolutely essential that the gate should be manned.
That is a photograph which is taken at an angle somewhere
above the crowd and looking downwards on to the crowd.
Do you see that? - A. Yes.

I would like you to put yourself in the position of
somebody in the crowd, in the near pen, which is pen 1
and part of pen 2.   If one comes down towards the front
of the pen at the head's eye view, what difference do you
say it would make whether or not there in fact was a
steward or Policeman stationed up near t h e g a t e ? - A.
Quite obviously the gate might be open or it might be
closed, depending on the way in which the pen was being
used for a particular match.

Certainly. - A. The question arises of the availability
of the gate, whatever that condition might.   The gate
must be available.

I quite agree.   Provided the gate is locked open, as it
happens to be in this photograph, what difference does it
make whether or not there is somebody standing by it? -
A. Well, I needed to continue the answer to your first
question.   The only reasonable way in which the
evacuation procedure could be made to work is if having
recognised the need to evacuate the ground, or that
section of the ground, via those radial gates because the
normal route was no longer available, then it would be
necessary to use the public address system to give^
information to the crowd about the direction in which
they were required to go.   At the very same time, if
there was a steward or a Policeman on that gate because
the gate was locked anyway, he would need to unlock that
gate if it was locked.
                                             A.   K .*lE A M E N


Quite. - A. Then he would have to draw attention to the
fact that this is where the gate is.   He can wave his
hand.   He can draw attention to it to the crowd.   If he
is a steward he should have an identification jacket on.

Are you saying that the Fire Service view was that this
action of a Policeman waving his hand above his head was
absolutely essential to the save evacuation in the event
of an emergency? - A. What I am telling you is that that
was part and parcel of the procedure that needed to be
adopted if you needed to move people through those gates
in an emergency.  It was to maintain what would have been
unobstructed had the radial fences not been inserted.

Quite.   There is no difference between us on that.    I
think it may be - I am not quite sure how much you were
personally involved in these meetings and how much you
are depending upon - and I know you have just been put
here as a representative of the Fire Service - how much
you were depending upon what you have read and been told.
- A. I said earlier that I wasn't personally involved in
any of the meetings, but I have discussed with the
Officers who did attend the meetings, both in 1981 and in
1985, what their understanding was about what the
arrangement would be for the manning and control of those
gate.   Obviously if you read what is written, and it
says "control of , it is open to interpretation.    What
is important is to find out what the Officers understood.

I will not spend any more time on it.   It was not the
position that what in fact was agreed by the Officer
Working Party was that provided these gates were in the
locked, open position, then it certainly wasn't ever
treated as absolutely essential that they should be
manned because in fact for practical purposes manning
them wouldn't make any difference? - A. If that had the
position that had been put to the First Service, that
those gates could be locked open in the open position,
with nobody on the gates, it would not have been
acceptable because we wouldn't have accepted it as
providing the alternative means of escape which was
required.

What is your answer to the point?   There is another
photograph which is slightly more from fans' eye view.
Try 367.   I have only just taken this photograph because
it is slightly lower down, although it is still not fans'
eye view, but you can get a better idea.   If you are in
the pen, at the front of the pen with all those people
behind you, what on earth difference is it going to make
whether or not there is a Policeman or steward standing
by the radial gate? - A. Well, if the gate is locked.
                                             A.   K .* SEAMEN


No, open.   When it is locked open. - A. What if it is
locked?

Forgive me, Mr. Seamen, let's not spend time over small
points.   Provided the gate is locked open, what
difference is it going to make whether or not a Policeman
is there from the point of view of fans at the front of
the crowd who want to escape in an emergency? - A. How do
they know where the gate is if there is no-one to show
them where it is.

Is that something which was considered by the Working
Party? - A. Yes, it was considered by the Fire Service as
to how you could maintain an ability to use those gates
for escape purposes if they were needed.

When the Fire Service considered it, how did they
consider that the Policeman or steward by the gates would
be able to communicate with people at the front of the
pen? - A. There was no need for them to do that because
the emergency evacuation procedure would be controlled by
the public address system.

In that case why do you need somebody by the gate? - A.
To unlock the gate if it is locked and to direct people
that that is the location of the gate.   It was part and
parcel of the procedure that had to be adopted.   The
other point to make on this is that the pens on the day
were extremely overcrowded.   The whole business of the
planning was that the pens would not exceed their safe
capacities.   Had that been the case there would have
been far more room in those pens in any case, than there
actually was.




                 Q. What was the safe
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


What was the safe capacity of the pens? - A. What was
the safe capacity of the pens? The capacities that
were worked out by the Health and Safety Executive I
think were just over about a thousand people.

What was the safe capacity of the pens prior to the
disaster as far as the Officer Working Party was
concerned? - A. The only stipulation which the Safety
Certificate made was 7,200 for the whole of the
terrace.

Address yourself to the question since you have said
the pens were overcrowded. So far as the Officer
Working Party were concerned, not with hindsight, not
with calculations that have been done after the
event, prior to the disaster, what was the safe
capacity of the pens? - A. The whole question of
whether the capacity could be contained within the
new pens, within safe limits, was discussed by the
Officer Working Party.

What is the answer? - A. In particular — let me
finish — with regard to whether numbers going into
those pens could be properly controlled.  This was
specifically asked by the Fire Service Officers and
the Police Officers who were part and parcel of the
Officer Working Party gave an assurance that they
could control the numbers.

What numbers? - A. They were going to control it.
They had a means of controlling the flow into
individual pens by, if we take the tunnel for
example, at the mouth to Pens 3 and 4 there was a
gate. That gate could be closed off if they did not
want to use both pens so that they could direct
spectators into whichever pen they wanted to use.  If
they wanted to use both pens they could use both
gates. There was a means of controlling the number
of people who went in there.

What number? - A. There was no specific number fixed
but there was a means of using the system which was
adopted to maintain the limits within safe numbers.

Is this the position that so far as the Fire Service
were concerned that once the radial fences had been
put in, with the gates at the back of the radial
fences, then in the event of an emergency which
blocked off the central tunnel, what the crowd would
have to do would be to go back up and file through
the radial gates, is that correct? - A. We felt the
chances of losing the tunnel were remote because of
the lack of fire risk but if it came to the situation
where you could not use the tunnel then, yes, it
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


would be necessary to go through the gates in the
radial fences to move laterally around the corners of
the terrace.

In order to be able to do that, would the Fire
Service need to know what was the safe capacity of
the pen, in other words how many people there were in
the pen, who would have to escape through the radial
gate in an emergency? - A. We already knew from 1979
that the whole of the terrace could be evacuated by
the three exits off that terrace in about five and a
half minutes. There was actually an over-capacity of
exits provided and none of the alterations that took
place when they installed the radial barriers had the
effect of increasing capacity in any way. Therefore,
the starting premise to look at that terrace was that
the actual main normal exit routes off that terrace
were more than adequate for the numbers.  There was
never any suggestion of increasing....

More than adequate though — I come back to the
question... - A. There was never any suggestion of
increasing the original 7,200 capacity.

More than adequate for what numbers? - A. For the
numbers of people that would be within reasonable
limits on the terrace.  It all had to do with proper
control of stewarding, policing arrangements of
matches to make sure that any area did not become
overcrowded. That was an obvious thing that was
talked about by the Officer Working Party when the
idea to install the radial fences was put forward.

Do you accept now that the Officer Working Party did
not direct itself to the safe capacity of the newly
created pens? - A. I accept the Safety Certificate
was never amended.

Can you just answer the question? - A. I accept the
Certificate was never amended to show safe figures.

Can you just answer that question? - A. I am quite
convinced the officers from the Fire Service that
were part of the Officer Working Party, from the
information I have got from questioning the
individuals who went to the meetings, took full
account of whether or not the means of escape
provided were adequate for the numbers which were
anticipated should be in there.

Can you just answer that question? Do you accept now
that before the disaster the Officer Working Party
never directed itself to the safe capacity of the...?
- A. No, I do not.
                                             A. K. SEAMEN



What is your answer then? - A. I say that they never
anywhere were stipulated a specific figure but I do
not say that because there was no figure that the
Officer Working Party did not think about the ways
and means of how it could be maintained.

If there was no figure how can you know what the
capacity is? - A. I have already said to you that the
Fire Service officers, and it is recorded in the
minutes of the meetings that took place, were
particularly concerned about how it could be ensured
that people were properly directed into their correct
places on the terraces and how the numbers were going
to be controlled within safe limits because of the
effect that putting the radial fences in would have.
We received, they received what they considered were
satisfactory assurances that it would be properly
controlled.

Is it not actually this, which you do not answer
directly, the nub of the problem; that the Officer
Working Party did not direct its mind to the safe
capacity of the pens and accordingly it did not then
direct its mind to the means by which that capacity
could be controlled? - A. I do not accept that.

It did not, as a matter of fact, did it? - A. There
were means in that ground for ensuring that the safe
capacity could be maintained. They were controlled
by the gates into the pens and when a pen was full to
capacity it could be shut off and people directed
into another part.

The point is there that if you do not know what the
capacity is, how can you control it? That is the
point. - A. Observation.

Observation of what numbers? - A. Observation to see
if — in the absence of having a number to work and
let us be quite specific on this, you showed me a
plan that I told you I had never seen until after the
disaster which shows figures.  It showed 1,000 in Pen
3 I think and 1,200 in Pen 4. So quite clearly the
Police and the Club were aware of what the figures
should be. Somebody put those on a plan and they
knew what they would work to. The means of escape
provided from each of those pens....

You are just inventing this as you go along. How do
you know the Police were aware of these numbers? - A.
I am not saying — I am saying that someone knew
there was a figure on there.
                                                A. K. SEAMEN


     THE CORONER:   We are getting into hopelessly....

     MR. KING: Sir, he might have been in Court
yesterday when Inspector Bullas gave evidence.

     THE WITNESS:   You are trying to say, for
example, that all 7,200 people could have been in
those centre pens.  I say no. The whole aspect was
to ensure it could be controlled within safe limits
and properly I am sure it would be safe.

     MR. PAYNE: I put the point to you that if
capacity had been assessed then there would have had
to have been some means of controlling the capacity
as, for example, in the drawing we looked at a few
moments ago over the adjournment, the 474 drawing
where you had got separate turnstiles to the
controlling access to the separate pens? - A. If I
can come back to the actual drawings, the drawing
that showed the layout that was actually installed in
July 1985 where the wall was built, at that time the
approved feed into the ground, it was done for home
and away supporters.

Mr. Seamen, I am going to move on to a... -A.     If I
can say that the way in which the...

     THE CORONER: No, I think we have said enough.
I think we will move on to another subject.

     MR. PAYNE: I would like you just to help the
Jury if you would, Mr. Seamen, from your experience
and expertise in the Fire Service just to direct the
Jury's attention to which provisions of the Green
Guide the Fire Service regarded itself as having a
duty to consider on the question of the safety of the
ground.  If you have got a copy of the Green Guide
there I want to ask you to look at a number of these
provisions. Can you look at No. 12 please? What    I
want to know is whether this fell within the
responsibility of the Fire Service?

     THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, I do not want to
trammel your cross-examination too much but I want
Mr. Seamen here on relatively limited matters and I
do not want to go over, as I said yesterday and the
day before, every conceivable aspect of the Green
Guide the Safety Certificate or every other aspect.
I have tried to limit my examination-in-chief to the
three or four matters which I thought were relevant
and I want to try and stick to those.  I have allowed
you to explore some of the other matters but I think
now we will have to pull in.
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


     MR. PAYNE: Sir, perhaps I can take it
relatively shortly.

Do you see paragraph 12, Mr. Seamen? - A. Yes.

Taking it from about halfway down, and taking it
shortly, go over the page until you find about
halfway down the paragraph where you will find the
words "The first step, therefore, is to assess". Do
you see that about the middle of paragraph 12 about
halfway down? - A. Yes, I have got it.




                     /Q.   I wonder.
                                    A.K. SEAMEN
                                                    *$


I wonder if the jury have been able to find that.

      "The first step, therefore, is to assess,
      using the Guide's criteria, how many people
      can be safely accommodated in the different
      sections of the ground given the existing
      condition of the ground (ie determine a
      safe spectator capacity). This should be
      done with a proper, detailed plan ...

Did any part of that fall within the responsibility of
the Fire Service? - A. The calculation of the adequacy
of means of escape, capacity on means of escape fell
within the Fire Service's remit. It also fell within
the Club and Dr. Eastwood's remit in putting forward
proposals because the Green Guide was to guide everybody.

So that did fall within the remit of the Fire Service.
Now go on to 101 would you.
      "A ground should be divided into sections
      to prevent potentially hazardous migrations
      by spectators.  Each section of a ground has
      its own limit of safe capacity (see Chapter 16)
                      tt
      •   •   •   •




which contains the detailed provisions of how you work
out what the capacity is? - A. Yes.

Doesthis fall within the  remit of the Fire Service? -
A. That section of estimation of safe ground capacity
which is to do with the calculation of capacity on exit
routes, not the holding capacity of the terrace because
we weren't professionally qualified to do that.

And 206? - A. Yes.
Did this fall within the remit of the Fire Service:

      "Crowd movement on terraces should be
      strictly controlled in order to give the
      police the fullest opportunity for crowd
      control. Less problems occur when terraces
      are subdivided as far as possible into
      sections by use of both radial and lateral
      barriers or railings which should comply
      with the strength requirements set out in
      Chapter 9. Each section should ideally
      be self contained and should be serviced
      by its own entrance/exits, refreshment
      facilities and toilets .... Special care
      is needed to ensure that sections and
      subdivisions are provided with sufficient
      exits for use in an emergency.
                                   A . K.   SEAMEN



Did that fall within the remit? - A. Everything to do
with exits in an emergency, exits at any time at the
ground. That was obviously something that the Police
were interested in. It was a crowd control measure.
It is exactly what was being done in installing the
radial fences to give the Police better control of the
crowd.
Can you confine yourself, because I am instructed quite
correctly to keep this short. I am just asking you whether
these fall within the remit of the Fire Service. I just
want to run down the points. Can you go back to a different
topic now at paragraph 62? - A. Yes.

It says:
      "All doors on an exit route should always
      be capable of opening outwards so that crowds
      can escape in an emergency. This is parti­
      cularly important for doors within covered
      stands and at the foot of stairways."

Is that within the remit of the Fire Service? - A. Yes.

Now the blue doors that you were shown earlier on in the
photograph in fact can't open outwards, can they? - A.
But they would be locked back in position when the ground
was in use.
Can you actually answer that question, Mr. Seamen? - A.
They can't open outwards but they would not be in the
closed position when the ground was in use. It is some­
thing that occurs in many public buildings that are used
for public entertainment, the outer doors will be locked
back in position and that was the case with this tunnel.

Are you saying from the point of view of the Fire Service
these doors were safe when they were closed, when the
terrace was occupied? - A. I said that the doors were
locked back up against the tunnel walls when the terrace
was in use, locked back.

Do you think there was a breach of paragraph 62? - A.
No I don't, they were locked back.

The jury has in fact heard that in 1988 at some time
these doors were closed tight at a time at which Pens 3
and 4 were crowded. Does that give you any qualms as
a Fire Officer? - A. Not provided they were kept closed
and kept properly supervised under control conditions
in case it was necessary to open them because there was
an evacuation needed, which is exactly the reason why
we wanted the gates in the radial barrier fences manning.
                                     A . K.   SEAMEN
                                                       *%


Does the Fire Service have to consider that there might
have been an emergency on Pens 3 and 4 which would have
caused people to rush down the tunnel to escape.   Is
that something which you would have to consider? - A.
It is something, anything might happen. You would have
to consider every eventuality, but what I said when I
was asked about that question earlier, this point earlier,
was if a decision had been taken to close those gates
because the centre pens were considered to be as full as
they needed to be, so those doors on to the tunnel were
closed, then if there was a sudden need for evacuation
then there would be time to open the doors again before
the crowd reached that point because of the distance of
the tunnel.

I will move on leaving it in this way: your evidence as
a Senior Fire Officer is that this was safe, the con­
figuration of these doors was safe. Is that your evidence
- A. Everything is safe according to how it is used, how
it is controlled.

Now look at 66. - A. Yes.

It says:

      "Where exit gates have to be secured against
      outside intruders they should be fitted with
      panic-type bolts, but all exit gates, unless
      secured in an open position, should be manned
      at al.1 times while the ground is used by the
      public and be capable of being opened
      immediately from inside by anyone in an
      emergency."

I would just like to apply this to two particular gates
in the pens. First of all the perimeter gates on the
perimeter fence. They were not capable of being opened
immediately from inside in an emergency, were they? -
A. The perimeter gates, no, they were not intended to
be.

So from the point of view of the Fire Service they were
not regarded as exit gates. Is that right? - A. Let me
make it clear:      they were not calculated as part of the
capacity for calculating how many people could be
evacuated from the terrace. They were always recognised
as gates that were useful to be used should an emergency
arise, that is why, one of the reasons why they were
required.      In fact in the 1981 semi-final when a similar
crushing incident had occurred, then the gates to the
perimeter fence were successfully used on the occasior?
•* •.0 evacuate people, but the reason why they were not
available directly from the inside was that they are
required to be stewarded by either the Police or Stewards
in case an emergency arose and it needed to be used
or the Police needed to gain access to the crowd because
of crowd disturbance. That was the particular role of
those gates.

Right, but since they were not capable of being opened
immediately from inside they were not treated as exit
gates. That is what it comes to, isn't it? - A. That is
not the reason that they weren't treated as exit gates.
Let me make it clear:  they were regarded by the Fire
Service as exits that could be used when the need arose
from that terrace. They were not calculated as part of
how many exits you need to evacuate the people from the
terrace.

And the other gate I want to draw your attention to
in connection with paragraph 66 is the radial gate.
Now this guidance here in paragraph 66 is that "exit gates
unless secured in an open position, should be manned".
This is what we were discussing a few moments ago. If
these radial gates were in fact secured in an open
position the Guide is not suggesting they should be
manned but that is what I put to you earlier on? - A.
My interpretation of paragraph 66 is that that paragraph
is dealing with the external gates from the ground, the
final exit gates from the ground. That is what it is
talking about. It is not talking about other gates within
the ground, it is talking about the final gate out of the
ground.

For practical purposes in an emergency these radial gates
were useless to anybody who needed to escape from the
front of the pen, weren't they? - A. Why? I don't think
so. Properly used with a situation that had been
properly controlled for numbers; using the public address
system as I have described, I don't see why, and bearing
in mind that we felt it was a remote possibility that
the tunnel would be lost.

Very well, that is your answer.   Now look at 96 would you?
- A. Yes sir.

This is the 12 metres rule.

      "The aim should be to ensure that every
      spectator on the terraces is within
      12 metres of a gangway or exit, so that
      spectators can move quickly on to exit
      routes at the end of an event or in the
      event of an emergency."

Is this within the remit of the Fire Service? - A. Yes.
                                           A. K. SEAMEN


It is.  Well the spectators at the front of pens 3 and
4 were not within 12 metres of a gangway or exit, were
they? - A. Once in 1979 the Officer Working Party at
the Club representative's suggestion had decided that
there would be a reduction of capacity of ten per cent
to allow for the non-provision of gangways on that
terrace, for various reasons that were put forward,
then there were no gangways to measure to from that
point.

The question then arose of the reasonability of the
terrace as it then stood.  Quite clearly there would be
a situation on the terrace, even in 1979, were the
distance to an exit from a standing terrace without a
gangway, would exceed 12 metres, but the whole
reasoning for the 12 metre distance was to enable the
gangway positions to be identified.

The answer is surely - I asked you a very simple
question - it is in fact true, isn't it, that the
people at the front of pens 3 and 4 were not within 12
metres of a gangway or exit, were they? - A. Yes, but I
d o n 't see that ....

Is that correct, that is all I am asking? - A. Yes, it
is true but it had so safety implication as far as I am
concerned.

Surely it is very, very important for the people at the
front of pens 3 and 4 when there is an emergency, as
there was, to be able to escape?  Surely that is
important and that is why there is a rule that they
have got to be within 12 metres of an exit? - A. It
does not say that they have got to be within 12 metres
of an exit specifically.  Let me ....

I am sorry, Mr. Seamen, it does actually say that. - A.
A gangway or an exit it says, so if there had been a
gangway in there, if we had put a central gangway in
and not had the central tunnel, then it would not have
mattered h ow far it was from the point they got to the
gangway to either of the exits round the corner.

Certainly, because if there is a gangway it is kept
open so that people can go up and down it.  That is a
gangway, isn't it? - A. But it has to carry the flow of
people.  From the point at which the proposal was put
that it was not necessary to have gangways on that
terrace, gangways were never going to be provided.

Are you saying the Fire Service were quite comfortable,
then, with the fact that the people at the front of
pens 3 and 4, never mind about this disaster on the
15th April, but at any other match, as a general
                                                    A. K. SEAMEN


experience the people at the front of those pens were
more than 12 metres from an exit and the Fire Service
were quite happy about that? - A. Yes, because the
whole aspect of using these guides is applying them to
existing situations and using professional judgment and
deciding whether the situation is safe.  You are never
going to be able to comply chapter and verse exactly
with any guide.

On this particular point the professional judgment we
are talking about is that of the Fire Service, isn't
it? - A. As far as the use of that is concerned, yes.

        MR.   ISAACS:   No questions at present,     thank you,
sir.

        MR. MANNING:     I have no questions.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Mr. Seamen, I don't want to enter into the argument as
to whether or not assurances were given or were not
given.  What I want to find out from you is what
clearly was obvious to you, as a member of the Officer
Working Party, as to the effect of the arrangements in
1985 when they were made.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, if my learned friend is going
to explore these matters with this particular witness,
then I would wish to address you upon them.  I would
wish to address you upon this line of questioning.

     THE CORONER:   Would you mind leaving us for a few
minutes while I hear what Mr. Isaacs has to say?

You will have to leave us too, Mr. Seamen.

       (In the absence of the Jury and the W i t n e s s )

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, what I am concerned about is my
learned friend asking a question addressed in this way,
that what will obvious to this witness as a member of
the Officer Working Party, and then expecting him to
give some view as to what was obvious to him as a
member of the Officer Working Party, when in fact he
was not a member of the Officer Working Party.  That we
know to be undoubtedly correct.

     We then move on, how can this witness say what was
obvious to the Officer Working Party, unless it is only
from references to documents, and in those
circumstances I would wish to have sight of the
documents to which my learned friend would wish this
witness to refer.
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


     MR. KING:   Sir, I may have phrased the question
badly and I accept that.  I did not want to suggest he
had been a member of the Officer Working Party but,
sir, he has given evidence to you and to my learned
friends as to why he understood the gate had to be
manned.  Therefore I am entitled to ask him about the
gate and the considerations which led to that.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I think that is right.  In a
sense he has already been through all that, so insofar
as you merely want him to dot i s and cross t's --- I
think what is right is that you should be able to ask
him again, if you wish, why he takes the view that the
gate had to be manned.

     MR. KING:      Indeed ___

     THE CORONER:     And that is fair enough.

     MR. KING:    And also, sir, he has given evidence
as to assurances which were given for the safe control
of and direction of fans into the pens.   He has given
evidence of that and he has given evidence that those
assurances were sought as a result of the changes, and
in view of that evidence I am entitled to ask him what
it was about those changes which led to the need for
those assurances.   I must be entitled to ask that.

     THE CORONER:   Are you saying that what you want
to ask him is why it was that when, on 242, the wall
was built, the Fire Service felt it necessary to ask
for assurances about the ingress onto the terracing?
Is that the question you are trying to ask?

     MR. KING:   Sir, a number of questions were put by
my learned friend Mr. Payne, as to the capacity of
individual pens.  The answer which was given was that
he had assurances that the Police would be able to
control the numbers going into the pens, and my learned
friend put the question, and was forceful on it, how
could we do that or how could it be done if the numbers
were not known, and so the cross-examination went.
Sir, I am entitled to investigate, because it is an
important matter, not whether or not the assurances
were given because that is a matter of evidence, but as
to why it was important to know that those assurances
were given.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I think you can ask that.   I
think it would be better if you did not start the
question by saying, "Wasn't it obvious ...", because
that, if you like, steers the answer in a particular
way, which I don't think you intend to do but there is
a risk of it.
                                                A. K. SEAMEN


     MR. KING:      Sir, he is not my witness with
respect.

     THE CORONER:     No,   I agree.   He is my witness.

     MR. KING:    Indeed and, sir, I am entitled to ask
him what was the reasoning, as he understood it, for
those assurances.

     THE CORONER:     I am not objecting to that.

      MR. KING:  But, sir, I am also entitled to ask
him - he may disagree - as to what is obvious about
those needs arising out of the changes, that is looking
at the changes which were made.  I am entitled to ask
that.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, with respect, my learned friend
is entitled to ask this witness why the Fire
representative on the Officer Working Party took the
view that he took.  To say - and I echo what you have
just said - what was obvious to those people and to ask
that question this witness cannot possibly answer, with
respect.

     Similarly, I ask for your ruling at this stage -
it may be that my learned friend will not wish to ask
this question but in case he does so we can get it out
of the way - to ask this question, what his view now is
of what was obvious at the time, because that is quite
a different matter.

     Sir, as to what the Working Party, from his
investigations, may have thought, fine, but as to what
he now thinks the Working Party may have thought, that
in my submission would not be an appropriate line of
questioning.  Similarly, what he now thinks should have
been obvious at the time is not an appropriate line of
questioning.  I think you can see the difference
between the "2" and the "3".

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am certainly entitled to ask
him what was obvious at the time from the material
which was available at the time, on the basis of that
material why assurances were sought and that is all I
am seeking ....

     THE CORONER:   No, I think that you are entitled
to ask the first part of your question which you have
now put as point two, namely what was the reasoning
behind the request for the assurances, and you can ask
him again what the assurances if you think it is
necessary.  That I think is right, but I agree with Mr.
Isaacs on the other point, that to go into the
                                           A. K. SEAMEN


obviousness or otherwise of what people might or might
not have thought at the time, the Jury will have to
draw their own conclusion on that point, so I go with
you part of the way but not the whole way.

     MR. KING:   Sir, what concerns me is that my
learned friend Mr. Payne has asked a series of
questions as to how this could have been done, how that
could have been done, based on the capacity of the
pens, sir.  He was asking his opinion about that,
because it was directed to him, saying, "How could it
be done if you don't know the capacities?", and it
would be quite unfair to restrict my line of
questioning so that I am not entitled to elicit from
him, as an experienced Fire Officer, his opinion on the
very matters to which my learned friend has directed
his attention, and indeed, sir, you very properly ....

     THE CORONER:   But I have not stopped you from
doing that, Mr. King.  I think that we may be at cross
purposes.  I think it was perfectly proper for --- if
this gentleman says, as he did, "We calculated the
capacity", or the egress capacity, which is the only
thing he is interested in, and frankly the only thing I
was interested in, namely, "How many people could we
get out within the eight minute maximum period which we
considered to be safe?", to arrive at a figure - he can
work that out from looking at the cross section of the
tunnel and all the other bits and pieces.  He then has
to apply that figure, whatever figure it might be, to
the stated capacity of that pen, or of the terrace as a
whole.  I think it was perfectly proper to ask, "Having
done your sums how did you know whether in fact they
were correct?", if he didn't know how many people were
in that area, and he gave an answer - whether we like
it or not is neither here nor there - he said, "We
didn't work the figures out but I was satisfied upon
the basis of the assurances which I had been given that
the numbers could be controlled and that the control
would be by visual means that, in fact, it was safe".
Now, whether he is right or wrong is neither here nor
there.

     MR. KING:   I agree entirely, sir, but I am
entitled to investigate the need for the control into
those pens, because that was the assurance he was
given.  The fact that they were pens which were viewed,
upon his evidence, as areas which had to be controlled,
I don't want to investigate the numbers, but it is very
important and it is an important piece of evidence
this, of his evidence, that in 1985 those pens, on his
evidence, were viewed, because of the changes, as
separate entities, because that is ....
                                            A. K. SEAMEN


      THE CORONER:   I don't think he quite said that
but you can ask him that question, yes.   I don't mind
that.   I think it is, if you like, the introduction
that causes the problems.   I think you can get all the
information that you need or that is legitimate in the
way which we have just discussed.

     MR. KING:   I agree, sir, but I don't resile, sir,
from the use of "obvious" when appropriate, because
that is a word which was ....

     THE CORONER:   I am not asking you to resile from
that because there may well be occasions where it is
entirely appropriate, and you have used it often enough
and I have not stopped you, have it?

     MR. KING:   And indeed, sir, it was introduced
originally not by myself but by my learned friends to
my right, very early on in this Inquest, when asking
matters about what was obvious.

     THE CORONER:   I don't remember that, but be that
as it may, I am not going to search the transcripts for
who used it first, it is neither here nor there.

     MR. KING:   I agree.

     THE CORONER:   I am not asking you to say you will
never, ever use it again or anything of that sort.
There may well be occasions when it is perfectly right
and proper.  I think we should proceed with this
witness and I think you can ask the questions in a way
which will satisfy ....

     MR. ISAACS:   The distinction was this, sir:  I
have no objection at all to my learned friend asking,
"What was the reason, on your understanding, for these
Fire Officers taking the view that you have
expressed?", but this Officer, with respect, cannot say
what was obvious to those people or not because that
requires him making a value judgment upon that which he
has been told, and that is quite different.

     MR. KING:   But, sir, people have asked him to
make value judgments. You - and I don't complain about
this - asked him a value judgment when you asked him
whether or not it would be safe to close those gates in
an emergency against the flow of the crowd, and he gave
his answer.  That is seeking his opinion and his
judgment.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, it is quite right, and I
made it crystal clear when I asked him that question
that I was not asking him what was his value judgment
                                            A. K. SEAMEN


as to whether the Officer in 1985 thought it, I said,
"You are a senior Fire Officer.   As a senior Fire
Officer tell me, do you think that it is safe to shut
the gates against the crowd".   I see nothing wrong with
that at all and I don't think it is in the same class
at all.  It is a totally different issue.   I am asking
him for his opinion on a fact, because we know that, we
have had evidence to that effect, and I was interested
in hearing from the only Fire Officer whom we are going
to have, as to what his personal opinion on that issue
was.  I think that is right and I don't resile from
that.

     MR. KING:   And I am not complaining about it,
sir, because I wish to investigate that a little more
myself.  It is just an example, sir, of using the
witness quite properly to give his professional
judgment on matters which are before this Jury.

     MR. ISAACS:   And the distinction, sir, with
respect, is the difference between his opinion and his
opinion of what other people thought, and that is what
I object to.  My learned friend perhaps does not
understand the difference, albeit that it is a subtle
one.




         /THE CORONER:   We are not going
                                              A. K.* lEAMEN


     THE CORONER:   We are not going to go into that one.
Let's have the jury back.   Mr. King, as far as I am able
I like you to have the opportunity to do your cross-
examinations in the way you wish.

     (The witness and the jury returned to court)

     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:   Mr. Seamen, you were asked early on
today about what you took into account when calculating
and assessing the means of escape.   You referred to the
Green Guide giving a comprehensive package of guidance.
Do you remember that? - A. Yes.

When you later on in your evidence were asked about
whether you thought the arrangements which were
ultimately arrived at after 1985 were safe and
satisfactory, you said they were so long as the terraces
were being used as they were intended to be used.   That
is right? - A. Yes.

And so long as the arrangements you understood were to be
put into effect, were put into effect? - A. Yes.

You referred as part of the package of the Green Guide,
to the correct control and packaging of spectators? - A.
Yes.

Is that an important part of safety at a ground? - A.
Yes.

When you were being asked as to the means by which one
would know how many were in a pen, or the means by which
one would know how many had to get out of a pen for
calculating the means of access, you told us that the
Police, as you understood it, had given assurances that
they could control the flow of spectators into the
individual pens? - A. Yes.

Is it your understanding that the purpose of those
arrangements would be to ensure that the numbers in a
given pen did not become overcrowded? - A. Yes.    The
whole concept of installing the barrier fences was to
give the Police better crowd control facilities.

So is it your understanding that when the changes were
introduced so as to introduce the radial fences, that
looking at those changes those centre pens which were
created were now looked at as separate areas into which
the numbers had to be controlled? - A. Yes. There were
separate areas that people would fill into because the
Police could have an arrangement whereby match by match
they would decide which areas were to be used.
                                             a   .   k .* Se a m e n


If I can just investigate that a little further.   When
the learned Coroner was asking you about why you should
man the gates, the radial gates at the back, as opposed
to the tunnel, you gave as one of your answers that the
gate isn't in such a position as to be obvious to anybody
coming into the pen necessarily, that is right, isn't it?
- A. No, it's not.

That is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Indeed, isn't it right, isn't this one of the problems
with those gates, looking at the plan and looking at the
photograph which you have been shown - let me show you
C.367, for example, which my learned friend Mr. Payne
showed you.   That is C.367.   That is a photograph which
Mr. Payne was putting to you when cross-examining you
about what difference would it make if the gate were
manned.   I don't want to ask you that question, but it
is right, isn't it, that the gate was in such a position
there was an obvious risk that it might not be obvious or
visible especially to those at the front?   That is
right, isn t it? - A. Well, wherever you had put a gate
in that radial fence, at the front or the back, that
would have been true for some people in the pen.

Clearly right at the back in the position it was, it
wasn't in a very obvious position for those who were
forward of it looking toward the ground, looking towards
the match? - A. No, it wasn't.

You would agree with me that once you have a substantial
number of people in the pen there is also an obvious risk
that it is going to be not easily accessible to those
much nearer at the front because of the numbers in the
pen?   That's right too, isn't it? - A. Again it depends
on how quickly the people at the front needed to gain
access to the particular gate.

Once that pen becomes crowded the visibility of the gate
becomes very difficult, doesn't it? - A. Yes.

Also the accessibility of the gate becomes very difficult
unless you happen to be right near it?   That's right
too? - A. Not necessarily.

Not necessarily, but there is a risk of that? - A. Can I
say, the whole objective...   You asked me if the whole
thing was looked at in terms of a safe package.   In
other words, making sure the area did not become
overcrowded and that the crush barriers and the
structures themselves could contain any pressures within
safety limits.   If the capacity in the pen had not
exceeded that could have been set for the area of 54
people per ten square metres at that time, then there
                                              A. K.*9*EAMEN


would still have been relative ease of movement in the
terrace.    So in that context it would have been
possible for people in the vicinity of a gate to start to
flow through the gate in the emergency procedure.
Obviously anyone farther away, it would take them longer
to do it, as it would in any situation.

What is clear from those answers is that once you have
introduced the radial gates and once you have put the
radial gate at the back in the position it was in, you
have got to be very careful as to the numbers you allow
in to the individual pens? - A. Yes.

If in fact there is no means of knowing exactly how many
people are in the pen in the sense of a mathematical
number, then that also means that you have got to be even
extra careful to keep observation to make sure that the
pen does not become overcrowded?   You have got to be
extra careful? - A. Yes, I believe you have.

It isn't the situation that merely because you cannot
tell how many people are in a given pen that you should
just abandon hope and say, "We just won't turn our minds
as to whether or not it is becoming overcrowded"?

     THE CORONER:   No, I don't think so.   I don't think
that is for this witness and I don't think it is a proper
question.

     MR. KING:   Let me put it this way:   you yourself
gave this evidence that if the pen at the front becomes
overcrowded with crushing - you gave this evidence this
morning - then something has gone seriously wrong.    That
is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Is that something which has gone seriously wrong with
crowd control?   Controlling the numbers, getting into
the individual pen? - A. Yes.   Again, even before the
radial fences were put up on that terrace it was still
necessary for proper measures to be taken to ensure that
the crowd on the terrace was properly packed.

Does "properly packed" include ensuring even distribution
across the terraces? - A. Yes, so far as is practicable.

You referred, and have been referred, to the Green Guide;
that package of measures which you say and understand
were taken into account when the Fire Service gave its
blessing to the changes in 1985.   You have been referred
to the Green Guide? - A. Yes.
                                                a   .   k .*Se a m e n


It is in front of you.   Would you look at Chapter 8,
which is on page 31, the very first paragraph, where it
says:

     "Terraces and Viewing Slopes.

     Arrangements should be made to encourage the even
     distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide
     ease of access and egress;..."

- A. Yes.

     "...to control and facilitate movement, particularly
     if a local emergency should arise during the event;
     and to contain pressures before they reach dangerous
     proportions."

Do you see that? - A. Yes.

Is that one of the examples of measures relating to crowd
packing, control and density to which you have already
referred? - A. Yes.

You have told us that it was not anticipated the
necessity for evacuation, forward evacuation, of the
pens.   That wasn't thought of as being a necessary
happening. - A. If I can say what I said. We never saw
the need for a mass forward evacuation of the pens.   We
always identified there may well be some emergency on a
terrace that might require that the pitch perimeter fence
gates might need to be used, but never the mass
evacuation of people to the pitch in the way that
happened on the day.

Is that because you were given the assurances again that
there would be proper arrangements made for the control
of the numbers going on to the terrace into a given area?
- A. Yes.

Also no doubt for the even distribution as well across
the terrace? - A. Yes.

You have already told us that if you have a situation
where there is crushing at the front of a pen and
something has gone wrong - could I ask you this also in
your experience as a Fire Officer - if you have a
situation in the terrace which you now know existed since
1985, that you have got two centre pens which are packed
and side pens, one of which is half empty, something has
gone seriously wrong...

     THE CORONER:   No.      He cannot give a response to
that as a Fire Officer.
                                                    a   .   k .*Se a m e n


        MR. KING:      Sir, I would like to address you on
that.

        THE CORONER:     Very well.

           (The witness and the jury left c o u r t )

     MR. KING:   Sir, he has already given as a very
important part of his evidence that the reason why he was
able to say that the changes effected in 1985 were
satisfactory, was because it was viewed in the overall
context of the arrangements for the safety of the ground.
He gave a list of them, sir, including the control of
entry of fans, their packing and density.   Sir, I am
entitled to ask him, as an aspect of that, whether or not
where you have a situation where two pens are full, and
side pens are half empty - which is the situation which
we know existed in 1989 - is or is not that which one
would expect if the arrangements he understood were to be
carried out, had been carried out, because that is the
essence of his evidence.




           MR. FOSTER:      Sir, that is a question of
                                               A. K. SEAMEN


     MR. FOSTER: Sir, that is a question of crowd
behaviour and that is not within the ambit of the
Fire Service and cannot be.

     MR. PAYNE:    Yes, that is an identical point.

     THE CORONER:  I entirely agree with Mr. Foster
and Mr. Payne.  I am sorry, Mr. King, I do not accept
that you are right on this point.

     MR. KING:    I accept your ruling, sir.

    (The Jury and the Witness returned into Court)

     MR. KING: Mr. Seaman, can I leave the position
with you in this way to ask you this; you referred
to when you were being pressed about the assurances
given to you about controlling flows into the
individual pens that it all had to do with proper
arrangements either by the Police or stewards to
ensure no area would become overcrowded.  That is
what you said? - A. Yes.

You did not know who was going to undertake those
arrangements but somebody would undertake them.   Is
that the position? Did you know who would be
undertaking them? - A. Because the Police were the
people who were requesting the radial barriers and
fences to improve....

     MR. ISAACS:  Is this something he can answer
through his own knowledge or is he just making this
assumption? In which case there is no basis on which
he can give this evidence.

     MR. KING:    He can give it from the files, sir.

     MR. ISAACS: Only if there is something in the
files but he seems, from what he has been saying from
the outset, to be saying, "If this seems to be an
assumption I am making because they ask for the
radial fences", then something else follows. That,
as we know, need not necessarily be the case.

     THE CORONER:  It need not but I think I will
allow him to answer this question.

     MER. KING: Can I do it in two stages and see if
I can help my learned friend? First of all, was it
your understanding that the Fire Service wanted to
satisfy themselves that arrangements had been made? -
A. Yes.
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


To what were those arrangements directed? - A. The
arrangements were directed towards seeking assurances
that there were proper arrangements agreed which
would ensure that the numbers going into individual
pens were properly controlled.

It may be a matter for other evidence as to who on
the day in 1989 had that responsibility or took it.
Just tell us this; from your looking at the file and
asking the questions of the responsible Officers
which you have already referred to, which is the
basis of your answers to the questions already put to
you further along the line here today, who did you
understand was taking on that responsibility for
those arrangements? - A. The Officers that actually
attended the meeting, because I did not personally
attend the meeting, I have spoken to the Officers
that did, their questioning as to whether or not
there were adequate arrangements for controlling
supporters were during an Officer Working Party
meeting and it was the Police representatives who
said that they had got adequate arrangements and that
is what was accepted.

Let me move on to another matter. The learned
Coroner very properly asked your opinion as a senior
Fire Officer as to the feasibility of shutting off
the gates of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

It was in the context of, you suggested it, if it was
necessary so to do if the pens were full so as to
prevent more people coming in. Do you remember that?
- A. Yes.

Is it the essence of your answer that although the
doors would open in what can be called the wrong
direction against the flow of the crowd coming from
the terrace, although that would be the case, there
would not really be any problem with that if you did
choose to close it because if there was an emergency
on the terrace it would take longer for the crowd to
come down the length of the tunnel than it would for
whoever was manning those gates, Police or stewards,
to open the gates? - A. Yes.

What you told us was, all it was, however you said,
it needed some proper planning? - A. Yes.

Some thought, yes? - A. Yes.

           Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE

Mr. Seamen, can I start with an obvious point? Part
of the mechanism by which entry to the ground is
                                              A. K. SEAMEN


regulated and controlled is necessarily the
turnstiles? - A. Yes.

The effect of going through a turnstile is that it
slows down any entry of a particular individual and
means only a handful of individuals come through at
any one time every few seconds? - A. Yes, it controls
the rate of ingress.

From that, what would be your anticipation in terms
of ingress of the amount of people who are likely to
go down the tunnel at any one time if there is entry
to the turnstiles? - A. In the Green Guide which was
in force, it set 750 people per hour as a planning...

Going down the tunnel? - A. Yes, all I am saying is
that if a turnstile is assumed to feed a maximum of
750 people per hour per turnstile and all the
turnstiles are in use then it is the number of
turnstiles feeding into that section times the
number, divide it by 60 and you find out a rough
approximation of what you do expect per minute.  It
would not be a high order, not a rush.

It would not be a rush? - A. No.

Would it be fair to say it is not going to be wall to
wall people in a mass going down the tunnel at any
one time? - A. No, it would not.

You would expect that when you are going down a
tunnel, coming through a turnstile you should be able
to walk freely and easily? - A. Yes.

You would presumably also accept that if steps are
taken for whatever reason which bypass that normal
safety mechanism of turnstiles and allows far more
people to come in at any one time than the turnstiles
will admit, then that can cause in itself a potential
threat to safety? - A. Yes.

You would also no doubt accept that large numbers of
people going down that tunnel at any one time in a
mass can also cause a potential threat to safety? -
A. Yes.

That would be so, one assumes, whether or not those
radial fences were actually in position because we
know in 1981 there was a crushing incident on an
undivided terrace.  Is it right to say that that
occur equally if those radial fences had not been
there and a whole rush of people had come down that
tunnel all in one go and can that cause problems? -
A. Yes, it would.
                                             A. K. SEAMEN



Those problems are going to be of a localised
overcrowding nature? - A. Yes, depending on the
condition in the individual pens at the time it
occurs.

In fairness, just on one point, you were asked a lot
of questions about a plan that was given in 1987
which had a series of numbers on it and in reply to a
question by my learned friend, again for the Chief
Constable, you said it was obvious from that,
although the Fire Service did not know about it, that
the Club and the Police knew about the capacities
that those pens could have or words to that effect? -
A. Yes.

Did you actually know the origin of that document? -
A. I believe it originated from Eastwood and
Partners.

Did you know it originated in the context of the
original designs to have completely separate pens and
turnstiles and it was actually just a notional number
given by an employee of Eastwood who just put it on
and by accident it got incorporated into a later
plan? - A. No, I do not know that.

You would no doubt agree with me that if, on any
given day, as you know was the case, the gates in the
radial fences are left open, then having a fixed
capacity in each pen is actually a nonsense because
people can move in between the two pens round the
back and through those gates? - A. Unless specific
measures to control the numbers in pens are taken,
yes.

You were also asked a lot of questions about the
manning of the radial gates and I regret I have to
introduce some documents but I hope I can take it
fairly quickly and show you through the documents
what exactly was discussed. The first thing I can do
without the documents, perhaps whilst Sergeant
Griffiths is handing them out, you did say if it was
manned then the person on that gate would have to
wait for an announcement over the tannoy as to what
to do in an emergency and direct the crowd from the
tannoy? - A. The anticipated emergency evacuation
procedure would be to use the public address system
to give information to the crowd about what was
required of them.

Is that again for the obvious reason that just as you
have said those gates themselves were not obvious on
a crowded terrace that even if you had a steward or a
Police Officer standing there in their identifying
gear, they are just part of a crowd and people
further down on the terrace cannot see that person? -
A. Yes.

You need some direction through the public address
system to say to the crowd, "Do not go down the
tunnel"? - A. Yes.

Or "Go through those side entrances"? - A. Yes.

Or "Go through the side entrances or through the
tunnel"? - A. Yes.

It requires that degree of direction from
elsewhere? - A. Yes.

Before you go to the documents you have just been
handed, could you look at C.389, a Working Party
minute of the 11th September 1981.

     THE CORONER:    What number did you say it was?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  I think, sir, it is C.389.  I
thought it was C.386 but it is the Working Party
minute dealing with the installation of the radial
fences of the 11th September 1981.

     THE CORONER: C.389 was the letter either from
or to Dr. Eastwood dated 14th September.

    MR. CATCHPOLE:     It must be about C.382.

     THE CORONER: Yes, there is a C.386 which is a
minute.  You are right.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Mr. Seamen, for your information
this has already been introduced.  You can see it is
a Working Party meeting. There is no one represented
by the Club or the engineers and if you briefly look
at the purpose of the meeting it was trying to
consider the plans submitted by the Club and Dr.
Eastwood to install the radial fences in the first
place? - A. Yes.

If you look to the final paragraph on the first page
it starts off:

     "It was agreed that Mr. Ward should
     notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners.
     The Officer Working Party sees no
     objection to the proposals to install the
     two radial barriers subject to...."
                                             A. K. SEAMEN


Then there are a number of conditions and the third
one is being the new gates at the rear of the terrace
also being under Police control? - A. Yes.

That I can tell you was the response that went out to
the Club through Dr. Eastwood, exactly those
conditions, and there was no suggestion in this
letter or anywhere else that these gates had to be
constantly manned.  I will take you to the other
documents where I think your references that youare
thinking of are but you will accept from me it
actually says simply "under Police control" there? -
A. Yes. What I was basically referring to was what
the understanding of our officers were who attended
the meeting.




                        /Q. That is what I would be.
                                                               95

                                             A . K.   SEAMEN
                                                               *    *


Q. That is what I would be grateful to go through with you
   because if you look at the documents that you have just
   been handed.

              Sir, these   are a bundle of documents.  It might
        for ease be best   if I give them one single 'C' number
        because all I am   going to do is go through them. I hope
        it won't take up   too much time.

              MR. BEECHEY:   The 'C' number sir is C475.

              THE CORONER: Can we just say what they are. C475,
        correct me if I get this wrong, Mr. Catchpole, it is
        notes of a meeting of the Officer Working Party dated
        the 29th July 1985. A letter, is it from or to
        Dr. Eastwood?
              MR. CATCHPOLE:  I believe it is to Dr. Eastwood
        from the South Yorkshire County Council.

              THE CORONER: Yes, that is right, dated the
        30th July 1985, and a letter from Dr. Eastwood dated
        the    1st August 1985. Another note of a meeting of the
        Officer Working Party dated the 7th August 1985. That
        is it, isn't it?

              THE WITNESS:    Yes.

              THE CORONER: Just so that we know what we have
        got in the 'C' number.

q   .         MR. CATCHPOLE: Mr. Seamen, if we can start off
        with the meeting of the 29th July 1985. This was the
        meeting which we see from the first sentence of the first
        paragraph:

              "The purpose of the meeting was to consider
              the detailed plans submitted by the letter
              dated 25th July from Messrs. Eastwood and
              Partners of arrangements for the segregation
              of visiting spectators at the Leppings Lane
              End of the Hillsborough Stadium of the
              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club."

        These were the revised arrangements that you were
        referring to when discussing this with my learned friend
        Mr. Payne that came out after the ones he showed you on
        that plan? - A. Yes.

Q. If you look at the very last paragraph on the second
   page (j), I don't think I need to go through anything
   else, it simply says:
                                                                           96


                                        A   . K . SEAMEN
                                        --------------------------------   *   f


        "Stewarding of New Gates - as mentioned in
        my letter of 2nd May, 1985, it is essential
        that all the new gates are fully supervised by
        Stewards, who must be fit, able and properly
        trained."

  That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. Was that what your understanding is what the Officers
   were saying to you, that that is the sort of supervision
   that was required? - A. All the gates that were installed
   including there were the new exit gates in the new barriers,
   and the existing gates in the barrier fences on the terrace
   and then the exit gates out of the ground. All the gates.

q . if you turn over to the next document it is the letter
    from South Yorkshire County Council, Mr. Vaughan, to
    Messrs. Eastwood and Partners dated the 30th July 1985.
    Again if you go to the very last paragraph, as is the
    norm, (j), it is exactly the same as the Minute of the
    Officer Working Party informing the Club of the decision?
    - A. Yes.

Q. Then go over to the letter of the 1st August 1985. This
   is a letter back from Eastwood and Partners to the Chief
   Executive.  It really thanks him for the letter we have
   just seen, the 30th of July. Then under (a) it says:

         "We are not sure of the location on the West
         terrace of the proposed extra security
         gate."

   I think that was the confusion you were referring to?
   - A. Yes.

Q. It continues:

         "There is already a gate in the 2m wide gap
         formed by the new radial fence for use by
         the police. This same gate will still be
         available for the spectators in emergency as
         there are gates into the 2m gap from the
         terrace which will be under the control of
         the police. This point may perhaps be
         clarified during the Working Party's visit
         on 7 Augus t ."

   So Eastwoods bat it back and say: "Well they are under
   the control of the Police, can we talk about it at the
   Working Party meeting"? - A. Yes.

Q. If we turn over finally. This is a Minute of that meeting,
   7th August 1985.  If you turn over to the second page,
   it has got 161 at the bottom, my own numbering, you will
   see there is some marking on the right-hand side of the
                                    A.K. SEAMEN
                                              “ »$


page which again is my marking, you should ignore it
or the jury perhaps can ignore it, but it actually
says:
      "On the Terrace itself, it was noted that
      there was an existing gate in the new 2m.
      wide gap formed by the new radial fence for
      use by the Police. This gate would still
      be available for the use of spectators
      in an emergency as the gates at the top of
      the Terrace under the control of the Police
      would enable spectators to be directed down
      the 2m. wide gap."
So in other words the effect of all this correspondence
was to leave, as agreed at the Officer Working Party
meeting, that the existing arrangement back from 1981,
that the gates would be under the control of the Police
on that terrace.  Is that fair? - A. Yes.

So would it be fair, and please this is not any criticism
of you because you come along to help us as much as you
can by asking questions of your Officers, but it does
seem when they were saying it was constant supervision,
that may have arisen out of another context? - A. Yes,
I think it is a difference of interpretation over what
was actually written.
Let's explore that for a moment.  It is right that you
as a member of the Officer Working Party and you as
the Fire Service would have got a copy of those Minutes?
- A. Yes.
And we know at the end of the day all the gates are left
under Police control. Are you saying that your under­
standing is something different from that and that you
did not write back and say:  "That means constant
supervision"? — A. No, what hhppened was that the form
of words used was regarded by the Officers as covering
what they thought it meant, but they thought it meanu
what they had discussed in the meetings which was that
the gates would need to be manned at all times.

That is not actually what the wording says? - A. It is
not, but the Administrator that worked on behalf of
South Yorkshire County Council he produced the Minutes
of the Meeting and as with many other Minutes it is
how is the thing worded?

 It would have been possible for someone to write back
 and seek an assurance that what that meant was constant
 supervision? — A. Yes, I believe it would but I think
 there had been so many letters along the same lines
 over a period that I don't think anybody would have thought
 to think that the point was not perfectly clear.
                                     A.K.   SEAMEN   #



How we can leave it in that instance is then the gates
would be under the control of the Police and at least
as far as the Officers you have talked to they thought
that meant constant supervision? - A. Yes, the only other
point I would make on that is what we were interested in
basically is that a gate in those situations needed to
be policed or stewarded.  It did not really matter
providing that it was effective and the only ---

I stop you short because all I am trying to do is see
what we can actually get as a matter of fact from the
documents. From the documents they are going to be left
under the control of the Police. Your evidence they
are amplifying that, is your understanding from other
Officers who were present is that they understood the
words "under the control of the Police" to mean constant
supervision? - A. Yes.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:   Thank you.

      THE CORONER: Mr. Catchpole, forgive me.   I know
you put paragraph (j) to this witness from the letter,
the letter from the Chief Executive, "Stewarding of New
Gates" and then in response Dr. Eastwood's letter which
you then drew his attention to you picked on (a) and you
dealt with that and I am not complaining particularly
about that, but there is a (j) as well and in fact
Dr. Eastwood's letter follows the letter ....

      MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, that is quite right, I should
have put that.
      THE CORONER: I think because otherwise we have
got not necessarily half a story but we may not have the
full story.
       MR. CATCHPOLE: Can we go back, that is absolutely
right.    (a) in the letter to Dr. Eastwood actually deals
with both security access and emergency egress purposes,
a pitch perimeter fence gate to be provided, and (j) deals
with the new gates being stewarded, but if we look at the
Minute of the Officer Working Party Meeting on the
7th August 1985 there was the new gates, the confusion
was cleared up I believe, you referred to confusion in
answer to my learned friend Mr. Payne about where this
new gate was going to be and in fact it was going to be
the gate at the rear of the terrace. I can explain that,
I think, but basically the Police had requested in those
new radial fences, the proposal already showed radial
gates at the rear of the radial fences. At the meeting
the Police said they would like an additional gate in
each fence towards the front of the fence so there would
have been two gates in each fence.
                                                           99



                                           A.K.   SEAMEN



            When David Vaughan from the County Council wrote
      back to Dr. Eastwood I think he assumed, he did assume
      that it was the Fire Service that were asking for the
      additional gates for means of escape purposes and we
B     weren't, so he wrote back and informed Dr. Eastwood that
      that was not the case and I think he consulted the Police
      obviously separately and they had said I think they would
      not insist on the gates as I understand it.

    Q. Perhaps I can .... A. Sir, if I could say that the
       manning of the gates that we were talking about prior
       to that were the two radial gates at the back of those
       radial fences so they remain and the comments we have
       made from the outset about the need for them to be manned
       did not change.

    Q. Can I just go through it and clarify that. From the
       letter of the 30th of July we see that Mr. Vaughan
       refers to: "for both security access and emergency
       egress purposes, a pitch perimeter fence gate to be
       provided". That is right.

             Then at (j) he refers to "Stewarding of New Gates"
       and says:  "it is essential that all the new gates are
       fully supervised by Stewards, who must be fit, able and
       properly trained", so it is all new gates? - A. Yes.

    Q. If you then look at Eastwoods letter of the 1st of August
       here is the confusion about the extra security gate at
       the front of the j.'<ac>ial fence. He then refers to the
       new radial gates at the back of the radial fences. This
       is in paragraph (a). That is right, isn't it?

             Sir, I don't think it does actually follow exactly
       the same as Mr. Vaughan.

             THE CORONER:   Perhaps not.

             MR. CATCHPOLE: And he says there that that gate,
       which is the one that was actually left in existence and
       approved by the Officer Working Party, will be under the
       control of the Police, and that is right, isn't it?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. And that was what was discussed at the Officer Working
       Party, so we were talking about the gates that were
       actually there and left there at the back of the terrace,
       the radial gates? - A. Yes.

    Q. And that was what was left under the control of the Police?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. And that is where, you have given the evidence, is the
       understanding of the Officers that you have spoken to
       as to what those words meant to them? - A. Yes.
                                                          100


                                             A.K.   SEAMEN
                                                             *   S

            MR. CATCHPOLE:  Is that fair sir.       It was not
      an exact follow through.

             I don't have any further questions thank you sir.

            THE CORONER!  Thank you.   Mr. Foster, I will skip
B     you and I will come back to you.   Mrs. McBrien, do you
      want to ask this Officer any questions?


                   Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN;

    Q. Mr. Seamen, I may be a bit out of my depth with all this.

             THE CORONER;    I think we all are, don't worry.

             MRS. McBRIENs    I am going to try anyway.

    Q. I will just go over a few points to make sure that I have
       understood things.
             We know that the Police made the suggestion to
       have radial fences installed. You agree with me on that,
       don't you? - A. Well the proposal came from the Club via
       Eastwood and Partners but I understand that it was from
       suggestions made by the Police in discussion with the
       Club, yes.

    Q. That arose out of an incident that took place in 1931?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. And there was a meeting on the 8th June 1981 for the sole
       purpose of considering those proposals. Do you know
       anything about that? - A. I am aware that a meeting
       took place round about that time to discuss proposals,
       yes, to instal the three radial fences.

    Q. The Officers' Working Party, everyone who attended had
       an input into the meeting, didn't they? - A. Yes.

    Q. And after the discussions everyone present thought it
       was safe to have radial fences installed providing they
       were manned properly? - A. You mean the gates?

    Q. The gates sorry, yes, the gates in the radial fences
       were manned properly? - A. Yes.

             THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, no, you can't put it
       like it. You can't say "everybody" you can say the
       Fire Service because in fact it is obvious from what we
       have heard that not everybody accepts the interpretation.
       Whether he can say;  "It was agreed to have the radial
       fences, it was agreed to have the gates" and it was this
       Officer's understanding from his conversations with his
                                     A.K.   SEAMEN   g.


colleagues that they understood, that whatever it says
in the Minutes, that they would be manned.

That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

      MRS. McBRIEN: Does that mean that other members
present at the meeting did not accept that the radial
gate should be manned. Are you just saying that just
the Fire Service accepted it or did the other members
of the Working Party? - A. So far as I am aware no
member of the Working Party voiced any objection to it,
to the proposals which were put forward for the radial
fences.




                 Q. Yes, that they should be
                                                  A.   K.   SEAMEN


Yes,    that they should be manned.

     THE CORONER:   No. I am sorry, Mr. Catchpole has
just gone through all the correspondence and the word
which was used is "control".   Now, whether the word
"control" means manned or not is a matter the Jury
might like to think about.   What this Officer says is
that the Fire Service interpreted the word "control" as
meaning "manned".  You cannot jump from that to say
that everybody interpreted it in that way.   That is all
I am saying.  Do you see what I am saying?

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Nobody is arguing --- I think if
you asked the Officer. "Do you agree ....", and I will
ask this question:

Do you agree that as far        as you know nobody raised any
objection to the wording        of the minutes which were
circulated in connection        with these radial fences and
the gates at the back? -        A. So far as I know no one
raised any objection.

   ^ THE CORONER:   So you can go that far but you
can't go the next step, which is to say that means that
everybody took the Fire Service's interpretation.  Do
you understand?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, thank you.  When Mr. Butler
was here and he gave his evidence I asked him a
question, and he did say that he understood from
documentation that the radial gates were to be manned
by the Police.  He used those ....

     THE CORONER:       Well,    Mr. Butler's evidence we have
already got ....

        MRS. McBRIEN:   He used those     words actually.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.  The Jury heard it, I heard
it, everybody else heard it, so I don't think it takes
us any further forward.   He can't say that, and I am
not going to let him which is more important.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I can't ask the Officer if he
is aware of that then, is that what you are saying?

        THE CORONER:    As to Mr. Butler's evidence you
mean?

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.
                                                         *$
                                             A.   K.   SEAMEN


     THE CORONER:    Are you aware of what Mr. Butler
gave in evidence at this Inquest? - A. I would have to
be asked the specific point again.   I didn't quite
catch what she meant.   I sat in when Mr. Butler was
giving evidence but I can't remember the specific point
she is referring to.

Mrs. McBrien is putting to you, and I repeat it for her
on the basis that it is correct, that Mr. Butler said
that when he was at meetings, or when his
representatives were at meetings, they understood that
the radial gates at the back would be manned.  Do you
remember him saying anything like that? - A. No, I
could not put my hand on my heart and say that I could
recall it.

      THE CORONER:    That is what you are asking,     isn't
it?

      MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:     It is all in the transcripts,    Mrs
McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, I have got it written down
somewhere.  If I could have a minute I could give you
the reference where it is in the transcript.

     MR. CATQHPOLE:     Sir, if you want to give Mrs.
McBrien a minute,    I have realised there is a limited
series of questions    I should have asked this Officer
which I would be grateful for the opportunity to put
before my learned friend Mr. Foster ....

     THE CORONER:    All right.  You sit down and see if
you can find your bits and pieces and Mr. Catchpole
will ask what he wants.

       Further Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

I apologise for this, Mr. Seamen.  You were shown a
number of plans by my learned friend, Mr. Payne. - A.
Yes.

We have seen from the minutes, and I don't think I have
to take you through them - I have got the bundles here
if you want - but from your reading of the documents
all those plans were referable to segregation of
supporters at that end of the ground? - A. Yes.

And you I am sure more than many other people, will
remember that 1985 unhappily was the year of the
Bradford disaster when a number of people were killed
                                                      *   t
                                              A. K. SEAMEN


by a large fire at Bradford City Football Stadium? -
A. Yes.

It is right to say that there was an awful lot of work
that had to be undertaken to Hillsborough, not at
Leppings Lane end, but to other stands in the
Hillsborough ground because they had timber cladding or
the roof was not fireproof.  An awful lot of work had
to be undertaken to make that fire-safe, in the light
of the evidence that came out and the recommendations
made at the Inquiry into the Bradford disaster, that is
right, isn't it? - A. Yes.  I think it was the South
Stand, in fact, that the majority of work was done on.

It is right that unfortunately the Bradford disaster
and the recommendations that were made came immediately
after the original proposals were submitted in April
1985 for the segregation of the fans at the Leppings
Lane end?  Bradford came almost immediately after? - A.
Yes, it was almost at the same time.  I think the
Bradford disaster happened in May, 11th May, and the
first proposal was in April.

I think it is right from your reading that no one
suggested that the work that was proposed at Leppings
Lane end was for safety reasons.  What happened was
that there was an enormous emphasis on safety at
Hillsborough but that emphasis largely involved your
Officers in it being safe from the risk of fire, and
the work that was carried out for safety reasons was
related to the South Stand and elsewhere, that is
right, isn't it? - A. Yes, that work was done as a
result of the Bradford City fire.

I don't know whether you know this as well, there will
be other evidence, but you did actually use the words,
 the initial proposals to segregate the fans and for
designated fans were abandoned by the Club"? - A. Yes.

Do you know from your own knowledge the reason why it
was, because they had a lot of money and expenditure
which they had set aside for ground improvements which
was then spent in improving the safety of the ground as
a result of the Bradford fire, and as a result of the
proposals made by yourself and the Popplewell Inquiry?
- A. I have heard that said but I didn't know it at the
time.

       THE CORONER:    Did you find what you were looking
for?

       MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes.   It is transcript 37, page
70D.                                               y 6
                                                     * %
                                              A. K. SEAMEN


     THE CORONER:    Have you got it there?

     MRS. McBRIEN:      Yes,   I have.

     THE CORONER:    What would you like to ask?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   It is just one question that I put
to Mr. Butler, and this is the question I asked:  "The
radial gates in the radial fences, were they manned by
Police or were they supposed to be manned by the Police
up to the date of the disaster?", and his answer to
that was, "The reference within documentation is that
they should have been manned by Police".

     THE CORONER:    What is the question?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Well, there has been a bit of
controversy as to whether they should be and I was just
using that as an example.

     THE CORONER:   You can't use examples.   You can
ask him whether he remembers that being said.

Do you remember that being said? - A. No.

     THE CORONER:    I don't think you can take it any
further.
               Further Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN
     MRS. McBRIEN:      Could I just ask:

Were you aware that Lord Justice Taylor also brought
this point up?

     THE CORONER:   I don't know what you are trying to
establish, Mrs. McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   That the radial gates were
supposed to be manned on that day.

     THE CORONER:   This Officer has already told Mr.
Payne, he has told Mr. King, he told me, he told Mr.
Catchpole.  He has already said it four times.  I don't
mind him saying it to you.  In a sense you are unlucky
because you are near the end - and I think he probably
told Mr. Maxwell, I can't remember.  He has said that
his understanding, right or wrong, was that the gate
was supposed to be manned.  I don t think you can get
any more out of him unless you want him to change his
evidence, to say that isn't his understanding.

I think I have summarised your evidence correctly,
haven't it? - A. Yes.

On this point I mean.    - A. Yes.
                                                       *$
                                            A.   K.   SEAMEN


     MRS. McBRIEN:   I am finding this a little
difficult to deal with ....

     THE CORONER:    It is difficult.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   ... quite honestly, anything to do
with the Safety Certificate or with these matters, so I
am just working my way through it as best I can.

We saw a photograph of the state of the pen, C367,
showing the numbers in the pen. Mr. Seamen, you were
asked to look at that photograph and consider the
possible presence of a Police Officer there.   As you
said earlier, if fans had come in by turnstile entry at
the rate of flow that you mentioned, the pen may not
have looked like that, might it? - A. I am not quite
sure which pen we are looking at here.   I am not quite
sure whether that is one of the centre pens, or whether
it is pens 1 and 2 to the left of pen 3?

It is the centre pen.   I think we can see the tunnel at
the back there, on the right hand side.   I believe that
is the tunnel.

     THE CORONER:    I don't think it is actually.     I
think it is pen 6.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is pen 4, sir.   You can see
Sergeant Swift at the gate.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I am sorry, yes.  Could someone
help on the time of the photograph, please?

     MR. RUSSELL:    3 o'clock.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   You were asked to look at that
photograph.  If people would have come in at a slower
rate then that pen would not necessarily look like
that, would it, at 3 o'clock? - A. Well, I find that
difficult to answer.  I don't know whether that
photograph is taken after the gates were opened, or
when they had been filled by turnstiles only.

     THE CORONER:   I don't think he can answer that.
You can't actually say that.  I might have looked like
it, it might not.  We don't know.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Let's say Police were manning the
gates at the back.  Would you have expected them to
keep the walkway at the back quite clear, so that the
exit gate would be more visible? - a. No.

You would not? - A. No.
                                                        *$
                                             A.   K.   SEAMEN


Why do you say no? - A. There was not on that terrace
any recognised gangway and so it would have been
entirely impossible to have made an attempt to keep a
particular area clear.  The acceptance of the terrace
was on the basis that there were going to be no
gangways and the judgment that had to be taken when the
radial fences were installed was whether acceptable
arrangements for evacuation in an emergency could be
maintained with the new arrangement, and that is why we
wanted the gate at the back of the radial fence for
evacuation purposes and why we needed the gate to be
manned at all times, so that the evacuation procedure,
if implemented, could operate properly.

Would you agree that the main purpose of the radial
gate was for fans to transfer from one pen to another,
but they were not there for the purpose of exiting from
the pen? - A. No, there wasn't one reason or another
reason for the gate being provided.   It is like many
doors in many buildings, they serve a variety of
purposes, and these gates could obviously serve a dual
role in that sense.

If an Officer was at the back he would surely ensure
that the area did not become too crowded near the gate


     THE CORONER:   No.  I stopped Mr. King and I am
going to stop you as well.  That is behavioural aspects
of the crowd.  Try another question.




      /Q.   MRS. McBRIEN:   The gates were
                                              A.   K.   SEAMEN


     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Now the gates were put at the back,
obviously, rather than at the front.  Was that because
the people who would come in later would be the ones who
would be expected to move into the other pen rather than
take the ones down at the front who had been there
earlier?  Was that a consideration? - A. I don't think I
could answer that.   It wasn't a consideration that the
Fire Service would have in mind.   We were concerned with
evacuation and egress from the terrace, and the proposal
when the barrier fences were first put forward was for
the gate to be at the back.   Our judgment, all along the
line, was whether it was adequate in the position shown.

So no considerations of any other sort were given? - A. I
can't say whether the club or Eastwood and Partners or
the Police or anyone else gave that consideration.   All
I can say is that the Fire Service was considering the
position of the gate from the point of view of egress.

Would you think that the Police would have a better view
of the terrace if...

     T H E CORONER: No, Mrs. McBrien.   It is exactly the
same question just turned the other way round.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Have you ever known of the tunnel
gates to be closed during a full capacity match like the
semi-final? - A. Prior to the disaster the answer to that
is no, but in evidence during the Taylor Inquiry it was
stated that those gates h ad been shut off at the previous
year's semi-final.   I don't know whether that is true or
not, but that is what I heard.    Prior to then I had no
idea that that had happened.

Would you yourself think that was a very dangerous policy
to adopt, to close those gates? - A. It depends on the
circumstances in which the gates are closed and h o w they
are controlled.   As I said earlier, the gate themselves
on a match day would be padlocked back in position
against the walls of the tunnel because their prime
function was to prevent access up that tunnel when the
ground wasn't in use, as I understand it.   In the event
of people needing to leave the terrace via the tunnel,
because an emergency arose whilst the gates had been
closed perhaps to prevent further people gaining access
to those pens, then my view is that it would have been
perfectly possible to open those gates before people
needing to escape arrived at them.   Because of that it
would still be a safe situation.

People could have crowded into the centre by coming
around the sides...
                                                 A.   K.   SEAMEN


     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, this gentleman has
given you an answer.    I asked him a question, Mr. Payne
asked him a question, Mr. King asked him a question, you
have asked him a question.    He has given the answer five
times exactly the same.    We are not going over it any
further.   When I say "exactly the same", substantially
the same.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    When the terrace was an open terrace
- that was before 1981 - the three main exits routes from
the terrace were to the left, to the right and through
the tunnel? - A. Yes.

At that time, to your knowledge, was the tunnel ever
closed off before the radial gates were... - A. Not as
far as I am aware, no.

You have told us that the capacity remained the same when
the radial fences were installed and so we had the same
numbers, so you would need the same exit points, wouldn't
you? - A. In fact the same exit points were maintained.

Yes, that is why I am saying would you agree it was
dangerous to close off the tunnel?

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, h e has given you an
answer.   If you don't like the answer I can't h elp it,
but he has given you an answer.    He has given me an
answer.   We can all make a judgment as to what we think
of the answer.    Please move to the next question.     If
you haven't got another question then sit down.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   You mentioned evacuation time.    I
think you said if the tunnel was blocked for any reason
whatsoever, the time it would take to evacuate the centre
pens would be eight minutes via the radial gates? - A.
Roundabout that time, yes.

If you had the tunnel open as well you could evacuate
that area in two and a half minutes? - A. I think it
would take somewhere in the order of about three minutes.

N o w we know minutes were vital on that particular day,
weren't they?     Would you say it is far wiser to keep
that tunnel open...

     T H E CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, I am very sorry.   I am
going to ask you to sit down.    This is the third time
you have attempted this question and I am now allowing
it.    Please sit down.   Miss Addleman, any questions?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:    I have none,   thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. Russell?    Mr. Foster.
                                              A.   K.   SEAMEN


            Cross-Examined by MR.   FOSTER:

Mr. Seamen, capacity figures were, to some extent,      the
responsibility of the Fire Service? - A. Yes.

Upon what basis did the Fire Service put forward capacity
figures? - A. We put forward capacity figures based on
the carrying capacity of the exit routes from the
terrace.

Would you accept that the capacity is a matter to which a
number of disciplines have an input? - A. Yes.

I think in May 1987 the Local Authority suggested that
the Fire Service took overall responsibility for stadium
capacity, is that right? - A. Yes.

I think in a letter of the 7th July, 1987, the Fire
Service wrote back to the Local Authority saying that
they could only accept responsibility for capacity
figures insofar as those were calculated relating to
means of escape.   Correct?  - A. Yes.

Now I want briefly to take the matter of the degree to
whic h the club and/or the Police would be able to control
the number of spectators entering the pens.   We have had
mentioned the plan for separate turnstiles which were at
various times in front of the Officer Working Party and
plan 6705/8.A and 6705/17 showed revised a turnstile
layout from that which we have just seen.    Is that
right? - A. Yes.

It was that layout that was substantially approved by the
Working Party in July 1985 and put into effect? - A. Yes.

Can you he l p about this: while those various proposals
were under consideration, was it said by either the
Police or by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club that there
would be any problem in controlling the numbers entering
different pens? - A. No.

Was it at any stage urged that the schemes which gave
turnstile control should be adopted for that reason? - A.
No, it wasn't.

Turning again to capacity, if on the 15th of April, 1989,
the numbers inside the pens had been the maximum holding
capacity numbers permitted by the Green Guide, do you
consider there would have been ease of movements through
the pens? - A. Yes, I do.

In your opinion as an expert Fire Officer, would a
serious crushing problem have occurred? - A. No.
                                              A.   K.   SEAMEN


     THE CORONER:   Don't pursue that either because he
can't say that.

     MR. PAYNE:   And h e hasn't said what numbers he is
talking about either.

     THE CORONER:   Exactly.

     MR. FOSTER:    Perimeter gates, very briefly,
Mr. Seamen.    When you were calculating the time which
had to be allowed for the terrace to be evacuated, did
you take into account the perimeter gates in the West
Terrace perimeter fence? - A. Not for calculation of
evacuation time, no.

What were those gates intended for? - A. They were
intended for Police access in case of crowd disturbance,
localised emergency such as might arise if a fight
developed, or if for any reason there was a local
problem, but nothing of so extensive a nature as actually
occurred on the day.

Before the 15th of April, 1989, had the Fire Service
received any evidence or any suggestions of any kind that
the width or numbers of the gates in the perimeter fence
were inadequate? - A. Not in any way.   In fact, in the
1981 incident the gates were successfully used to gain
access from the terrace to the pitch perimeter.

Can you help about this:  is it a requirement set down in
the Green Guide that perimeter gates can be controlled so
that immediate access to the pitch or the perimeter track
can be assured in the event of an emergency? - A. Yes.

That is paragraph 215 of the 1986 edition.   I don't think
we need go through it.   Radial fence gates.
Mr. Seamen, what was the primary exit route from pens 3
and 4? - A. The tunnel was the primary exit route.

Was there an alternative exit route? - A. The gates in
the rear of the radial fences were the alternative exit
route.

Did the Fire Service, in considering exit from the
terrace, consider that the use of the radial gates in the
event of an emergency was likely? - A. No.   We thought
it was unlikely that because of the lack of fire risk on
that terrace and on the stand in general, that an
incident would arise which would cause that to occur, but
we nevertheless wanted to maintain the availability in
case that should ever happen.
                                                   A.   K.<*SEAMEN


The evidence seems to be that on the 15th of April
spectators didn't in fact leave pens 3 and 4 by way of
the radial gates?

     THE CORONER:   Were you there? - A. Not at the
time...   I went on the day but sometime afterwards.

     THE CORONER:     I don't think he can answer that.

     MR. FOSTER:  It was part of a question which I was
going on to finish, sir.

     THE CORONER:     I am sorry, maybe I interrupted you
too soon.

     MR. FOSTER:   What was the Fire Service's
understanding of the procedure which would be used were
the radial gates to be used for the purpose of evacuation
from pens 3 and 4? - A. That the evacuation would be
activated by a message from the Police Control over the
public address system, giving the relevant information
and what action needed to be taken.   This was part of
the emergency evacuation procedure in the ground.    It
entailed using the public address system to give
information.

     MR. FOSTER:     Thank you, sir.     I have no further
questions.

     THE CORONER:   Now, Mrs. McBrien, have you got any
questions other than the one which I am not going to let
you ask?   I don't want to be unfair to you.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    I have just got one more question.

       Further Cross-Examined by MRS. M C B R I E N :

Mr. Seamen, this is about the gates in the perimeter
fence.  Were you aware that those gates shortly before
the disaster had been fitted with quick release latches?
That was to ensure greater safety of fans in those pens.
- A. Yes.   These were fitted at the recommendation of
the Fire Service because we weren't entirely happy with
the type of fastening which was on the gate prior to
that, which was a barrel bolt fastening from the pitch
side.   We felt that if ever an incident occurred and the
gates came under pressure it would be difficult to open
the gates quickly.   We looked for a device that would be
capable of being operated even if it were under
substantial pressure from the terrace side.   That is
something on which a lot of discussion took place between
the Fire Service and Dr. Eastwood's firm to devise.
                                                           * *    113

                                                        A. K. SEAMEN


    Q. So you think that there could be a possibility of
       pressure building up at some stage? - A. That is what
       I said before.  There could be a localised emergency
B      and if it caused pressure near the gate we wanted to
       be sure he was easily able to open the gate and we
       were not satisfied with the type of device that was
       previously fitted.

    Q. Did you know that that mechanism did work on that
       day, that the gate, when the pressure built up to
       such an extent, was actually forced open by the
       pressure? - A. I do not know that that is the case or
       whether the gates were actually opened.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   I think what you wanted was a
         mechanism which could be opened even if the gate was
         under pressure? - A. Yes.

    Q. That is what you said, not that it was a mechanism
         which would open under pressure? - A. We wanted a
         gate which could be opened even if pressure was
D        behind it and when the devices were installed we had
         several burly firemen and various other people
         pushing against the gate to see if it would operate.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: Does that mean that when a
         certain pressure built up that the gate would
         automatically go open without somebody on the
         outside, on the pitch side, going along and having to
         open it? - A. No, it was not designed for that
         purpose.  It was designed only to be opened if
         someone decided to open it but if there was pressure
         from the terrace side it would still be possible to
         open it easily but not designed to spring open under
         a pre-determined pressure, no.

              THE CORONER:   Mr. Foster, is there anything else
         you want to ask?

              MR. FOSTER:    Nothing arising out of that, thank
         you, sir.

              MR. KING: Sir, could I merely ask that the
         witness be asked what he meant by "ease of movement
         on the pen" because it is a very important answer he
         gave very recently to my learned friend, Mr. Foster,
         and it may be to other Officers I might want to put
         that t o .

    Q.        THE CORONER:    What do you mean by that? - A.
         Can you just....

              THE CORONER:   Ask the question.
                                                             **    114

                                                          A. K. SEAMEN


                   Further Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

    Q. It was put to you very recently that if the Green
B      Guide had been complied with as regards numbers....

              MR. PAYNE: Yes, that is right, and this is
         where you intervened and said, what numbers.

              MR. KING: No, no, with respect, if my learned
         friend would wait, It was the second question which
         was objected to.

    Q. If in a given area and we are talking about a pen the
       Green Guide had been complied with your answer was
       that you would expect ease of movement in the area,
       in the pen? - A. Yes.

    Q. It would follow from that that if there is not ease
       of movement in a pen, that is a tell-tale sign that
       the Green Guide had not been complied with?

              THE CORONER:   You tried this earlier, Mr. King.

              MR. KING: Sir, it is important because it is
         going to be used at a later date that one cannot tell
         by observation something....

              MR. CATCHPOLE:  I wish my friend would not make
         a speech.  I apologise.  I hate getting up in front
         but it has been true of lots of people. Do not make
         speeches. Let us do it another time.

              MR. KING: I really want to know from the
         officer what he means by ease of movement, that is
         all.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Define what you mean by that term
         and then we will leave it at that? - A. If I can say,
         what we were saying, on the day the pens were
         overcrowded.   There were more people in there than
         the maximum Green Guide capacity could possibly
         have....

              MR. KING:   No, that is not the question.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   That is not the question, Mr.
         Seamen. - A. If I can develop it, because I need to
         do this to come round to the answer.

              MR. ISAACS: I am sorry, sir, he is a Fire
         Officer. Could we have this discussion outwith the
         Jury? I am sure they want to go home now anyway.
                                                               **    115

                                                           A. K. SEAMEN


                  MR. KING: Sir, it is an important factual
             point. All I want to know is what he means by "ease
             of movement".
    B
        Q.         THE CORONER:   Answer the question, which is,
             what do you understand — never mind about the
             numbers, never mind about the capacities, never mind
             about whether the pens were segregated or not, never
             mind whether any numbers had been fixed — and just
             say what you mean when you say "ease of movement"? -
             A. I mean that there would have been sufficient space
             still available in the pen for individuals to move
             relatively freely and to have enough room to move
             around, put their hands in the air, do what they
             want.   If the Green Guide packing density had not
             been...

        Q. No, you must not say that because you cannot say
           that. Your understanding of "ease of movement" is
           that people can have the capacity to move their arms
           and are not too close together? - A. Part of it is
           based on experiments that the Fire Service carried
           out and submitted to the Taylor Inquiry which to
           be...

        Q. We are not going into that. - A. Which demonstrated
           packing densities.

                  MR. PAYNE:  It would be interesting to know when
             they were carried out. Is this before or after the
             disaster.

                  THE WITNESS:   It is afterwards.

                  MR. KING: All I wanted to know was what he
             meant by "ease of movement". Now I know and thank
             you.

                  THE CORONER: Ladies andgentlemen, you had
             better go as fast as you can.   I think it is a 9.30
             start tomorrow.  I know that somebody has got
             something on tomorrow, very important, and whoever it
             is — I do not know who it is — you will finish in
             time so that you can get to wherever you need to be
             safe and sound hopefully and that you will be
             successful. We want a report on Monday! Off you go.

                         (The Jury retired from Court)

                  THE CORONER: Mr. Seamen, I would like to take
             theopportunity of thanking you for being here. It
             has   taken a bit longer than Ianticipated but it
             always takes a bit longer than I anticipate.   I have
             got used to that. Thank you very much indeed.    I am


H
                                                   *f     116

                                                A. K. SEAMEN


much obliged to you for your help and you too, Mr.
Foster. Thank you for being here. Does anybody want
to know whom we have got planned for tomorrow?

     MR. MANNING:   What time is the person's
finishing time?

     THE CORONER:   1.30 is the absolute deadline.   In
fact, it is 2 pm I can tell you that but I intend to
finish at 1.30 to give him or her a little bit of
breathing space.   Tomorrow we are going to hear Mr.
Curry, Mr. Eason, ex-Police Sergeant Higgins, and
query Mr. Wells.   Mr. Eason is an ambulanceman and I
guarantee that I will not go into the whole — or at
least I will not go and I will not let you go —
issues of the deficiencies or otherwise of the
Ambulance Service response.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, it may be helpful if you
are prepared to give us very brief indication of the
parameters within which you expect the questions to
be answered of Mr. Eason.

     THE CORONER: Yes, I will tell you exactly.
What I want from Mr. Eason is exactly the same as I
wanted from Mr. Ellis and indeed as I want from Mr.
Curry. He is a reporter and indeed from Mr. Lawson,
Mr. Motson and about 100 supporters.  Those are five
examples. What I want from him is his observation of
what he saw on the day and what his assessment of
what he saw in the light of his experience as an
Ambulanceman is. I am not the least bit interested
in how many ambulances turned up, what time they
arrived, whether or not they could have been faster,
whether the oxygen bottles were full or empty. That
is all very interesting but it has all been done by
Lord Justice Taylor quite properly.  I have no
objection.  Even if I had an objection it would not
matter. His terms of reference were wider in that
respect than mine and he very properly dealt with all
these matters.

     I do not consider that the Jury needs to know
any of that but what I think the Jury do need to know
and what I think is helpful to them is to see (a)
what people saw from different points in the ground,
which has been one of my objectives to pick people
from different areas, and (b) from different
disciplines, and disciplines which, if you like, have
a bearing on injury.  If we had had a Fire Officer in
the ground like we had had an Ambulanceman I would
have called that Fire Officer and asked him exactly
the same questions because I would have been
interested to know what the Fire Officer made of it.
                                                   A. K. SEAMEN


   I think the Jury would have been interested in that
   and they would have been entitled to take it into
   account. Does that help you, Mr. Catchpole, as to the
   range of questions? The same applies to Mr. Wells.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:  It helps very much and is it
   still your intention to have Mr. Mackrell as first on
   on Monday morning?

        THE CORONER:     Indeed, yes.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:  If any of these witnesses spill
   over they will be put into the sweeping up operation?

        THE CORONER:     Yes.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:     Thank you very much, sir.

        THE CORONER: For Monday I want Mr. Mackrell and
   Mr. Lock is No. 2, so to speak.   It depends, of
   course, how long we take but I am not making any
   guesses. Mr. Mackrell is bound to take a little
   while and I do not think we can avoid that.   It is
   not right that we should as well.   Is there anything
   else? I do think it is important in that we have got
   to have some guidelines on these. They do raise
   interesting matters which people may be interested in
   but they are outside the scope of the Inquest.   Is
   there anything else from anybody apart from wanting
   to go home? I think not. Very well, 9.30 tomorrow.
   Remember, Mr. King, it is 9.30 and it means getting
   up earlier.

(The Inquests were adjourned until 9.30 am the following dav)
