                                                                                        M I R . 15




 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised   \   ^            ^       »   Number

                     ■


 Title                                       cHL frO\<=j
    gc/uc/e source and any document number i f relevant)


' Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No ____
                                                                                                                  Receiver




                                                                                                                   Indexer
  Document registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                              Statem ent Reader
  Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                  Indexer
  Indexed as indicated

  No(s) of actions raised

  Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                  S IO




 Further action No(s)                                                                                             Indexer



 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL,         1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                TRACEY ELIZABETH COX




                         Before

DR. S.L.    POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci,        B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her M a jesty’s Co r o n e r )




                            At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery S t r e e t ,
                     Sheffield.

                            On

                  23rd April,     1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                     INDEX




                        POL. IHSP.    it. S AU ER S Recalled

                           By The Coronere

                    B   OPEKIHG STATEMENT BY THE CORONER


                        DR. J. C. CLARK Called

                           3y The Coroner


                        POL. SGT. J. ICILLOCK Called

                           By The Coroner


                        PET. INSP. 1-t. LAYTOH Called

                    D      By The Coroner




                    E




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
23rd April, 1990


        INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF TRACEY ELIZABETH COX


          MR FRASER:   Sir, do you want to deal with the
     question which arose with the Officer about the timing
     of the statement, or would you rather leave hi® with
     some time to investigate that and move on?

           THE CORONER:     No, we know the answer so we can
     deal with it now.     I am afraid I forgot that we had not
     dealt with it.   Can you just come and tell us about the
         everything is in order but I just want it to be
     sure.

                MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Recalled:

                         By THE CORONER:

          THE WITNESS:    Yes, sir, the situation is as
     follows ....

Q.        THE CORONER:   For the sake of the record we are
     dealing with ROY PEMBERTON'S Inquest at the moment,
     aren't we? - A. We are, sir.

Q. Yes, go ahead.  The witness that I referred to who came
   across Roy and subsequently was shown visual material
   is a Police Officer who in actual fact had dealings
   with more than one deceased. One of those deceased was
   certainly Roy Pemberton, and a number of others.  In
   statements that he has made that are contained within
   the files relating to those specific other deceased, is
   the time 1520.  The statement that contains the time is
   not actually included in this file, it was within our
   knowledge in preparing this file that that was the time
   that he was referring to.

Q. Yes, I see.   So in other words what you are saying is
   that it is in a statement which actually has more
   bearing on another case. You knew this and so it was
   included? - A. Yes, that is correct, sir.

          THE CORONER:    Is that all reasonably clear now?

          MR   FRASER:   I am grateful, sir, thank you.

          MR FRASER:    Sir, the next case that you will deal
     with relates to Tracey Cox.  Tracey was at the game,
     sir, with her husband Richard --- with her boyfriend
     Richard Jones, and tragically they both lost their
     lives.  Mrs. and Mrs. Cox have since the disaster felt
     unable, for reasons personal to themselves, to become
     involved in any legal matters at all, and therefore



                            - 1 -
                        strictly speaking although I am here before you today I
                        don't appear as a member of the Committee for their
                        solicitor because there is no solicitor.  Sir, I can
                        tell you that Richard's mum is in Court.  She wil l , fOf
                        course, sadly be back here to deal with her own son s
                        Inquest on 3rd May.  Having said that, sir, obviously
                        if there is any way I can assist you or the family as
                        the evidence is presented I will, of course, do so.

                              THE CORONER:   That is exceedingly kind of you.  I
                    B   knew that Tracey's family weren't coming, and indeed
                        they did in the end get a firm to write to us, but they
                        also confirmed that they weren't attending and I
                        respect their view and their decision with regard to
                        that.   It is a matter for them and I would not have
                        wanted them to do anything which would make them more
                        unhappy than they are, but thank you for your offer of
                    C   assistance.

                             You say Richard's mum is here?

                             MR FRASER:     Yes.

                             THE CORONER:     And dad, I see.   I thought you
                        might be.
                    D
                             Well, we are going to follow our normal format
                        because it does not make any difference whether the
                        family are here or not, we still want to do each
                        Inquest as properly, if I can put it like that, as if
                        the whole room was full of family.  It does not matter
                        to me one tiny bit whether they are --- so we will do
                        it in the conventional way.
                    E
                             This is a resumed Inquest which was opened on 18th
                        April, 1989, and on that occasion Weil Anthony Parkin,
                        Acting Coroner's Officer said:

                             "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
                             been identified to PC 579 Zielinski of the South
                             Yorkshire Police as that of Tracey Elizabeth Cox
                    F        by Leslie Jones, her friend.  She was 22 years of
                             age having been born on 4th August 1965 at Walton
                             in Surrey.  She was a single woman and she lived
                             at <
                             Wiltshire.  She was a student by occupation.

                             She died at Hillsborough Football Ground following
                             an incident there on Saturday 15th April, 1989.
                    G        PC Zielinski caused the body to be removed to the
                             Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                             Detective Constable Simon Weigold, who
                             subsequently identified the same body to Prof.
                             Usher and Dr. Clark.  It is the family wish that
                             the body should be cremated."

                    H
                                               - 2 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      DR. J. C. CLARK


                                  We then did write, as we did in all cases, to her
                             family to try and check details and there were a couple
                             of corrections which needed to be made in that opening
                             remark.  The first one was that we misspelt
                                            It should have been.
                               , that is the correct spelling.   The second thing is
                             although we had the date of birth right, 4 8 65, we had
                             got her age wrong and it is actually 23, and her place
                             of birth is Walton and Weybridge, Surrey.   That is in
                             the statement signed by Geoffrey Cyril Cox, dated 28th
                    B
                             April, 1989.

                                  Alcohol was estimated in the usual way and Dr.
                             Forrest gave evidence of this on the opening of these
                             resumed hearings, and the result in the case of Tracey
                             was it was negative.

                                  We are now going to listen to Dr. Clark.

                                       DR. JOHN CHALMERS CLARK Called;

                                                By THE CORONER;

                                  THE WITNESS;   Dr. John Clark, Forensic
                             Pathologist, University of Glasgow.
                    D
                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Dr. Clark, you dealt with the post
                             mortem on this young lady? - A. Yes.

                        Q.    And I think that at the time when you did it you   did
                             not know her diddle name was Elizabeth, you just    knew
                             her as Tracey Cox? - A. That is right, yes.
                    E   Q.   And it was case reference 19, that is right,    isn't it?
                             - A. That is right, yes.

                        Q. So could you tell me what you found in relation to this
                           young girl? - A. The cause of death was crush asphyxia.
                           This was based on the finding of signs of asphyxia in
                           her face, her face was congested and rather blue, and
                           there were the small petechial haemorrhages, not so
                           much on the skin but internally, on the organs.   She
                           had also inhaled some vomit into the air passages and
                           these findings would be very much in keeping with
                           severe crushing of her chest, preventing breathing.

                                  In addition to these asphyxial changes there were
                             a number of injuries on the body, mostly on the arms
                             and legs, bruises and grazes, but no internal damage
                             and these injuries played no part whatsoever in her
                             death, presumably caused by a combination of falling on
                             the ground or against something else, and perhaps grip
                             marks from people trying to save her.

                                  There was no natural disease at all which could
                             have contributed in any way.
                H
                                                   - 3 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      DR. R. C. CLARK
                                                                           J. KILLOCK

                        Q. The signs of asphyxia were relatively moderate in this
                           case but sufficient for you to be satisfied that was
                           the cause of death? - A. Yes, they were more pronounced
                           internally than externally, that is right.

                                   THE CORONER:  Now I am not looking at    you, Mr.
                             Fraser, because if Mr. Cox does not want to    be
                             represented it is only right that we should    not force
                              representation on him, but it is right that   I snould
                    g        give you an opportunity to ask anything.

                                  Ladies and gentlemen of the Jury, you have
                             understood it, haven't you? Thank you, Dr. Clark.

                                         POL. SGT JOHN KILLOCK Called:

                                                By THE CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:   Police Sergeant John Killock, sir,
                             of the Uest Midlands Police.  I have previously taken
                             the oath.

                        Q.         THE CORONER:   Yes, and if you would be good
                              enough to take me through the summary? - A. At 1410
                              hours on Saturday 15th April, 1989, Richard Jones left
                    D        his home in Sheffield with his sister, Miss Stephanie
                              Linda Jones, and Tracey Elizabeth Cox.

                        Q. Can I just stop you?

                                  THE CORONER:   Is that young lady next to you
                             Stephanie Jones, or not? No, I am sorry.

                    ®   Q. Carry on. - A. It was their intention to attend the Cup
                           Serai Final football match which was to be played at the
                           Hillsborough Stadiuta that day.  All had tickets for the
                           terraces at the Uest Stand.

                                  They joined the large crowd in Leppings Lane and
                             after some minutes entered the stadium via Gate C. All
                             walked together along the tunnel beneath the West Stand
                             and onto the terraces.  Miss Jones is unable to say
                             which enclosure they entered but it has now been
                             established that it was in fact enclosure 3.  She was
                             with her brother and Tracey as they entered the
                             terraces but after a few seconds she was subjected to a
                             surge of pressure which forced her towards the front of
                             the terracing.  In the crush that followed she was
                             separated from both her brother and Miss Cox.

                                  Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                             terracing Special Constable Anthony Lomax went to the
                             perimeter fence in front of enclosure 4. A female now
                             known to be Tracey was passed to him from the terraces.
                             (Miss Cox is known to have been in enclosure 3 and it

                H
                                                   - 4 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                        J. ICILLOCK


                          may be that she was passed over the lateral fence from
                          enclosure 3 to enclosure 4 before being passed out onto
                          the pitch).  With assistance Special Constable Loraax
                          carried Tracey onto the pitch and she was treated by a
                          St John's Ambulance Officer who has not been
                          identified.  Special Constable Loraax then returned to
                          the fencing to assist others.  After a short time
                          Special Constable Lomax returned to Tracey and with the
                          assistance of others, including Police Sergeant France
                          and Detective Constable Smith, they carried Tracey to
                    B     the gymnasium on a hoarding where a temporary mortuary
                          had been set up.

                               Police Constable Zielinski was directed to the
                          gymnasium and given responsibility for Tracey, together
                          with Special Constable Lomax.

                                At 1554 hours Dr. Brian Tiraney examined Tracey in
                           the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                                At 0245 hours Mr. Leslie Jones identified the body
                           of Tracey to Police Constable Zielinski at the
                           temporary mortuary.

                                The Officer later escorted Tracey's body to the
                    D      Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                           Detective Constable Weigold.

                                On Sunday 16th April, 1989, following
                           identification by Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. John
                           Clark carried out an autopsy and submitted a report
                           giving cause of death.

                    E          Found in the personal effects of Richard Jones
                          were three full match tickets which confirms the
                          evidence available that he entered the stadium via Gate
                          C together with Tracey and his sister Stephanie.

                                That concludes the evidence, sir.   There is visual
                           evidence.

                        Q. Yes.  I think it is probably fair to say that Stephanie
                           Jones does not give any time when she arrived at
                           Leppings Lane, does she? - A. I will just check her
                           statement, sir.

                        Q. Yes, if you could.  I can't recollect seeing any.    At
                           the bottom of page 2 she says:

                                "Richard thought it would take about 20 minutes,
                                15-20 minutes to get to the ground^and we got into
                                the car at 2.10".
                           - A. That is right but she does not, in fact, she can't
                           commit herself, to an exact time.

                        Q. Yes, and they might have gone somewhere else after
                H
                                                - 5 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                         J. KILLOCK
                                                                          H. LAYTOH

                          that, it is not quite clear.  But anyway there is no
                          doubt they came in through one of the gates, through
                          the big gate, that is right, isn't it, she does say
                          that? - A. Yes, I think they went directly to the
                          ground, sir, but she can't commit herself to the actual
                          time of arrival.

                        Q. Yes, that is fair enough, and I think just for the
                           record I have got to say that Special Constable Lomax
                           has also passed away, is that right? - A. Yes, he has
                    B
                           died, sir.

                                THE CORONER:    Any questions of this Officer?   (No
                           response)

                                    PET. IHSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                               By THE CORONER:

                                THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Petective
                           Inspector, West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination
                           has been made of the visual evidence available and
                           Tracey has been identified alive, both outside the
                           ground and, as has been mentioned, in enclosure number
                           3, and then subsequently later being carried across the
                    D      pitch.

                                Sir, on a photograph which has been given the
                           reference number MWL10/34A, which in fact is timed at
                           1455, Tracey is shown together with Richard Jones, and
                           in fact Stephanie his sister, apparently about to enter
                           the ground via Gate C.
                    E           On a BBC video tape which has been given the
                           reference number MAP 1, and timed at 1456:32:16, Tracey
                           is actually shown alive in enclosure 3.

                                Perhaps, sir, if I could just recall the statement
                           I made on the first day in relation to the timings of
                           the photographs, as opposed to the video, although it
                           appears from those two times there is only a minute and
                           a half perhaps, it could be that that is in fact
                           slightly longer.

                        Q. Yes, because the photographs are set by watches? - A.
                           That is right, sir.

                        Q. And it depends what time the Officers .... - A. That is
                           right, sir.

                        Q. But it gives us an approximation anyway? - A. Yes.
                           Certainly the BBC video time would be accurate.  Sir,
                           on a photograph referenced PR7/3, Tracey is shown being
                           carried on a hoarding across the pitch and Sergeant
                           France has confirmed that he is shown on the
                           photograph.  The Officer signed a plan of the pitch at
                H          the point at which he found Tracey and that, sir, is



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            H. LAYTON


                          referenced MF1.  Sir, if you could just give me a
                          moment I will just check the time on that photograph.
                          In respect of PR7/3, the time shown on the photograph
                          with Tracey being taken across the. pitch is timed at
                          1534.  Sir, prior to Special Constable Lomax's death he
                          in fact was also shown in photographs and he confirmed
                          he was actually shown on that photograph.

                                Fortunately Mr. and Mrs. Jones have been able to
                           assist us and they have confirmed the identifications
                    B      on visual evidence in respect of Tracey.

                                Can I refer you, sir, to a plan to which I have
                           given the reference number MWJL114, which is a plan of
                           the terraces?

                        Q. That will be C60.
                    C
                                THE COROWER;   Don't worry about these numbers and
                           things.  These are reference numbers.

                                THE WITNESS;  Sir, there is a second plan,
                           referenced MWJL26.  You will see that that plan refers
                           to PR7/4, which in fact is identical to PR7/3, which we
                           have already referred to.
                    D
                        Q. And that will be C61. - A. There is a further plan,
                           sir.  If we can refer to MWJL139.

                        Q. That will be C62.  That is one of the new ones, is it?
                           - A. It is an additional plan, sir, yes.  And finally,
                           sir, would you want me to refer to MFl, the plan
                           submitted by Sergeant France?
                    E
                        Q. Well it does show a position which is not shown on the
                               so perhaps we had better, which would make it C63.
                           That is MFl = C63.   And now you are going to show us
                           where it all is.   (The witness referred to the large
                           scale plan) - A. Sir^ if we could deal with HWJL139
                           first, which refers to this plan h e r e , and the point at
                           which Tracey is shown, together with Stephanie and
                    F      Richard, is about here, very close actually to Gate C.
                           Then in relation to the large scale terrace plan, on
                           the video reference, which is reference MAP 1, the
                           point at which I believe Tracey is shown, in fact she
                           is in the company of Richard at that stage, is
                           approximately here.

                        Q. That is about half way between the two barriers, isn't
                    G
                           it? - A. That is right.

                        Q. The one that broke and the one behind? - A. That is
                           right, sir.  If we can refer to plan MFl, on the pitch,
                           which is the plan submitted by Sergeant France, the
                           point at which he has identified Tracey is actually
                           here and then, sir, if we can look at MWJL26, in
                H
                                                 - 7 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                              H. LAYTON


relation to the photograph PR7/3 as referred to in the
summary, and as I say PR7/4 is identical, the position
that we have is actually on the pitch, he r e .

     THE CORONER:  Have you got any questions?   (No
response) Thank you very much indeed.

     That concludes the evidence which we are going to
take in the case of Tracey.  I have had some very nice
letters, or exchange of letters, with Mr. Cox because
it has been necessary for me to write to him, and as I
said I very much respect his views, but I would just
like to say for the record that of course I am very   ^
sorry that he lost his daughter and I am also - I don t
know how well you knew Tracey but the fact that you are
here must show that you had some relationship with her,
and I am obviously very sorry that you too have
suffered the loss, Mr. and Mrs. Jones, and of course we
will be talking about Richard on another occasion.
Thank you.

     We are going to rise for a few minutes.  Shall we
have a cup of coffee or tea and come back at about
half-past-3.


(The Inquest into the death of TRACEY ELIZABETH COX
       was adjourned to a date to be fixed)
