HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At
             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           5th February, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                               Page
N.M.   SAVAGE Sworn

       By The Coroner                            1
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne              13
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning            13
       Cross-Examined by Mr. King               14
       Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien           16
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell            17
       Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne      18

T.E.   CULLY Sworn

       By The Coroner                           19
       Cross-Examined   by Mr. Payne            28
       Cross-Examined   by Mr. Manning          33
       Cross-Examined   by Mr. King             36
       Cross-Examined   by Mrs. McBrien         41
       Cross-Examined   by Mr. Russell          43
       Further by The   Coroner                 46

N.F. ABBOTT Sworn

       By The Coroner                          48
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne             64
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning           64
       Cross-Examined by Mr. King              65
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole         69
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell           70
       Further by The Coroner                  72
       Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell   74
       Further by The Coroner                  75

R.J.   GREAVES Sworn

       By The Coroner                           75
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning           86
       Cross-Examined by Mr. King               87
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole         88
       Cross-Examined by Miss Addleman         90
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell           92
       Further by The Coroner                  92
       Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne     94

L.D.   LLOYD Sworn

       By The Coroner                           95
       Cross-Examined by Mr. King              103
       Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien          103
       Further by The Coroner                  104

D.J. MACARTHUR

       By The Coroner                          104
              INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT   (Cont)

                                             Page

T.W. LLOYD Sworn

     By The Coroner                           110
     Cross-Examined by Mr. King               118
     Further by The Coroner                   120
                                                  N.   M.   SAVAGE


           FORTY FOURTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

             TUESDAY, 5th FEBRUARY 1991

     THE CORONER:   Good morning.         I am sorry about the
delay.  We have a new lady.

     MISS HENDRY:   Sir, yes.  I am Miss Helen Hendry
and I am in place of Mr. Isaacs today.

         NEIL MICHAEL SAVAGE Called (Sworn)
                 By The C o r o n e r ;
Good morning.  It is Neil Michael Savage, is that
rignt? - A. Yes.

Is it still                                     , Liverpool?
A. No, I have changed my address since.
            - it is a public house -
         5kelmersdale.

Does that mean you have changed your job, because you
were a postman, I think, or are you still a postman? -
A. I have changed jobs, yes.  I am a licensee now.

You were and for all I know still are a supporter of
Liverpool Football Club, is that right? - A. Yes.

You decided to come to the semi-final on 15th April,
1989, is that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Had you gone to the 1988 semi-final? - A. I did, yes.

were you on the terraces that year as well? - A. Yes.

In the centre terraces or somewhere else? - A. In the
central terracing.

We will come back to 1988 later on then. You bought
your ticket on 14th April, is that right? - A. Yes, the
day before.

You, I think with several of your friends, did you go
by car? - A. We went by car, yes.

You actually met them, I think, in Liverpool, at a pub?
- A. We met them in my local, yes.

When you had finished there you got into your car or
cars and set off, is that right? - A. Yes.

How many were there in your group, perhaps you could
just tell us? - A. I think there were five all
together, five including me.
                                                 N.   M.   SAVAGE


Q. You left at about 11 a.m? - A. We set off to
   Hillsborough, yes. We met about 20-to-ll, I think.

Q. I think you had a pint and you bought a few cans to
   have on the journey? - A. That is right, yes.

0. Then you set off, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you get to Sheffield? - A. We arrived
   about 2 o'clock, I think.

0. You parked and then you walked towards the ground, is
   that right? - A. Yes.

0.   How long did it take you to get to the ground? - A.
     Between 20 minutes and half an hour.

0.   On your journeyings towards the ground I think you saw
     Police Officers spaced along the road? - A. Yes. You
     couldn't mistake the way to the ground because there
     was enough Police Officers to guide you there. You
     just had to follow the line of Police Officers.

Q. It was the fact that they were? - A. Yes.

0. They weren't shouting, "This way", or anything like
   that? - A. No.

Q.   But you knew .... - A. Where to go by their positions.

Q.    Pardon? - A. By the position the Police Officers were
     in we knew which way to go the ground. They didn't
     need to actually direct us.

0. I take it there were also quite a lot of fans going
   towards the ground as well? - A. There was a steady
   flow of fans, yes.

Q.    Did you notice anything at all about them? You weren't
     concerned in any way? - A. No, it was just the same as
     the year before.

Q.   When you got to Leppings Lane, to the entrance, do you
     know about what time it was? - A. It must have been
     about half-2 when we got into the turnstile area.

Q.   When you got to the turnstile area, you had been there
     before so you had some rough idea of what it looked
     like? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember the outer perimeter gates? They
   looked like park gates? - A. The outer gates?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes.
                                              N.    M.   SAVAGE


0. Can you remember those? - A. Yes.

0. Were they open or shut when you got there? - A. I think
   they were open.

0. They were open you think? - A. Yes.

0. Did you see them shut at all? - A. I can't recall them
   being closed, no.

0. Tell me how many people were there? I don't mean in
   numbers but I want you to tell me what sort of crowd
   there was? - A. There was quite, a large crowd. It was
   very congested in the area around ....

0. Sorry? - A. There was a large number of people around
   tae turnstile area.

0. Were they just round the turnstiles or were they on the
   roadside of those perimeter gates? - A. I would say
   they just came out, just past the gates, I would say.

0. Just past the gates when you arrived? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers around at that time
   when you arrived? - A. Only outside the perimeter
   gates.  I didn't recall any apart from the mounted
   Policeman inside.

0. What were they doing? First of all, how many did you
   see and what were they doing that you remember? - A. I
   would say there was about four I seen outside the
   perimeter gates, and they were just standing there.   I
   didn't see them actually doing anything.  There was a
   Policeman on a horse trying to control the crowd
   further on inside the gates, I saw him.

0. Is that the horse that stood on your foot? - A. I think
   so, yes, the same one.

0. I want you to have a glance at your statement, or part
   of it, because you do mention these Officers and you
   also mention the perimeter gates, and I want to check
   which account is more correct.   It is just to find out
   what is what.   (The witness was passed his statement)
   - A . I am sorry, I would say my statement is correct.

Q. You think your statement is correct? - A. Yes.

Q. Because your statement, in fact, is the opposite, more
   or less, to what you have told me, which is why I had
   to check it with you.  Is it right then that in your
   statement you confirm that you arrived at about 14.30,
   2.30, at Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.
                                                  N.    M.   SAVAGE


    Q. And that in your statement you say that the perimeter
       gates were shut when you arrived? - A. I think it is,
       yes.
B   0. Then you, go on to describe, you say there were five
       Policeman, but there may only have been four, and you
       describe what they were doing.  What were they doing as
       far as you remember, having re-read the statement? - A.
       They were trying to control the flow of people going
       through to the turnstile area from the perimeter gates,
       and they were letting so many through at a time.  I
       think it would be about five or ten minutes after, the
       gates were just left open all the time.

    0. Initially, what you are saying is they were trying to
       control the flow by opening and shutting, and in the
       end they left the gates open, you don't know why they
       left them open? - A. No, I don't know whether they were
       forced to or because of the body of people, they
       couldn't close them again, I don't know why, but they
       were left open after five or ten minutes.
D
    0. You also remembered seeing this mounted Officer and the
       horse stood on your foot? - A. Yes.

    0. You will remember that. - A. He was inside the
       perimeter gates.

    0. He was inside? - A. Yes.




                /Q. In fact, I think   • • • •
                                             N. M. SAVAGE

In fact, I think you had a job telling him to get the
horse off. He did not seem to hear you, is that
right? - A. Yes.

There was quite a bit of shouting between the Officer
and the people around, is that right? - A. Yes.

If anything, that annoyed you because the horse was
on your foot, I do not know? - A. It was just all
confusing all around and I don't think he could hear
me shouting to him because of all the panic around
me.

Does that mean there was an awful lot of noise going
on and lots of shouting or what? - A. It wasn't that
you couldn't hear people shouting. It was just that
there was that many people. There weren't screams.
It was just that there was that many people shouting,
not very loudly, that you could not understand what
was going on around you. It was all confusing.

It was a cacophony of   sound? -   A.Yes.

It was all letting up   and they   had allmergedinto
one? - A. I would say   so, yes.

You I think got through the outerperimetergates,
did you not? - A. Yes.

You were a bit uncomfortable when you were up against
a gate. Were you up against the gate shouting at any
point? - A. I was pushed towards the side gate.
Inside the perimeter gates to the left hand side
there is fencing as well and I was squashed up
against there.

Perhaps I should have asked you this; there are
three sets of these perimeter gates. You may not
know that but there are. Which one did you see shut?
Did you see them all shut? We will put the picture
of the gates up and we will let you have a look.
C.258. Can you see the picture there? - A. Yes.

You can see there three sets, can you not? - A. Yes.

Which one were you getting through? Is it the left
hand one or the right hand one or the central one? -
A. I think it was the left hand one.

You were uncomfortable but you were not particularly
concerned about your safety? - A. No, that is right.

Having got through you were heading towards the
turnstiles, is that right? - A. Yes.
Did you, in fact, go through a turnstile or did you
go through a big gate? - A. I ended up going through
a turnstile. I made my way to the right hand side.

You made your way across? - A. To the right hand side
of the left hand area that you can see. I made my
way as far to the right as I could because it didn't
seem as bad over that side. There seemed to be a
gate opened for a split second further round.

Behind where that white van is? - A. Yes, in that
area I seen a gate and I tried to get to there
because I think there was about eight to ten people
went through that gate and there seemed to be a lot
of room over that side. That is where I wanted to go
but then the gates themselves were open further over
and then the body of people moved towards the gate
that were open behind us then.

Which? - A. I think it would be the middle turnstile
that you can see that I went through. I wouldn't go
through with the main flow of people because I was
scared to go through because that there was a large
body of people trying to go through at the same time.
So I still managed to get through the turnstile.

Can you point to Gate B for a minute, Sergeant
Griffiths? Is that the one you saw open as well? -
A. I could see that had been open through the
turnstile and there is about ten people had gone
through and that is where I was trying to get to, to
get through there.

Hang on a moment. Go to the model because it will be
easier to show us on the model. Walk over to the
model and just show us? - A. I am a bit confused. I
can't remember now whether I went through these gates
here. I was definitely able to see the gates that
had been opened. I don't think there is any way I
could see from the pen inside this area. I
definitely saw that gate open at some stage.

That was the one you were trying to get to, is that
right? - A. That is the one I was going for. Looking
at that photograph, my mind seems to tell me I was in
that area.

The far side of that wall? - A. Yes, but I couldn't.
I must have been in this area to be able to see that
gate open.

Indeed, I think that is right. - A. So I would say
this is the area I first went into.
Let us then just deal with that.   You saw a gate open
whichever it was? - A. Yes.

Just open for a short time? - A. It was just seconds.

A few people went through? - A. Yes.

Forget which gate it was, did you see another big
gate open and more people go through? - A. That was
to the left of the other gate.

You did not go through that? - A. No, I was in the
turnstile area then. It started to clear and I went
through the turnstile.

You decided you would stick with the turnstiles in
effect? - A. Yes.

Having got through the turnstiles, you were then in a
big concourse area, is that right? - A. Yes.

Could you see a tunnel immediately ahead of you? - A.
No, I was directed to the tunnel.   Itwasn't
immediately ahead of where I was.   It seemed to be a
Police Officer directing people towards the tunnel
area. I think I couldn't see the tunnel.

Did you have to go through a big gap in a wall? - A.
Yes, to the left of me.

If you went left you could not have got to the
tunnel? - A. I just ended up back in the main body of
people. I thought I was away from the main flow of
people going through the gate that was open and the
turnstile I went through, it just ledme back into
the main flow and so I am not sure which way I had to
turn but I was, like, back into the main flow and I
got carried into the ground with the flow of people.
I actually went through on to the terraces through
the tunnel.

Did you go to the toilet at all? - A. No.

Did you see them marked by any chance? - A. I can't
remember seeing them.

When you went through the tunnel did you finish up in
the centre pens? - A. I was in one of the centre pens
then.

There are other tunnels as well in this huge area but
there is no doubt in your mind that the tunnel you
went through took you on to the centre pens? - A.
                                              N. M. SAVAGE


Yes, I was in more or less exactly the same position
I was in the year before inside the ground.

Your recollection is that you were directed to the
tunnel immediately after you got through the
turnstiles? - A. Yes, immediately.

There was a Police Officer just on the other side of
the turnstiles? - A. Yes, he was standing to the
right. I don't know if I had to turn left but the
Police Officer was on my right and I went the
opposite way from him because he was showing me
towards the tunnels on the other side or something.
It is a bit confusing the photo because I can't see
the other side to explain exactly where I am on it
but I went through the tunnel in the centre two pens
anyway to one of the pens. I think it was the right
hand pen.

Let us move on because we have heard quite a bit
about this area and it is obvious that your
recollection is not 100 per cent on this aspect or at
least it is difficult for you to express it. Was the
tunnel crowded or not? - A. It was crowded, yes.




                 /Q. Were you able to walk.
                                            N.   M.   SAVAGE


Were you able to walk normally or did you have to
shuffle along? - A. I had to shuffle because of the
force of people coming through behind me. That is
when I first got into difficulties, in the tunnel
itself. In 1988, my first thoughts when I was inside
the ground were it was quite packed there and I was
getting quite squashed then, but my first thoughts
were I couldn't stand this for 10 minutes and I got to
an area where there was a bit more space.

Stick to 1989. - A. In 1989as soon as I got in the
ground I just knew I had to get    out, and I justknew
that it wasn't a normal situation.

What I want to know   is whether, when you entered the
tunnel, you managed   to look onto the field? - A. I
could see the field   as I got to the top of the tunnel,
the very top of the   tunnel.

You mean at the beginning or at the end? - A. I can't
remember looking up until I got     to the top. I was
more worried about keeping my feet.

I see. Just as you were coming up you are saying? -
A. Yes.

Was the game in play at that point? - A. No. I think
the players were on the pitch, but they definitely had
not kicked off. It would be about 5-to 3 at that time,
I would say.

You are quite certain about that? - A. Yes, quite
certain.

It differs from your statement, I have to tell you. -
A. Well, I never wear a watch.

That is why I am asking you.  I am not asking you what
time it was;  I am asking you what was happening on
the pitch? - A. The players definitely had not kicked
off.

They had definitely not kicked off? - A. No.

Okay. So how did you get out of the tunnel? - A. I
was just forced onto the terracing.

By the people behind you, you say? - A. Yes, the
weight of people.

Did you go left or right? - A. I just went straight to
the front.   I was just forced out there towards the
front.   I would say slightly to the right, but mainly
forward.
                                             N.   M.   SAVAGE


As soon as you were on the terrace you knew that you
did not want to stay? - A. Yes, I knew it wasn't a
normal situation.

So did you then look towards your right and you could
see there was a bit more space there? - A. Yes, there
was space to the right.

What happened then, tell me? - A. It was becoming more
and more pressure inside the terracing all the time,
and there were quite a few people around me I noticed-
getting into difficulty, and then I just started
panicking myself because I couldn't breathe myself and
I was trying to help a little girl.  I saw a little
girl and I think the bloke in front of me might have
been standing on her and I was screaming to him to get
off her and he couldn't hear me.

Did you get up against the barrier? - A. No, I was
just against bodies - not bodies but bodies of people.
I was just squashed up against other people.

Could you see a barrier ahead of you? - A. There was
one about 5' in front of me, I would say 3', but I
wasn't up against one.

You were not up against it? - A. No.

Did you see anything happening to the barrier? - A.
No.

You did not? - A. No, I can't recall.

You are quite sure about that as well? - A. I am not
quite sure.  It is a long time ago.  It is a long time
since I made the statement. Whatever is in the
statement isn't clear in my mind, so I would take more
notice of the statement than what I am saying at the
moment because the statement would probably be more
accurate.

Shall I tell you what you said in the statement and
see whether you are prepared to agree with it? - A.
Yes.

If I deal with the tunnel first, you said,

    "As I went on, the tunnel wasn't crowded but the
    main bulk seemed to be behind me. As I looked
    forward I could see the game had already started.
    I think I was still walking fast but as I entered
    the pen area I realised it was really full.  I
    have never seen a stand that full.  I was pushed
    to the right into Pen 3 and immediately I entered
                                            N.   M.   SAVAGE


     I wanted to get out.  It wasn't just
     uncomfortable any more but frightening."
A. Yes.

Thelast bit is exactly what you  have told me, but you
do say that the game had already started? - A. I don't
think it had kicked off.

You are pretty confident that that is wrong in the
statement? - A. I think everything is right apart from
the fact that they hadn't kicked off.

When you turned to the barrier, what you said there
was:

     "The people in front of me were doubled over the
     barrier.  The pressure at this stage was
     unbelievable.  The only way I didn't go down was
     by fighting for breath by lifting my head up for
     air. I then saw the barrier in front of me bend
     forward and I got pushed forward again in front
     of the barrier.   There were bodies on the floor.
     If the barrier hadn't have broken I don't think I
     would be here to tell this."

Does that ring a bell with you at all? - A. I can't
recall seeing the barrier breaking, but there was a
barrier gone on the floor and for a split second there
was more room than what there had been, and that was
because of the fact the barrier had gone.  I didn't
actually see the barrier going because there were
people in front of me.

So what you are saying is that you realised the
barrier had gone later on, do you say? - A. Yes, later
on.

Are you telling me that what you are trying to say is
that you noticed there was a movement forward that
gave you a bit more space for a moment or two? - A.
Yes.

You saw the barrier later? - A. Yes.

And you   put two and two together? - A. Thatmust  be
what I meant in thestatement, yes.     I didn'tactually
see the   barrier go.

You did   not see it go? - A. No.

Of course, you would not be able to help us as to when
it went if you did not see it go? - A. No.
                                              N.   M.   SAVAGE


Show us on a plan, we will just get you to mark a
cross, where you were when you found it so, as you put
it, unbelievable and you were fighting for breath. -
A. Yes. (Witness marks plan)

     MRS. PERKINS:   C436.

     THE CORONER: I just want to ask you a couple
more questions about 1938. You said it was a semi­
final and you said that you went through the same
tunnel, is that right? - A. Yes.

Did you finish up in the same pen? - A.     Yes, I think
so.

Pen 3 we call it, but the same sort of area? - A. Yes.

And in about the same position, or were you somewhere
different? - A. More or less in the same position.

Do you remember what time you got to the ground in
1988? - A. I think it was about 1.30.  I went on the
train the year before.

That is when you arrived     in Sheffield.Did you go
into the ground at 1.30?     - A. Yes, I went with a young
lad who lives near me, I     took him along with me and
because I was with him I     went in straight away.

So you went in very much earlier? - A. Yes.

Two more questions. You have already said it was a
bit tight in 1988? - A. Yes.

How tight is tight? - A. It was a lot tighter than
what it is normally like on the Kop.

In 1988? - A. Yes. I can't describe how tight it was,
because if you don't know what it is like you wouldn't
know.   It was tighter than a normal football match.

But you were willing to go back this year.  If it had
been no worse than that, you would have put up with
it? - A. Yes.

Did you see people climb up into the stands in 1988? -
A. Yes.

You did? - A. Yes.

At what time was that? - A. Half-time.
                                              N.   M.   SAVAGE


             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE;

Can you just work out from the start of the journey how
much you had to drink on the way to the match? - A. I
would  say one pint and two cans of lager, I had myself.
About  one pint and two cans.

That is a pint before you set off and two cans in the
car? - A. Yes, that's about a pint and a half.   Two cans
is about pint and a half, so about two and a half pints.

What about the rest of the party? - A. One had about
three   or four cans and a pint.  The driver had one pint
in our local before we set off.    He didn't have any more
to drink.   The rest of us had more or less the same,
just two or three, but one lad had three or four.

Can you help the court to understand why it is that you
arrived so much later than you did in 1988? - A. Yes,
there were large road works going on in the Stockport
area, the M.63.   Because I knew my way to the ground, we
didn t set off early enough to cover these roadworks and
we were held up for about an hour with the roadworks
around Stockport.   Then there was quite a tail back all
the way to the Snake Pass then from Hyde.

            Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING;

When you were giving us the description of the 1989
match, just in one sentence you went back to 1988, before
the learned Coroner asked you at that time to concentrate
on 1989.   This is what I have noted you said, "In 1988 I
had been squashed for about ten minutes and I then moved
to an area of more space and it eased off." - A. Yes.

Is it your experience, Mr. Savage, as a person who stands
on the Kop that very often there is a tight squash
towards the kick-off time? - A. Yes, towards the main
entrance, it is more congested than other areas.

Most often it begins to ease off as the crowd finds
its... - A. They spread around a bit.

That is normally after kick-off, although there is often
then a pressure if there is an exciting incident or a
goal or something like that? - A. That s right.

Had the situation been different in 1989, as you last
said to the learned Coroner, you would have been
perfectly prepared to have stood there and you would have
expected that it would, as it had done in the year
before, eased off sometime just after kick-off? - A.
That's correct.
                                             N.   M.   SAVAGE


When you saw people being lifted up into the seats above
your head in 1988, could you see any reason at that time,
other than to get into the seated area, why people were
being lifted up? - A. No.

Did you see people being lifted up in 1989? - A. Yes.

In the short period you were there before kick-off? - A.
I can't remember recalling before kick-off.   I was just
concentrating on what was going on around me.   I saw,
after I was on the pitch, people being lifted up.

You can't say whether you had seen that happening whilst,
you were on the terrace as opposed to when you got out on
to the pitch itself? - A. Yes.

You have obviously tried to put this out of your mind,
Mr. Savage? - A. I have, yes.   I have just totally shut
it out of my mind.

Obviously today you have had to try and recollect events
from some time ago? - A. Yes.   I have just had to shut
the whole business out to be honest and some things I
have managed to shut out and some things I haven't.

You recognise the sort of dilemma we have had today
between what you said to start with and then what the
Coroner has put to you within your statement which in the
first instance was entirely to the opposite effect. - A.
Yes.

It is right that that difference has occurred even though
you have had a chance to read through your statement
outside this room before you came in? - A. No, I didn't
really read through my statement.

Here you not given your statement to read through? - A.
Yes, I was, but I had two minutes to read fifteen pages.

Yes, it is not easy, but I suppose the fact I am putting
to you, if you accept it, is that it is difficult now for
you to remember the facts and to choose between that
which is in the statement and that which you have tried
very hard to give in evidence? - A. When I see the facts
from my statement then I recall it.   All the facts are
etched in my brain from that day but some of the details
you need to know are some of the things I have managed to
shut out.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

The crowds finding their own level, pressures easing off
at a place like, say, Anfield, is in relation to a
                                               N.   M.   SAVAGE


terrace where you can move right across at Anfield? - A.
Yes.

The whole width is open? - A. Yes.

They don't have radial fences at Anfield? - A. No.

I know you have found everything quite confusing in the
evidence today and I don't criticise you for that at all
and I am not going to ask you about which gate or which
turnstile or what have you, but I want to ask you about a
little detail in your evidence which doesn't depend on
exactly where you were, just your memory.   You remember
not seeing the tunnel when you came originally came
through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

You remember   being directed by a Policeman? - A. Yes.

What was the situation you found yourself in when you got
through the turnstiles, whichever turnstile it was?      Was
it you didn't know where to go?      What was the position
you were in? - A. It was that I didn't know where to go.
There wasn't that many people around me to be honest.      I
went definitely to the left.      I don't know whether I
turned left through a gap.      I can't remember, but I
definitely had to go to the left to get back into the
main flow of people going into the ground.      I was more
or less - I w a s n t told to go that way but that was the
way that the Police Officer was implying me to go, into
the other area.

Did that lead you to the tunnel? - A. Yes.

The other matter I am interested in is this:  you
describe going through the tunnel and the people behind
you.   Do you recall the tunnel being downhill as you go
along? - A. Yes.

Did that increase your speed, the very fact it was
downhill? - A. That would increase it, plus the fact the
weight of people behind me increased it.

You yourself came on to the terrace, really you entered
it with the momentum of the crowd? - A. That s right.

It wasn't that you had a choice about stopping and
deciding you wouldn't go any further? - A. No, you
couldn't stop.

If I could summarise your experience of going through the
tunnel:  it is the momentum of the crowd, going downhill
and you are taken on to the terrace? - A. Yes.
                                              N.   M.   SAVAGE


When you enter on to the terrace, whatever time that was,
you clearly would have liked to have got out immediately
if you could have done? - A. That's right.

Of course you couldn't because of the number of people? -
A. No.

            Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Savage, on your way down Leppings Lane to the
entrance you said you saw Police Officers.     Were these
Police Officers positioned at the end of the side roads?
- A. There is a side road to the right hand side on the
way towards Leppings Lane.     I think there might have
been a couple of Police Officers, but the main Police
Officers Isaw were to the left, just    further up past the
shops, in between the shopping area and the perimeter
gates.    I  think there is a chip shop there on the left
hand side.    Near the perimeter gates, the Police
Officers.

When you were at the turnstile area you said you saw the
gate opening to your right? - A. Yes.

Did you see that gate opening twice or just once? - A.
Just once.

You said it opened for a very short time? - A. It was
only seconds.    I would say no more than seven people
went through it.

By the time you had got through the turnstiles and you
were going to the tunnel area you saw lots of people
coming in from that direction? - A. No, to the left of
the turnstiles I went in.   There was a gate to the
right.  That was open for seconds and the gate to the
left of me was the one that was left open.

You did join masses of people going down the tunnel you
said? - A. Yes.

Did you see where they were coming from? - A. From the
open gate to the left of the turnstiles.   To the left of
the turnstiles I had come through.

You could see the open gate? - A. I could see the gate
had been opened before I even went through the turnstile
because everybody went for the gate then.   That left a
little space for me to enable me to go through the
turnstiles safely.   Well, what I thought was safely, but
I was just directed back into the main flow again, as I
say.
                                                                     17

                                                        N.   M.   SAVAGE


    Q. When did you make your statement, the statement that was
       read out by the Coroner? - A. Towards the end of May, I
       would say.

B             THE CORONER:   The 30th of April, 1989.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   But you don't write your statement
         out yourself?    Somebody else writes it out for you? -
         A. Yes, but I read the statement after I had given it.
         I read the statement in my living room.   I signed every
         page of the statement.

    Q. When   you sign it do you study what had been written down?
       - A.   I had only just spoken what was written down so if I
       read   it after that I know exactly what I said.   That was
       good   enough for me.   I put my signature on it.

    Q. When Mr. Manning was questioning you about the statement
       I didn't catch the very last part of your evidence.   I
       don't know if you can remember what you said then? - A.
       Was it something about I had tried to shut it out of my
       mind?   Which gentleman are you talking about?   The very
       last sentence I said?

    Q. Yes, it was. - A. I can't remember it myself very
       clearly.   I have had this etched in my mind,
       unfortunately some of the details are what I have
       forgotten.    I think I said something along those lines.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

    Q. Mr. Savage you made your statement on the 30th of April,
       some fifteen days after this terrible day? - A. Yes.

    Q. From what I understood you to say a few moments ago, you
       have had an opportunity to read through it, and you
       signed it having made it? -A. Yes.

    Q. No doubt you had an opportunity to make any corrections
       to it if you wanted to make them? -A. Yes.

    Q. At that stage, some two weeks after this disaster, it was
       your recollection that the game had started when you
       arrived on the terraces? - A. Yes.   Well, as it is
       written in the statement, yes, but the game definitely
       had not started.

    Q. I'm sorry? - A. I did say at the time that I think that
       is the only thing I have made an error with in my
       statement, when I was asked about that point before.

    Q. Did you correct that in your statement when you read it
       through and signed it? - A. No.




H
                                             N.   M.   SAVAGE


     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I wonder if I might be allowed to
ask one more question?

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Could you just explain why it was you didn't go through
the gate?   When you saw the gate open and the crowd go
in why did you not go in that way? - A. Because I was
scared to go in that way.

Can you just explain that in your own words to the jury?
PUt them in the picture. - A. At that time I was coming
back from the gate on the right hand side, that had been
opened.   I was about three feet in front of the
turnstiles and once the gates were opened the main body
of people went to go through the open gate and it left a
bit more breathing space around the turnstile area.   I
was just able to go through quite freely then.

Through the turnstile? - A. Through the turnstile.

Was there any reason you didn't want to go through the
gate with the crowd? - A. I was frightened to go through
the gate.

Explain why that was.- A. Because of the amount of people
in the area.   There were too many people to be going
through an area like that.

Take it steadily because the picture in your mind is
important and helpful.   Why was it frightening? - A.
Because of the sheer number of people going through that
area.   It had already been quite difficult to keep your
feet.   I was not scared at all outside the ground but I
knew there would be difficulties through that way because
of the amount of people going through.   I knew on the
other side there would be difficulties because obviously
that amount of people can't walk through and stand on
football terracing at the same time.   There has got to
be some pushing and shoving somewhere and somebody
getting crushed somewhere, so I wouldn't got that way
because I was terrified.




        THE CORONER:   Mr. Savage
                                              T.   E.   CULLY


     THE CORONERs   Mr. Savage, can I say thank you
very much for coming.  I am sorry we have brought it
back to you but on the other hand you must understand I
cannot actually tell by reading the statements how you
feel about the situation, and I felt that it was right
that we should hear what you had to say. - A. Okay.

So I hope I have not upset you more than is absolutely
necessary, and thank you very much indeed. - A. Thanks
a lot.

         THOMAS ERNEST CULLY Called (Sworn)

                   By THE CORONER

You are Thomas Ernest Cully, is that right? - A.
Correct, yes.

Can you give us your address? - A.


You are, I think, a Liverpool supporter, is that right?
- A. Correct, yes.

You came with some of your friends by car to see the
match on 15th April, 1989, is that right? - A. Yes.

Can you remember what time you left home to come to the
match? - A. Round eleven-ish.

Do you know what time you arrived in Sheffield? - A.
Just after one, I would say.

I think you went and had a couple of cans of lager with
your friends, is that right? - A. What it is, when it
is a semi-final you usually meet up with friends, and
we met up, just up the road. There was a supermarket,
I think it is the top road.

That is right,yes. - A. There was about eleven, ten of
us, twelve of us, something like that, and we just got
a crate between us and had two cans.

You had two cans. That is what I thought you had and I
just wanted to get that out. Then what happened? Did
you then go straight to the ground or what happened
then? - A. We   were stood by the top, and   wesplit up
then, because   everyone goes their own way. You have a
stand there, you have a talk and then you walk down.    I
walked down towards the Leppings Lane. One of my mates
went in the stand side and I was with my lad, who is
14, and I went into the other side.
                                                                     20

                                                         T.   E.   CULLY


    Q- What time did you get to Leppings Lane, the turnstiles?
             - A. About 2 o'clock.

B   Q.       Did you get in quite easily or not? - A. This was what
             surprised me, you see. All the stands were empty.
    o.       No, I am talking about the turnstiles. - A. Yes, that
             is what I am saying. All the stand side were empty.
             You could just walk straight in there but they started
             to get queues going to the Leppings Lane end, but the
             stands, to get into the Leppings Lane stands, were
             empty.

             Did you have a terrace or a stand ticket yourself? - A.
             I had a terrace and inside I ended up in the stands.
    o.       Okay, we will come to that in a minute, but which of
             the turnstiles did you go through? - A. Leppings Lane.

    Q. The stand turnstiles or the terracing? - A. The
       terracing.
D
    0 . You said there were queues there? - A. Yes.

    0    .   Did you have any difficulty getting through that
             turnstile? - A. Yes.

             In what way? - A. In the way that there was a bit of a
             crush, because as I say there was -- I was on the
             side.  Just have a look at that picture you had before,
             you have got little railings on the side.

             Yes, we will put it up again and then you can help us.
             There is a little bar there, is that where you say you
             were standing? - A. Yes, next door to the transit van.
             Where the transit van is, the little thing what's along
             the side there.

             You were on the turnstile side of that, were you? - A.
             Yes, that's right.

    Q.       Did you, in fact, go in through a turnstile? - A. Yes.

    Q. You did.        Did you see any big gates open at all? - A.
             When I was inside, yes.

             Once you were inside. How long would you say it took
             you to get through? - A. Five, maybe ten minutes. It
             wasn't ....

    Q.       It wasn't that bad? - A. No.

    Q. Were you searched on your way in by a Police Officer? -
       A. Yes. There seemed to be Police Officers right next



H
                                             T.   E.   CULLY


    that is where I say in my statement that there was
Police Officers crushed against the wall because they
were the ones who were supposed to stop you and search
you, and as you got through again, to stop people
bunking over there was more on the other side.

Were you actually searched? - A. Probably.

You can't remember now? - A. I can't remember, you know
what I mean.

But you do remember seeing some Officers and your
recollection is that they were squashed against the
wall? - A. Yes.

On the outside, we are talking about? - A. Yes.

I think you also saw a mounted Officer, didn't you? -
A. Yes, I actually spoke to him.

Where was he? Was he on the outside of     these big
railing gates or the inside? - A. He was    just here. I
would say by where the van is now.

Where the van is, I see. What was the substance of
your conversation, can you remember it? - A. Yes. As I
was going in there, there was pickpockets working them
gates, because someone was by my pocket,   that is how I
knew, and I am not just saying this now,but you
actually get crushes, people want crushes and these
people seemed to want it at the time, you know what I
mean, and they actually were working them gates there.
I told him, I said to him, "Why don t you get them off
the back there? There's some pickpockets working
there".

I see. Just as a matter of interest, did he respond to
your suggestion? - A. No. He was just doing his normal
job.  I don't think he was interested.

You had the impression   that there were somepeople
there who were trying to get at your wallet, is that
what you are saying? - A. I would say so, yes.

But you kept it, I hope? You didn't lose it? - A. I
don't think I had it with me. I think I just had money
in my pocket.

Did you lose your money, that is what I am trying to
find out?- A. No, I was fine. Can I say something
else, just one thing?

Yes. - A. The reason why I knew there was pickpockets
there, I have been going - I am 35 now - I have been
                                            T.    E.   CULLY


going since I was 9 and I have been all over the
country with Liverpool.  I have been to Europe, I have
been everywhere, and it is just things you notice.
Over 20 years you are going to notice things like this,
and you know where to get in. I have been to
Hillsborough loads of times.

You knew the ground? - A. Yes. I was there in '77 when
Everton played Aston Villa in the League Cup replay.  I
was there the year before.  I have been loads of times.

Perhaps I ought to make sure that I have understood
your evidence correctly. Are you saying that your
impression was that people were deliberately trying to
cause a crush in order that they could exercise their
skills at pickpocketing more easily? Is that what you
are saying? - A. I would say that they were in there.
What they do is, they go round, they look for a crush,
anywhere where there is tight packing they get in, and
it is as simple as that.  It is no good one person
standing up, trying to pickpocket him. What they do is
wait for a crowd and then they get in the crowd, and
that is where they do it. They are not like the ones
you see on telly where they walk up, twitch your
pocket, and it's gone. What they do is they push you
everywhere and the next thing it's gone out of your
pocket. They are not delicate.

I understand, and you speak from experience you say? -
A. Not from being a pickpocket.  (Laughter)

Ho, no, I didn't mean that! Good answer. Now then,
let's get back to the match, okay? - A. Right, yes.

You went through the turnstile, okay? - A. Yes.

You said you took about five or ten minutes to get
through? - A. Yes.

Then you got into a big concourse area, right? - A.
Yes.

On the inside? - A. Yes, the back of the gates.

There were another load of Police Officers doing
various things, but you can't remember whether they
searched you any more? - A. No. They probably did
because they usually do at most matches nowadays.

Are you saying you did see a large gate open? - A.
Well, I never saw that until I actually, I was up in
the stands ....
                                            T.   E.   CULLY


You didn't see it from the concourse area? - A. Yes, I
did. The first thing I done was walked in the gates
and straight down the tunnel. Got to the top of the
tunnel, you couldn't move, right, and by this time I'd
lost my lad, so I went back out and at the side - have
you got any pictures of inside?

Yes. We can show you on the model. Walk up to the
model.  (The witness used the model to illustrate
his evidence) Show me where the tunnel is. - A.Right.
I came through the turnstile, I went straight down the
tunnel. By this time I had lost my lad, so I came back
out. There was a Policewoman standing there, so I just
made my way through there, and got to these stands
here. There was a Policeman there, about six stewards
inside the gates. There was a big lad there, getting
in there, I went through, next thing I ended up in the
stands over there. I realised then I never had my lad
with me. I looked over and found him here. There was
a lot of people in here, in the stands, who I knew, so
I borrowed a ticket off them ....

You had better come back because I can't hear you.      You
nave lost me as well.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Sir, he has indicated going
through turnstiles A-G, down the tunnel, comes out of
the tunnel, through the gate in the wall, and then up
through entrance U-V-W-X into the West Stand.

     THE CORONER:   So you got up into the stands,
okay. Before you got to the stands, before you got up
there, you say you went down the tunnel, right? - A.
Yes.

Why did you turn back? That is what I am trying to
find out. - A. I got right to the top and you couldn't
move. This was at half-past-2, you couldn't move then.
You could actually see where it parted, but you have
got fellas at the back, usually the large fellas go at
the back, and I'm only 5.5, 5.6, so I couldn't see over
them. I just walked down and ....

Did you actually go onto the terrace or did you decide
when you saw the people? - A. I actually got to the
back of the terrace, pushed my way in, and then just
turned round and went back out again.

You decided you didn't like it? - A. No.

And you went back out, went through that little gap in
the wall? - A. Yes, there was a Policewoman on that.

Then you went up towards the stands? - A. Yes.
                                              T.   E.    CULLY


How did you persuade them - well, did you persuade them
to let you up or what? - A. No. What it was, it seemed
to me as if everyone w a s taking a walk them thingys,
looking at them, and walking through this gate, and
then everyone just walked up. There was stewards
everywhere going, "Tickets", but everyone was just
pushing past them.

You finished up on the West   Stand, as opposed to      the
terracing? - A. Yes.

I take it from that, that you didn’t have any
difficulty coming back out of the tunnel at 2.30? - A.
No, there was no difficulty. Just walked in, saw it
and walked back out in.

When you were up in the West Stand did you find a seat
or were you standing around at the back? - A. Well,
when I got in there, strange as it may seem, there is
like a walkway at the back, where you can walk along,
and you find friends there. Most Liverpudlians know
each other, the large crowds, we found a few friends
and then we got inside and we ended up in the far
corner.




               /Q. It was when you
                                                               25

                                                     T . E . CULLY


    Q. It was when you were up there that you saw the gate
       open? - A. No, no. Then I realised that my son
       wasn't up there. So I looked over the actual corner
B      and I saw him in No. 2. No, it won't. It will be in
       No. 1 because Nos. 2 and 3 are in the middle, aren't
       they?

    Q. We will get you to show us on a plan in a minute but
       I am trying to find out whether you saw a big gate by
       that white van open at all? - A. I did eventually.
    Q. When was that? - A. I shouted my lad. He was in No.
       1. I come back down. I borrowed a ticket off
       someone else because I wasn't going to leave him in
       the ground the way it was. I borrowed a ticket off
       someone else's stub, come back down and told him to
       meet me by the actual gate. I found him and just as
       I turned round to go a Police Officer had his back
       against the gate and walked sideways with the gate
       because it is like a concertina gate and he just
       walked sideways.
D
    Q. Let us get the story completely right. You entered
       the ground, you went down the tunnel, you did not
       like what you saw because there was a wall of people
       there and you had also lost your lad? - A. Yes.
    Q. You came back out and went through the middle gap in
       the wall, up the stairs? - A. Yes.
    Q. You stayed in the stand, met a few of your friends,
       looked down on to the terracing? - A. Yes.
    Q. Saw your lad in one of the pens? - A. Yes.
    Q. You managed to shout to him, "Come back"? - A. Yes.
    Q. You went downstairs? - A. Yes.
    Q. Back into the concourse area? - A. Yes.
    Q. So you had to come back through that hole in the wall
       or the gap in the wall, is that right? - A. Yes, that
       is right.

    Q. As you were there you could see a Police Officer open
       a big concertina gate? - A. That is right, yes.
    Q. At this point you were with your boy? - A. Yes.
    Q. He had joined you? - A. Yes.

    Q. You saw the gate open? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                  26
                                                        T . E . CULLY


    Q. People came in through the gate I take it? - A. There
       was a large rush then and just behind Leppings Lane
       there is another gate, a separate one, to go back up
B      into the stands. We sort of ran for that, sort of
       thing, and we sort of rushed and I actually had to
       pull the gate back open off the stewards because the
       stewards all ran inside and pulled the gate shut. I
       had to actually pull my way in and push my way in
       back through the gate and show them these tickets
       what I had borrowed upstairs, the stubs, and I
       actually got back into the stands.
    Q. In other words, you were saying the stewards were
       trying to shut the gates which leadup to the stairs
       to stop people going into the stands? - A. Yes.
    Q. You managed to grab it, get it open, show them these
       tickets? - A. Yes.

    Q. The borrowed tickets? - A. Yes.
D   Q* You and the lad went up? - A. Yes, that is right.
    Q. Then having got up into the stands I take it you sat
       down somewhere, is that right? - A. Went back over to
       the far corner again.

    Q. Right at the other end of the stand? - A. Over the
       side.

    Q.    If you look at the model which side did you go? - A.
         The North Stand side, near theNorth Stand side.
    Q. Was that below the North Stand, the pen where your
       lad had been when you shouted at him? - A. Yes. He
       was actually in those pens there on that side.
    Q. It is No. 6 or 7? - A. Yes, he wasn't crushed or
       anything. It was just I didn't likethe look of what
       was going on.

    Q. You then sorted yourself out. You were with your
       lad, you were up in the stands and you looked down.
       What was happening on the pitch then? - A. The teams
       came out, a big roar, and they were just kicking
       round. The next thing the match kicked off.
    Q. Did you look down on to the terracing at all? - A.
       No, I can't say I did. I did but not looking for
       anything in particular. You stand about, you are
       talking in the stands, you know what I mean?
    Q. When was it you first noticed that anything was not
       quite right? - A. After the kick-off people started



H
                                                                 27

                                                       T . E . CULLY


         coming over the tops of the middle wires and on to
         the pitch and then all of a sudden the match got
         called off. We were up in the far corner. We even
B        thought it was sort of, like, I knew obviously it
         wasn't a pitch invasion. There was obviously
         something wrong because it was all Liverpool
         supporters. They would have no reason to invade the
         pitch and so it was obviously something wrong but we
         thought it would be cleared and the match would start
         again. The next thing is that we saw people coming
         out of the North Stand ripping down boards, putting
         people on them but before this there was a man died
         on the pitch. He actually died and you could see
         them working on him.
    Q. That is when you realised that something was
       seriously wrong? - A. I said to my mate, "There is
       one dead". That was definite because they put
       something over his head and then there was a lad
       lying...

D   Q. That is enough. You do not need to go on any further
       with that. Show us on a little plan where you were
       in the West Stand? We will put a plan up for you and
       you can put a cross on it. - A. Yes.
          MRS. PERKINS:   This is C.437.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   When you were in that stand, the
         players had come up on to the pitch? - A. Yes.
    Q. Were you seated or standing up? - A. Sitting because
       everyone, like, all help and push up.
    Q. How much of the terracing could you actually see when
       you were sitting down? - A. Not a lot. You could see
       the front fence and behind the goal. You could see
       people.

    Q. You could see? - A. If you looked right you could
       actually see people getting pulled into the stands.
    Q. How much of the people themselves on the terracing
       could you see? - A. The actual squashing?
    Q. Yes? - A. Very little,    You could see them coming
       over the fence.

    Q. It was the coming over the fence that attracted your
       attention? - A. Yes, coming over the fence.
    Q. In 1988 you went to the match as well, did you? - A.
       Yes.




H
                                                               28
                                                     T . E . CULLY


    Q. The Semi Final? - A. Yes.
    Q. Where were you that year? - A. I was in the North
B      Stand.

    Q. I will not ask you any further questions about that
       then? - A. Yes.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:
    Q. I am sorry to have to go over one or two points that
       you have already mentioned but I would be glad if you
       would just help a little more so far as you are able.
       When you first got into the tunnel and went down to
       the end you have explained what you did then. The
       note I have got is - I do not want to lead you. You
       give your own evidence. When you got down at the end
       of the tunnel what were other people doing who were
       going down the tunnel at the same time as you? - A. I
       don't know. I can't understand what you are trying
       to get at.

    Q. I do not want to give you too much of a clue because
       I want you to give the evidence rather than me
       suggesting the answer, do you see? - A. Yes, I
       understand what you are getting at and in my mind I
       am trying to think whether people were turning round.
    Q. I will set you up and you give your evidence without
       me telling you too much, do you see? - A. Yes.
    Q. Just bring to mind, there you are going down the
       tunnel for the first time? - A. Yes.
    Q. You arrive at the end of the tunnel and there is a
       big crowd there? - A. Yes.
    Q. I have put you in the picture. We know what you did.
       What did you see other people doing who were arriving
       at about the same time as you? - A. In the tunnel
       itself?

    Q. Yes, arriving? - A. The only thing I can think of is
       people going back and forward. It is a passageway.
       People go back, go forward, you know what I mean? It
       is the only way in and out.

    Q. Give us the picture that you had. You are the one
       who was there, do you see? They were going back and
       forward? - A. All as I can remember is that they got
       down to the end, couldn't see nothing. You couldn't
       go anywhere because there was like a steel piece in
       the middle separating, going either side, and there
       was just nothing there for me because I am only



H
                                                                 29

                                                       T . E . CULLY


         small, you know what I mean, and I just turned round
         and come back.
B   Q. Were you the only one who turned round and came back
       out? - A. Probably not. If is the only way in and
       out of those two pens there must have been people
       coming in and out as well.
    Q. You went through the gap in the wall and we have
       followed your route up into the upper stand? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. Your son was now over on the left hand side of the
       terrace below you, is that right? - A. That is right.
       Do you know what? I have just thought on now that
       that is exactly where I lost him. Where I actually
       went into the stand he couldn't get through. His way
       got blocked.

    Q. Into the stand? - A. Yes, into the stand and I never
       realised until I was going up the stairs that he
       wasn't with me and that is when I went and had a look
       over and that is when I actually saw him. I borrowed
       a ticket and come down and got him in with me.
    Q. Where were you when you got separated from him? - A.
       Actually going into the stands.
    Q. What do you mean by the stands? - A. The actual
       stairway up to the stands.

    Q. Had he gone down the tunnel with you then? - A. Yes,
       he must have done.

    Q. And came back out with you? - A. Yes, he must.have
       done.

    Q. So you shouted down to him and arranged to meet him
       in the concourse area? - A. Yes, that is right.
    Q. You saw the big gate opened by the Policeman with his
       back to the gate. You have told us that? - A. Can I
       just say something now?

    Q. Certainly? - A. When I gave my statement, right, it
       was a question and answer statement. I had things to
       say there what weren't even asked of him. When I
       went to that thingy, I was expecting to write a big
       statement out and I was going to go on about
       different things, how they shouldn't have them side
       things on the side because they....

    Q.        THE CORONER:   We do not want to hear that. - A.
         But what I am saying is, I am looking here, right,



H
                                                                 30
                                                       T . E . CULLY


         and there is people. I am saying one thing, right,
         my lad must have gone down the tunnel with me. If I
         would have wrote a statement at the actual time this
B        would have been in it, you know what I mean? I am
         going back now over two years and things are actually
         coming back to me.

    Q.        MR. PAYNEs Mr. Cully, just do your best to
         answer the questions, and that is all we really need
         your help for please on the particular points? This
         is a particular point I would be grateful if you can
         help about if you can. I am just setting you up to
         bring you to the question that I want to ask? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. You saw the Policeman with his back to the concertina
       gate and he pushed the gate open? - A. Yes, he walked
       sideways with the gate.

    Q. Describe what you saw then please? - A. A rush come
       through.

    Q. A rush of what? Give plenty of information because
       we have to rely on people's evidence? - A. What it
       was is, like, I was right virtually behind the gate
       because I will tell you what I was watching. I was
       watching people actually coming over the top.
    Q. Over the top of what? - A. Over the top of the
       turnstiles. There was a crush outside and you
       couldn't move. What they were doing was actually one
       lad, as he jumped down, a Policewoman got him and
       tried to throw him back out again. Then not long
       after that, that is when the actual door was open but
       there was people coming over the top. They were on
       the top of the thingy waving tickets, "We have got
       tickets", you know what I mean? There was others, I
       don't know, you know what I mean, but when they were
       jumping down some of them were getting pulled and
       thrown back out and then other ones. The next thing
       the gate opened and that is when a great big rush
       come through. That is when I said to my lad, I got
       hold of my lad and I actually....

    Q. Just a minute, sorry. There is a lot of coughing.
       You said to your lad? - A. Come on and that is when I
       actually pulled him towards the other gate to go up
       into the stands.

    Q. How did you get over to that gate? - A. I actually
       run.

    Q. You and your lad ran to the gate? - A. Yes.




H
                                                               31

                                                     T . E . CULLY


    Q. The stewards were running ahead of you? - A. No, the
       stewards were already in the gate. What it was there
       was no stewards on the outside. On the first one
B      when I got in there was a Policeman and a load of
       stewards. On the second one there was about six
       stewards and all they were interested was stopping
       people getting into the stands who never had a ticket
       and they just pulled the gate, like a gate, and one
       was open to let you in and there was all stewards
       behind it and it was like in half, sort of thing.
       There were two gates, they opened out like that and
       they actually pulled it shut- They were like behind
       it and they had hold of the gate actually pulling it
       and I had to pull it open to get in.
    Q. While you and your son were running across and then
       getting through those gates, what was the crowd doing
       that had rushed in through the gate? - A. It just ran
       straight down the tunnel.
    Q. Then you went up into the stand? - A. Yes.

    Q. You went back to your original place at the far left
       hand end? - A. Yes.
    Q. You did not particularly look down into the terrace
       below you? - A. No.
    Q. To take a particular interest in what was happening
       there? - A. No.
    Q. That is quite right, is it not? -A. Yes.
    Q. You waited for the kick-off? - A. Yes.
    Q. When was the first time you realised that something
       had gone dreadfully wrong? - A. When they started
       coming over the top on to the pitch and even then it
       never hit me, as I say, until they started giving all
       that out on the pitch.
    Q. When you saw that crowd come rushing in and rush into
       the tunnel, did you think that anything was going to
       happen? - A. No, no. It is not the sort of thing
       that I would, sort of, think about, you know what I
       mean. I knew that I had been down that tunnel and I
       knew there was no way I was going to rush back down
       it, you know what I mean, because I knew there was no
       way you could get on to the thingy at the other end.
       It is just the thingy. Usually people find their own
       way and if there was no barriers in the middle of
       that thingy, that ground, that is what would have
       happened. Everyone would have moved sideways and
       there would have been no crush at all because



H
                                              T . E . CULLY


everyone would have just sideways•   It happens every
day at football matches.




         /Q. You are a very experienced football.
                                           T.   E.   CULLY


You are a very experienced football supporter
obviously from what you have said? - A. Yes.

It never crossed your mind that that crowd coming
rushing through the gate was going to cause a terrible
crush causing deaths in those pens, did it? - A. Well,
I never knew that on the other side of it, like, you
couldn't move, you know what I mean.

          Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Mr. Cully, the impression that I had when I was
listening to your evidence for the first time was that
you realised that your lad was not with you when you
got out onto the terrace at the end of the tunnel? -
A. I actually came back. Even now it only hit me -
right - when I was sitting here thinking about it that
he wasn't there. Now I might have walked down the
tunnel and saw him when I came back but I know that I
tried to get him on the stands with me - right - and I
couldn't. There was an Officer there, there were a
couple of other people and I went up there and he
wasn't with me. When I turned round halfway up the
stairs he wasn't there, so I thought, 'He'll come
through in a minute'. I waited and he never came
through.

So had he been with you when you had gone down the
tunnel then, the first time, gone through the gates?
Had he gone through the turnstile with you? - A. I
wouldn't like to say "Yes" and I wouldn't like to say
"No ".

You would not like to say "Yes" or "No" as to whether
he was with you when you went down the tunnel? - A.
That is what I am saying

You would not like to say he was with you when you
came out of the tunnel again? - A. Yes, he was
obviously with me then. There is just a complete
block of walking down that tunnel. I remember getting
down to the bottom. It is just something I haven't
even thought about. He probably was with me because
he went to the match with me, do you understand? He
has walked down the tunnel with me and then come back
out again, because he was with me when I went to get
on the stands.

But you got into the West Stand and saw him somewhere
below you on the terraces to the side of you? - A.
Yes, that is right.

And you do not know when you had separated from him? -
A. Yes, going up into the stands. At the back of the
                                             T.   E.   CULLY


concourse - right - you have got the tunnel and the
first thing you do when you come into the ground is go
and get yourself a place. So I walked down the
tunnel.

With your boy? - A. Probably, yes. That is what I am
saying. He was with me when I was at the stand, so he
was probably with me when I walked down the tunnel.

When you   got to the terrace the first time, the words
that you   used were that you shoved someone aside so
that you   could get a place, one of these big fellows
in front   of him, is that right? - A. Probably then.

Did your lad follow you then, you having made a room
for him? - A. To me the end of that tunnel - right - I
walked down the tunnel, saw that it was not on, you
know what I mean, I couldn't do nothing. There was no
place for me down that tunnel so I came back out again
and went sideways. There was a woman Officer on the
side gate there and I walked through that gate and
tried to get in them stands. I probably said
something like, "Come on, we're not staying here,
we'll go back again".

You probably said that, but at the end of the day, Mr.
Cully, what you are having to say to us at this moment
in time is that you cannot honestly tell us whether
the lad was with you. He probably might have been
with you but you cannot say, going down the tunnel and
going onto the terrace, whether he was definitely
there? - A. I never went onto the terrace. I actually
walked to the back of the thingy, saw the crowds -
right? You couldn't move then at half-past 2, you
couldn't get in there.

You did a little bit more than that. You just pushed
past them, did you not, to see what was then the
situation? - A. Yes, but that is it, you obviously do.
You don't just stop dead. You try to make your way in.

Let us go back to the part that we then know that the
two of you were together, or just before that. You
had gone up the steps into the West Stand? - A. That
is right, yes.

There were stewards at the top of those steps checking
people for tickets? - A. No, there were about six
stewards and a Police Officer at the bottom.

At the bottom? - A. Yes.

But you were able to push past them with other people,
not having a ticket, and get up into the stand? - A.
                                                              35

                                                  T.   E.   CULLY


     We came back through the gate. That was the only way
     I could see out. There was nowhere else to go so I
     went in there. I never actually came out of that
     tunnel to actually bunk into the stands. I just went
     through that gate, saw that entrance and went up.

Q.   Whatever your intention may have been, the fact is
      that you did not have a ticket for the West Stand, did
     you? - A. No.

Q.   You got past the stewards and the Police Officer
     without having a ticket? - A. Yes.

Q.   You then got   up into the West Stand? - A. Correct.

Q.   You then saw your lad? - A. Yes.

Q.   And you borrowed two ticket stubs? - A. Two ticket
     stubs, yes.

Q.   So that you could go and get your lad and bring him
     back up? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q.   You went down, having called for your lad, and met him
     around the concourse? - A. Yes.

Q.   At that time the gate opened? - A. Yes.

Q.   Why did you not stand your ground at the gate? - A.
      Because I was going to get back into the stands.
      There was a rush came through.

Q.   If you had stood your ground when that gate opened,
      the odds are that you would have got trampled on,
      would you not? You were not going to stand there with
      all that crowd rushing through the gate? - A. I wasn't
      going to stand there, but I wouldn't say I would have
      got run over. There was a rush came through and I
      just headed straight for them stands, and that is
      where I had to get back on.

Q.   You grabbed hold of your lad and ran away from that
      rush through? - A. Yes.

Q.   Because you did not want to stand there with that rush
      coming through and you possibly get yourself into some
      bother with it? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q.   You then came back to the stand, the West Stand, where
      you had been before? - A. Yes, but I went up the
      actual opposite entrance.

Q.   Although the stewards were trying to hold the doors
      closed, you managed to pull the door open? - A. Yes.
                                                             36

                                                 T.   E.   CULLY


     They were actually closing it when I got there and I
     probably got my foot in, you know what I mean, and
     pushed it open and threw ray lad in then.

Q.   Did anybody else follow you in? - A. I don't think so.
      I think I was the last who actually got up them stands
      there.
Q.   So it was clear to you what the stewards were trying
      to do apparently in closing the doors, but you decided
      that you were going to pull them open and get you and
      your lad in? - A. Yes.
Q.   With the two stubs which you had borrowed from
     somebody else? - A. Yes, that is right.
                 Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q.   Mr. Cully, you were asked, for what it is worth (and I
     do not mean that unkindly) your opinion by my learned
     friend Mr. Payne, the gentleman who asked you
     questions before the gentleman here, as to what you
     thought about the people going down the tunnel and
     whether you thought that that would cause crushing and
     injuries on the terrace. You were asked for your
     opinion about that, do you remember? - A. Yes.

Q.   I want to investigate the facts which were available
     to you to assess your opinion, and I do not again mean
     this unkindly.
          MR. PAYNE: As a matter of fact, I did not ask
     him for his opinion; I asked him what he thought at
     the time.
          THE CORONER: I think that that is pretty close to
     an opinion. I was tempted to stop you actually, Mr.
     Payne, and I think Mr. King is entitled to ask some
     questions on that.
           MR. PAYNE: Sir, if Mr. King is entitled to ask
      this question, and I do not say he is not --

          THE CORONER: I do not know what he is going to
     ask yet, but I am sure he is entitled to ask some
     questions.
          MR. PAYNE: If he is entitled to give the witness
     a lot more information, then this raises an important
     matter which has come up earlier at this Inquest
     because there are many occasions when I would have
     liked to do that with other witnesses, but I have been
     stopped, and this is an important point.  I would like
                                                       37

                                           T.   E.   CULLY


to do it. I do not mind if Mr. King does this, but I
should be allowed to do the same.

     MR. KING: My own view is I was quite surprised
when my learned friend asked this witness what he
thought himself at the time would be the effect of the
people going down the tunnel. I say that, sir,
because one of the issues in the case is not what this
witness thought, but what was obvious to people in
charge. That is the issue, not what this witness
thought. However, my learned friend chose apparently
to make a point to ask this ordinary fan what he
thought. Now this ordinary fan said - and we can
remember his answer - that he himself did not think,
with all these people going down the tunnel, that
there would be crushing and injury in the pen. That
answer, sir, may or may not affect the Jury, I do not
know, but I am entitled to see the basis upon which he
was forming that view because he was not the man in
charge of the game.

     THE CORONER: Both of you are right, of course.
Mr. Payne is right because this issue arose in the
case of Mr. Motson. Mr. Payne, in fact, attempted to
put exactly the same thing. I do not mean the same
questions, but it was in the same context. So I agree
with Mr. Payne that I stopped him with regard to Mr.
Motson, and maybe I am not entirely consistent because
I am actually inclined to allow you to ask some
questions in regard to this because I think all that
it is necessary to do is to establish whether this
chap's opinion on that matter has got any probative,
to use Mr. Isaacs's word, value.

     MR. KING: I could not agree more, sir. I, in
fact, am not going to put facts to him. I am going to
discover whether he was in a position to know about
certain things, whatever the state of those things
were.

     MR. PAYNE: It should be appreciated that the
questions themselves amount to an argument. It is
putting forward a series of propositions. I do not
mind that it should be done and I do not want to stop
Mr. King, but I should be allowed to do the same.

     MR. KING: I am sorry, sir, my learned friend
cannot have his cake and eat it. He chose to make a
point to this witness, I did not, and he now wishes he
did not, I am quite sure.

    MR. PAYNE:   Not in the least.
                                                            38

                                                T.   E.   CULLY


          THE CORONER: No, I do not think that is right.
     I think Mr. Payne is making a different point and I
     think the point he is making is valid. I think I
     distinguish a difference between the two witnesses. In
     my mind I can see a difference between the two
     witnesses. Go ahead with the questions. If I feel
     that you are trespassing beyond what I think is
     proper, then I will stop you because I agree with Mr.
     Payne, and indeed with you, that there has got to be
     fairness in the level of questions, and I am sure you
     would not argue with that.

          MR. KING: I agree.
Q.   Mr. Cully, I am sorry to ask you basic things but it
     is important in view of the question you were asked
     earlier. You are an ordinary football supporter, are
     you not? - A. Yes.

Q.   You were not yourself in charge on the day at the
     Hillsborough game of anything to do with crowd safety,
     were you? - A. No.

Q.   You yourself were not in a position to look at any
     video cameras, or video screens or anything, were you?
     - A. No.

Q.   On the day? - A. On the day.

Q.   You were not in a position to know what the state of
     the crowd was outside the gate which was opened before
     it was opened, were you? - A. No.

Q.   You did not know and could not make any assessment    of
     how many people were likely to come in, could you?    -
     A. No.

Q.   You were not in a position to know the state of the
     p e n --

          MR. PAYNE: This is exactly what I knew was going
     to happen. He is making very cogent argument. I can
     do exactly the same with the tap on the shoulder
     point. This is what I want to pursue and you have
     stopped me and I have accepted your ruling, but I can
     pursue the tap on the shoulder point with a whole
     series of questions to a witness. I know what I will
     get. I will get the answer, "No, I don't know", but
     it is the series of questions which mounts a very
     persuasive case. Mr. King can make a persuasive case
     by asking these questions, but if he does, then I
     should be allowed to do the same on the tap on the
     shoulder.
                                                            39

                                                T.   E.   CULLY


          MR. KING: Sir, what I am endeavouring to do is
     my learned friend chose to ask the question he did, I
     did not invite him to ask it. He chose to get an
     opinion of the witness.

          THE CORONER: But Mr. Payne is not complaining
     about that. What he is complaining about is that I
     appear to be favouring you by allowing you to put a
     series of questions which I have prevented him from
     putting when we had a witness where you had put a
     question which, rightly or wrongly --

          MR. KING: Sir, I could argue the point
     considerably as to the distinction.

          THE CORONER: I think the point is you do not need
     to go on any further. All we need, and all you need,
     and all the Jury need, is this witness has expressed
     an opinion as to he did not think there would be any
     harm in people going down, or words to that effect.
     You are asking him did he know what it was like down
     there, basically.

          MR. KING: I am trying to discover whether he had
     any - and I do not mean this unkindly to the witness
     because it is unfair really to put him through this -
     basis of fact in order to make the judgment which my
     learned friend is seeking to ask of him, that is all.

          THE CORONER: Why do you not ask him that
     directly?

          MR. KING: I am doing it by seeking the basis of
     the facts.
Q.   I only ask you one more fact, Mr. Cully, if I may.
     You yourself did not know what was the state of the
     central pens at the precise moment that the people
     went down the tunnel, did you? - A. I had no idea
     whatsoever.

Q.   What you can help us on though, let me move to
     something else, is that at 2.30 your own experience
     was that the terrace looked, I suppose you would say
     jolly packed, very packed, full, whatever word you
     use? - A. Chocka.

Q.   We have heard that before, and that was at 2.30? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   You can also tell us that at the time that the gate
     was opened? - A. Yes.

Q.   You saw one Policeman because he was opening it - yes?
     - A. Yes.
                                                                        40

                                                          T.   E.   CULLY


Q.   Did y o u see any other Policemen? - A. Yes, there was a
     Policewoman, as I say, by the door.     I saw her before.

Q.   One Policewoman.      An y other Police? - A.     I don't      think
     so.

Q.   The only thing you saw w h i c h in any wa y was preventing
     those people going where they wanted to go was what
     the stewards were doing to stop them going in the
     stands, that is all you saw? — A. There were no
     stewards there.  There wa s . n o one at the back.

Q.   I am sorry, I m i s u n d e r s t o o d you r evidence. - A. The
     actual stewards ran in the gate and pulled it behind
     them.

Q.   I unde r s t a n d that. That   is the only step you saw
     which was taken, to your        eyes, to stop the people
     going where they wanted?        - A. Yes.  They were just
     opening the gate and the        others rushed in.




                                     /Q.   I am interested
                                              T.   E.   CULLY


I am interested, though, in this answer you gave.    One
of the reasons you thought yourself that nothing was
going to happen with these people going on to the terrace
was you said that people usually find their own way if
they move sideways? - A. That is what always happens.

Do you mean by that moving sideways across the width of
the terrace? - A. I mean everywhere.    You get to
Wembley.  I have been to Wembley.    You go up the stairs
and there are great blocks.   People climb over them
because they are only low down.   Everywhere you go
before they invented these things, and always before it
is straightforward to stop people going where they don t
want them to.

The things you mean before they invented the radial
fences, that is what you are talking about? - A. Before
there was any fencing there was no problem whatsoever.

The simple point you are making to us is that you thought
people would be able to move sideways across the width of
the terrace as opposed to coming up against a fence? - A.
Yes.   I thought there would have been some way where the
gate was open and you could go sideways.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Cully, you said you arrived at the entrance of
Leppings Lane at 2.00 pm? - A. Yes.

What were conditions like at that time? - A. The place to
go into the stands was pretty empty.   What amazed me was
where you actually go into the Leppings Lane end where
the crush happened, it was actually harder to get in
there than what it was in the stands.   What amazed me is
when I got inside I only had to walk through the gate and
I was behind the actual - where they come into the
stands.   What I couldn't understand is why they were
only using those set of gates when they could have used
the lot.

What I am interested in is the state of affairs outside
at 2.00 pm, not inside.   What was it like at the
turnstiles at 2.00 pm? - A. The ones actually getting
into Leppings Lane were just getting crowded.

I have got down in my notes that you said you saw a gate
opening.   Is that correct? - A. I actually saw people^
getting thrown out of a gate once they got in.    What it
was, after we got in, as we were getting in people were
climbing over.   As they were climbing over they were
getting thrown back out again through the side gate.
The Police horse was still at the side then.   He was
still actually controlling where you walked down.    It
A                                                                  42

                                                       T.   E.   CULLY


       was only afterwards that you realised that people started
       coming in those gates and the whole lot was...   When I
       got there they weren't out on the road.   They were just
       pushing trying to get into this actual Leppings Lane end.
B
    Q. At that time at 2.00 pm you saw people getting over the
       turnstiles, you say? - A. Over the top, over the wall.
       People were actually against the walls.    People were
       actually standing on other people's shoulders to get over
       because they were stuck against the wall.     Even those
       three Police Officers were stuck against the wall.     As I
       have just realised, they were there to search us as we
       were going through, but they couldn't.

    Q. You said the Police Officers at that time were also
       crushed up against the wall, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. How sure are you of your time?   You had been for a few
       drinks earlier.   Did you look at your watch at that
       time? - A. No.

    Q. Or later when you arrived... - A. You are saying a few
       drinks.    You are talking about two cans.     I am a
       newsagent.    I get up at seven every morning.    I go out
       once a week on a Sunday night.    I drink two and a half
       pints on a Sunday night.    The ale had no effect
       whatsoever on me. We are talking about a few cans. We
       are talking about getting there at maybe quarters past
       one. Meeting up with a couple of friends.      Heading down
       towards the stands.    Then we are talking about queuing
       up and getting in.    Now we could be talking about
       quarter past two - in between two and quarter past - and
       once we got in there I walked down the thingy and that
       was it.

    Q. Could the time have been much later than you say? - A.
       No, not really.   When I was there...   Where the white
       van is, when I got there that white van could still have
       got in there.   The Police horse was there and it was
       empty.   Now I have seen on television where you have got
       people stuck at those gates and everything.   I was stuck
       against those railings.   I had to duck down under those
       railings and move back along a bit and get back in again.
       There was still room to actually move outside those
       railings when I was there, so that is why I am saying
       around two o'clock because the queue never started
       happening until after I was inside.   It was tight then
       but once I got in that is when I saw more people coming
       over the top and that is a sign you can't move outside
       against the wall.

    Q. It is just the time that is bothering me.   It seems from
       other evidence that it could have been later, but you are
       quite sure it was about two o'clock? - A. As you are




H
A                                                                43

                                                     T.   E.   CULLY


       saying, it could have been, but to me at the time this is
       what it felt like to me.   It felt like it was round two
       o'clock when I walked down and that was it.   I was
       inside the ground.   I actually walked down the tunnel.
B      I was able to walk upstairs.   I was able to find my son.
       I was able to get back in and I was able to still be
       there when the match started.

    Q. You said you were running, so you were going quite
       quickly? - A. Where?

    Q. At one stage you said you ran with your son.   Do you
       think time could have been... - A. No, I was inside the
       ground.   When the actual gate opened which I don't know
       whether it actually caused the crush.   It might have
       been opened again after that but the actual one I saw, I
       just ran towards that gate to get in that gate to get
       back up in the stand, so I was actually inside when I
       ran.

    Q. Now where you saw the six stewards and the Police
       Officer, which gate are we talking about?   I am not
       really very clear myself. - A. We are talking of the one
       where you go through the opening.   You come in the
       Leppings Lane stands.   You walk through the wall.
       There is an opening there and there was a Policewoman by
       that.   Then you go to the right, turn right and that is
       the entrance.

    Q. Did you come in turnstiles 1 to 16 to go through the gap
       in the wall?

            THE CORONER:   No, he didn't.   He said the
       opposite.   He said he came through A to G, went down the
       tunnel, came back out of the tunnel, turned to go through
       the gap in the wall and up into the stands.

            MRS. McBRIEN:      Yes, thank you.

            THE CORONER:   Mr. Russell, I think we will have a
       break now.   We will break now for a quarter of an hour.
       Mr. Cully, do not discuss the evidence with anybody and
       then come back in quarter of an hour and we will finish.

                            (Short adjournment)

                   Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

    Q. When you went up into the stand you didn't have to show a
       ticket stub of any ticket you had   This is when you went
       up into the stand the first time? - A. No.




H
                                              T.   E.   CULLY


The reason you were giving for that, as I understand your
evidence, is there were a lot of other supporters also
going up into the stand at the same time? - A. Yes.

You certainly didn't have a ticket which normally would
have permitted you to go into the stand, is that right? -
A. No.

You don't know whether, or to what extent, tne other
people going up into the stand at the same time did or
did not have tickets for the stand? - A. That's right.

Had you ever known tickets to be dropped or thrown down
from the stand on to the terraces for spectators on the
terraces to pick up and then make their way and get a
better vantage point in the stand? - A. Yes.

In what circumstances have you known that happen? - A. It
happens most of the time at big matches like this.   In
the likes of Liverpool it can't happen because once you
are inside they make sure your ticket is off you and
everything, but at the likes of big games - it has
happened at Wembley.   I have seen people throwing
tickets out of the windows.   Where there is a crush and
they go in.   People get pushed through the turnstiles
and they still have their ticket with them and that has
happened at Wembley a couple of times, where people have
thrown their tickets back out of the window and people
who haven't got tickets outside actually get in with the
same tickets.

Is that throwing tickets back outside the turnstiles so
that people can come in using the tickets? - A. Actually
at Wembley - I have never seen it anywhere else.   Well,
I have.   I have seen it at other places where people
have thrown their tickets back out.  I remember now it
happened at York when Liverpool played them in the cup.
We have played them twice in alternative years and it has
happened there as well where people have actually got
into the ground and they still had their tickets with
them.   They have somehow passed them out under a gate or
around a gate.

This is to get spectators outside the ground who don't
have tickets, into the ground by, as it were, recycling
the ticket because it hasn't been checked? -A. Yes.
They don't charge them for it.   It is like...

It is a service provided by spectators to other
spectators? - A. Well, it is not a service.   If you have
actually got into the ground and you still have your
ticket and there was another Liverpool supporter outside
you would try and get him in.   You wouldn t just leave
it at that.
                                                             45
                                                 T.   E.   CULLY


Q. Have you ever had ticket stubs thrown down from stand
   areas, where you sit, down on to terrace areas for people
   on terrace areas to move from terrace areas up into the
   stand areas with the benefit of those stubs? -A. Yes.

Q. In what circumstances have you known that happen? - A.
   Well, I did it, didn't I?   I never actually threw it
   down but if I wanted to do so I could have done.   A
   friend gave me his stub and I went back down and brought
   my lad back up.

Q. In your experience is that quite a common practice where
   the layout of the ground permits it?   Where you have got
   terracing underneath the stand area? - A. Yes.    Let's
   face it, if you walk into a ground and you have got a
   good view you don't want to move, but if you are like my
   lad, he couldn't see, you always try and get yourself a
   better viewpoint.   You won't just stand there.    If you
   can't see - you are not going to pay X amount.of pounds
   for a ticket to just stand there so you can't see a
   match.   You will always try and get a better space.
   When you have got that place you stay there.    You don't
   intentionally go anywhere to actually bunk in anywhere,
   or anything.   You get your ticket.   You go to watch the
   match and you try and get the best place you can.    It is
   not worth going to a football match to stand at the back
   of the stands and then go home.   You go to watch the
   match.

Q. You say you saw Liverpool supporters coming over the
   turnstiles, climbing over the top? - A. No, actually over
   the wall.   Not over where you go in the turnstiles, over
   the wall what the turnstiles are based in.

Q. Over the wall of the turnstiles? - A. Yes, and on to the
   roof of the turnstiles.

Q. And getting in without going through the turnstiles? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Is that a phenomenon you have ever known before? - A. I
   have known it at Wembley lots of times but they have put
   big wires across and everything now.

Q. They have put wires across to stop that practice? - A.
   Yes.




       Q. But before that that was
                                             T.   E.   CULLY


But before that, that was a common practice at
Wembley?- A. Yes. It is not a common practice. People
have got tickets but once you got there and you get
crushed, you actually try and get over, and that is
when they start getting people pushing each other out.
It happened in the stands when the crush was happening,
people were actually pushing people up into the stands.

You have been going to football matches for a very long
time. You told us about these instances of side
stepping the normal entry procedure, either into the
ground or from the terracing into the stands? - A. Yes.

In your enormous experience can you help me with this,
do you know of any other procedures that are used by
football supporters to gain access to the ground when
they don't have tickets? - A. Basically, giving money
in, trying to bribe someone in, things like that.
Where you actually walk up to a turnstile, you have a
little bit of ticket and you put the ticket down with
money there, sometimes they take it, sometimes they
don't.  It happens at Wembley quite a lot, because it
was even publicised where a lot of them got done. The
Police had a crack down on it, it was there every year.

Other than offering money you can't immediately recall
any tried and tested system of getting into a ground
without a ticket? - A. There is no tried and tested
way. There is a way to get in everywhere if you are
really persistent enough to get in anyway, you know
what I mean? It is one of those things. There is a
lot of games where, when I was younger, I have been and
there was no ticket but I have managed to see the game.

Well, we won't go into that.   Thank you very much. '

               Further by THE CORONER

Mr. Cully, I just want to ask you one other thing,
because the point that Mrs. McBrien was making about
the time is that on the whole we have been told that
the crowding and the crushing you have described
occurred rather later than what you have said. I want
to show you a photograph, and have a look at tell me
whether it was like this when you were there. It is
305. - A. You are saying this was at 3.05?

No, that is the number of the photograph.  I will tell
you what time it was in a moment. I want you to look
at the photograph and tell me whether that photograph
is something like what it was when you were there, or
was it better or worse? - A. That is amazing, because I
am on the photograph.
                                                                  47

                                                     T.    E.   CULLY


Q. You are joking. - A. I'm not, I'm actually on the
   photograph!  (Laughter) There I am, I've even got my
   glasses on.

0. So you were there at that time. This photograph is
   timed 14.31, that is half-past-2, one minute after, but
   it is actually exactly on half-past-2 because there is
   a mistake on the camera, so you can identify yourself
   on that photograph? - A. Yes.

0. At half-past-2. So you would accept that as being
   right? - A. Yes, that's what I'm saying, and I accept
   that I went in the ground.

          THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, that will help you,
     won't it?

          MRS. McBRIEN:    It certainly will, sir.        Thank you
     very much.

          THE CORONER:   I think we ought to mark this young
     man on the photograph. Can we do another acetate and
     get him to mark it?

0. Ue are going to get you to put a little cross on that
   photograph to show us where you are, because we won't
   remember later on. - A. Yes.

          Is there anything else you want to ask him?

          MR. MANNING:   It may not be a legal definition
     but the witness has about four or five, or perhaps six
     times, talked about "bunking in".

          THE CORONER:    Are you saying you want him to
     define that?

          MR. MANNING:   I would like him to tell me,
     please, what that means, with your permission?

Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, what do you mean by that? - A.
     I think I know what you mean, but tell me what you
     mean? - A. Getting in without tickets or whatever, you
     know wnat I mean? Not necessarily not paying, actually
     getting inside. If you haven't got a ticket you bunk
     in.

0. Thank you. If you look at that photograph you can see
   where you are, can't you? - A. Yes.

Q. Have you any idea, looking at that photograph, how much
   longer it took you to get through? - A. Not long
   because that is where I said you could actually see
                                                                 48

                                                     T.   E.   CULLY


        people thingying, and that is where I went through this
        first turnstile here.

        I can't hear you. - A. I actually went through this
        first turnstile here, next door to the gate. If you
        work it out, my timing, what I said, I walked in, I
        walked down the tunnel.

        Yes, it will work, I am sure. It depends how long you
        stayed chatting to your friends. Mr. Cully, if you
        would walk up to the acetate we will get you to put a
        cross on it. (The witness marked himself on Exhibit
        C438)          --------------- -- -------------------

        I would like to thank you for coming. You have given
        us, I think, quite a lot of interesting information,
        and I am very much obliged to you. Thank you.

                 NIGEL FRANK ABBOTT Called (Sworn)

                           By THE CORONER
0 . You are Nigel Frank Abbott, right? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it still                       ? - A . No, I have actually
   moved.  It is now                       in Redcar.

Q. But you used to be in Middlesborough, is that right? -
   A. Yes, indeed.

Q. In Cleveland.  I think I am right in saying that you
   had managed to get a ticket for the match on 15th April
   1989? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think a couple of days before or something like that?
   - A. No, I actually got it on the day of the match.

Q. Did you get it on the day of the match, sorry. That is
   right, yes, you hoped to get it and you came up to
   Sheffield by train? - A. That is right.

Q. You did not have a ticket when you were on the train,
   that is right, isn't it?- A. That is correct.
0. Did you come by yourself or did you come with friends?
   - A. I came alone.
0   .   I think I am right in saying that you thought you would
        be able t o g e t in, because the previous year, in 1988,
        when you didn't attend, you didn't go to that match,
        but your brothers went? - A. Yes, they did.

        I think one of them came without a ticket and did not
        have any particular difficulty getting one, is that
                                             N. F. ABBOTT


right? - A. Originally he was going to go to the match
to take ray other brother, but when he got there tickets
were going round and so he decided to actually go and
watch the match.

I see, so you assumed that if he could do   it in1988
you could do it in 1989? - A. Yes.

I think you arrived in Sheffield at about 10-to-l, I
think? - A. Ouarter-to-1, around that time.

You got off the train. Were you wearing football gear,
if that is the right word? - A;.Well, I had a jacket
and a Liverpool shirt and a Liverpool scarf on.

So you were recognisable as a fan? - A. Yes.

And also as a Liverpool fan, I presume? - A. That is
right, yes.

Is it right that you were steered, directed, whichever
word you wish to use? - A. They had two blackboards as
you came down the stairs. One said, "Nottingham Forest
fans , one said, "Liverpool fans", and arrows pointing
which way you had to go.

You just followed those arrows? - A.   That is right.

They led you onto coaches? - A. Onto   the buses, yes.

You got on, you had to pay a pound, I think, for the
round trip? - A. That is right.

The coaches were accompanied, I think, by a Police
Officer? - A. That is right, yes.

But is it correct that you were not actually asked
whether you had a ticket? - A. Never, no.

They didn't ask you? - A. Not at all, no.

So you finished up at the ground, or near the ground,
where the bus dropped you off? - A. That isright,  yes.

That would be about 1.15, is that right? - A. Yes, that
is right.

You then started looking for a ticket? - A. Yes.

Where you dropped off? Were you dropped off right
outside the entrance or ...? - A. No, the bus, I think,
dropped us off, not on the Leppings Lane, but on the
road that crosses Leppings Lane, on the bottom side.
                                              N. F. ABBOTT


Off the plan, yes, so you had to walk downhill? - A.
That is right.

That is Middlewood Road. So you then did that, you
actually walked towards the ground? - A. That is right.

I think you came to a little bridge, is that right? -
A. That is right.

Was it there that you were hoping to be able to get
your ticket? - A. Yes, up and down that road, outside
the entrances.

Is that what you did, did you walk up and down the
road? What did you say, "Spares?", or what? - A. Yes,
"Any spares, mate?", you know.

You saw a number of other people attempting    this as
well? - A. That is right.

Can you put a number on it? - A. During the course of
the afternoon before the match I must have seen 20 or
30 people.

These are 20 or 30 different people, I take it? - A.
Yes.

I think after about an hour, hour-and-a-half .... - A.
Yes.

You eventually caught sight of somebody who was selling
some tickets? - A. Well, he had just bought one for £15
so I offered him £20 and he seemed to like the deal, so
I managed to get a ticket.

You mean you offered him more than he was asking? - A.
No. I was offering more than he --- he had just bought
it off somebody else for £15.

I see. - A. I said, "I'll give you £20 for it".

So you didn't buy it directly, it was a second sale on?
- A. Through a distributor really.

Whilst you were perambulating up and down, did you stay
fairly close to the ground or did you stray further
afield? - A. To start off with I was just walking up
and down Leppings Lane, but there didn't seem to be
many around.  I kept asking people and they said, or on
one occasion on that road you mentioned, further out of
Sheffield, they said there was a pub and there were
some guys in there who were selling one, so I had a
wander down that way, but by the time I got there the
pub was actually shut, if it was ever open that is, so
                                                       51

                                              N. F. ABBOTT


   I walked back, again asking people for tickets, but had
   no joy until about 20-to.

Q. 20-to-3? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you moved on at any point by Police Officers? - A.
   Well, I was walking anyway.  I wasn't just standing in
   one place I was actually walking up and down, finding
   out where the flow of fans was, and actually trying to
   beat anybody else who was behind me by walking on.




                /0. Were you trying
                                                N. F. ABBOTT


Were you trying to walk against the flow or with the
flow? - A. Yes, generally. You walk towards where
people are coming.

Because that is where you meet more, of course? - A.
Yes.

So you were not actually held up    or stopped or
tripped? - A. No. At one time I     did start hearing
Policemen actually moving on, if    you had not got a
ticket, or, if you had a ticket,    to actually go into
the ground.

Tell me what actually happened then? - A. I think it
was a Police Officer on a horse just riding up and
down Leppings Lane telling people, "If you have got a
ticket, go into the ground" and moving people on who
were just stood doing nothing or asking for spares.
Was he moving those people who were asking for spares
away from the ground or towards it? Can you remember
that? - A. I cannot remember, sir.
He was doing something? - A. Yes.

You having fortunately got your ticket, it was a
terrace I take it? - A. Yes, that is right.
You went back to Leppings Lane and you say you got
your ticket at about twenty to? - A. Yes, that is
right because I looked at my watch to see how long
before kick-off.

Were you near Leppings Lane at that time by chance or
were you a long way away? - A. I managed to get the
ticket over the junction of Leppings Lane and the
other road. I keep forgetting what it is called. It
is just over the other side. It must be an extension
of Leppings Lane as it goes over the junction.
So it was not too far? - A. No.

You then went back to Leppings Lane? - A. That is
right.

When you got to Leppings Lane, what did you see? - A.
There was a lot of people massed not only at the
turnstiles but actually outside the gates. I am not
sure at that time whether all the gates were open.
These are the set of blue gates, not the concertina
gates in the turnstiles, but actually the blue gates
in front.

The perimeter gates? - A. Yes.
                                                               53

                                                    N. F. ABBOTT



    Q. They look like park gates? - A. Indeed. There was a
       lot of people all waiting there to actually go in. I
B      asked a Policeman where I had to go in with this
       ticket because it wasn't particularly clear on the
       ticket where it was supposed to be for and he pointed
       to Entrance B and so I moved down by the railings
       which are on the edge of the river bank to get to the
       gates there to get towards the turnstiles and by the
       time I got there they were just shutting as I arrived
       in the crowd and then there was lots of people around
       and the gates were then shut.
    Q. By the time you got to the gates the gates were
       actually shut in front of you? - A. Yes, but not
       immediately in front of me.
    Q. You could not get any further? - A. That is right.
    Q. When that was happening, what was the situation like
       in the crowd in which you were? Never mind the other
D      bits of the crowd but it is the crowd surrounding you
       that I am concerned with? - A. Surrounding me, it was
       all right on my right hand side because there was the
       fence and the river and on the left hand side it was
       very packed indeed and there was a Policeman on a
       horse in there. The horse could not go anywhere
       because there was that many people around him and
       there was no chance of moving whilst those gates were
       shut and people were still coming in at the back as
       well.

    Q. Were you, I mean personally, annoyed that those gates
       were shut at that point? - A. Not annoyed. I was
       just worried in case I missed the start of the match.
    Q. Did you appreciate why? Did you know why they had
       been shut? - A. Yes, you could see the amount of
       people waiting to get into the turnstiles and it was
       apparent that no many people were actually going
       through as quickly as they should do.
    Q. How many rows back would you say you were from those
       gates? In other words, how many people were ahead of
       you is what I am trying to get at? - A. Eventually I
       was stood at the right hand perimeter gates.
    Q. What I am trying to find out is how many rows back
       were you when the gates were shut and when you
       realised the reason for their being shut? - A. Not
       many people actually.

    Q. Not many people you say? - A. I believe the left hand
       gates of the two must have been the only ones that



H
                                                               54
                                                     N. F. ABBOTT


       were open because everybody seemed to be crowding in
       front of that gate waiting for that to open rather
       than the right hand gate.
B
    Q. Which is where you were? - A. Yes, and so I ended up
       after a couple of minutes actually stood by the right
       hand gates.

    Q. In other words, you are saying there was a
       differential across the entrance? - A. Yes.
    Q. Were you crushed in that position outside those
       gates? - A. No.

    Q. What happened then? - A. At one point the gate, this
       being the left hand perimeter gate, was opened.
    Q. The left one, not the one you were outside? - A. Not
       the one I was at and people started to flow through
       and moving to where the turnstiles were. Then it was
       seen that too many people had gone through and so
D      they shut them again. So I started edging over to
       the left hand side because I thought that was the
       only way I was going to get in. Then a little later
       on, two or three minutes maybe, the concertina gate
       was opened and all the people that were waiting to
       get through the turnstiles swung round and actually
       went through the concertina gate.
    Q. What about the people outside the perimeter gates?
       What happened to those people? - A. We just thought,
       "Oh, it is a matter of time before they open these
       gates and we will all get in". Again after a couple
       of minutes those gates opened.

    Q. Did the people stand still or did they push forward
       at that point so far as you remember? - A. Against
       the gates?

    Q. Yes, against the gates? - A. There wasn't much room
       to move anyway and so I think they were just waiting
       there for the gates to open.
    Q. You were outside the perimeter gates when the
       concertina gates opened. How often did you see them
       open? - A. I only ever saw them physically open once.
       By that time I had started moving to the left hand
       side and then it was somewhat blocked off but I never
       saw them shut and then opened again and so I couldn't
       really say.

    Q. You were out there for a little while, outside those
       perimeter gates? - A. Yes.
                                              N. F. ABBOTT


Did you see a Police Land Rover? - A. Not that I can
think of, no.

Did you hear any tannoy messages? - A. No, sir.
Did you hear any loudspeaker messages from the side
or the back of you? - A. Not at all, no.
You have mentioned the Police horse which was not
actually that close to you from what I gather? - A.
Yes, it was.

It was? - A. It was, yes, at one point.
How many Police horses did you actually see when you
were outside those perimeter gates? - A. There was
more than one but I am not sure. It might be two or
three.

Do you remember whether they were longways on or
broadways on? - A. The one that I was particularly
close to is actually pointed out away from the ground
and out on towards Leppings Lane.
Facing the crowd, in other words? - A. Yes, that is
right, sir.

Did you see a Police cordon of horses? That is what
I am trying to find out, did you see that? - A. Not
at all, no.

You did not see it. I am interested in what you saw
and what you heard? - A. Yes, of course.
It does not matter whether there was one or not.
That is neither here nor there. It was just a
question of what you saw.

You, in fact, entered through the big blue concertina
gate, is that right? - A. Yes, that is right.
When you went through it was wide open.   Would that
be fair to say that? - A. Yes.

When you entered that gate it sounds to me as if you
could not have been one of the first through because
you were still at the perimeter gates? - A. The
second time the perimeter gates opened I sort of
filtered in at the side.
It is very difficult this question; you would not
place yourself at the apex of the crowd, at the front
of the crowd? - A. No, I was sort of at the perimeter
on the right hand side.
                                             N. F. ABBOTT



Would you be in the middle of the people going
through or near the tail end? - A. I would have said
more in the middle.
Did you have any problems getting in? Were you able
to walk in normally or did you rush? - A. Through the
perimeter gate?

Through that concertina gate? - A. The concertina
gate, yes, I walked through with no problem.
Did you have any problems walking through the
perimeter gate or were you carried through or what? -
A. I had to push my way in and then you get carried
along.

In other words, once you have got through the
perimeter gate it eased off a bit? - A. Yes, it did.
By the time you got to the concertina gate you were
able to enter completely normally? - A. That is
right.

Was this the first time you had been to the ground? -
A. Yes.

You headed for the tunnel? - A. Yes, that is right.
Is that because you saw a sign over it, because
everybody else was going to it, or what was the
reason? - A. As you come through the concertina gate
the tunnel is directly in front of you and I couldn't
see any signs saying to go one way or the other and I
could see the pitch and so I went straight down the
tunnel.

Do you know what time it was when you went? - A. The
only time I can put on it is based on seeing two
players warming up and that normally happens a couple
of minutes before the match starts, these particular
two players.

When did you see those players? Was it actually as
you went into the tunnel? - A. Just before I got to
the tunnel I could see Bruce Grobbelaar, the
goalkeeper from about there downwards and Peter
Beardsley who is a bit smaller...

A little bit less of him? - A. A bit more of him.
You could see both of them and they were in the pre­
match warm up? - A. Yes.
                                             N. F. ABBOTT


The game had not started yet? - A. Not yet, no.
You were on the concourse side of the tunnel? - A.
Just about to enter the tunnel.
You then enter the tunnel? - A. Yes.
What was it like in the tunnel? - A. It wasn't very
crowded. I was on the right hand side of the tunnel
going down. There was a group of about five or six
blokes in front of me walking down the left hand side
of the tunnel but there were no problems with any
crowds in the tunnel at all.

You had what I would describe as free passage? - A.
Yes.

You were not pushed or shoved or anything. You were
able to walk through, were you? - A. Yes, that is
right.

When you got to the exit of the tunnel was the entry
on to the terrace as clear or was there a crowd there
at that time? - A. There was a crowd and the crowd
was all in front of you as you come to the end of the
tunnel. There must have been about five or six feet
of free space for people coming on to the terrace
before they hit the people in front of them.
I am sorry, I missed that. Could you just repeat
that? - A. As you came out of the tunnel there is
about five or six feet in an arc from the centre of
the tunnel that people were not standing in? - A. Are
you saying that you were actually able to exit from
the tunnel on to the terrace? - A. Yes.
Without having to push your way through anybody? - A.
Yes, that is right.

Once you were on to the terrace then there was a
crowd? - A. Yes.
I think you were aiming to get to the right side of
the goal, were you not? I think that is where you
would have liked to have been? - A. Yes. The place
where I came out of the tunnel was roughly
whereabouts I normally stand when I go and see
Liverpool anyway but as I was stood there it was
very, very packed indeed and so I attempted to move
away from the centre of the goal on to the side of
the terrace. I did not know at that time that there
was actually railings preventing you from moving more
than a certain distance.
                                               N. F. ABBOTT


Just describe then what happened? - A. As I was
moving sideways across the terrace there was a
movement of these people at which time I was turned
around and ended up facing backwards at the people in
the seats above the terrace and pushed down the
terrace. At the end of that passage I was leaning
across the crush barrier that broke.
Backward you mean? - A. Backward with one leg hitched
over the top of the barrier and my right leg on the
floor and facing that way.

Was that because you had just attempted to get over
the barrier to put it in between you? - A. No.
Or is that just how you finished up? - A. That is
right, yes.

You are saying that you had your back to the pitch? -
A. Yes.

Completely or were you able to see anything on the
pitch at all? - A. I could just see over my left
shoulder, just out of my peripheral vision if you
like, things that were happening on the pitch.
All I am trying to find out is when you first came
against the barrier and you first came against it, do
you understand? - A. Yes.
Was the match in play or were they still warming
up? - A. I think it was just about to start.
What makes you think that? - A. At the   time, our
captain and defender, Alan Hanson, had   been out with
injury and he returned for this match.    I remember
looking over my shoulder and thinking,   "Alan Hanson
is playing" and he was just about to -   he had just
finished the niceties with the referee   - come back
and let the game kick-off.

It was obviously very crowded from what you have
said? - A. Certainly.
Are you conveying to me at that point you still
expected the match to go on? - A. Yes.
Then what happened? - A. When the movement of people
started I thought it was just normal. It happens in
crowds. If somebody goes for a c o m e r and reaches
over, a sort of domino effect, if you like. I
expected people to sort of stand back on their feet
and move back a bit and the pressure to go. In fact,
                                          N. F. ABBOTT


it did not. There was just a continual pressure of
people pushing forward and in about three minutes into
the game there was a big cheer and there was more
pressure then. I didn't know why at the time, but one
of the players had actually hit the bar, but there was
no easing off of the pressure for quite a while.

What I want you to do is to go back again now because
I want you to think about the barrier. - A. Right.

You have told me that when you came against the
barrier you thought the game was just on the point of
kicking off, right? - A. Yes.

What I want you to do now is to describe to me what
you felt happen to the barrier, if you can remember
that is. - A. I knew I was up against the barrier and,
as I say, there was continual pressure. Then it
seemed that the barrier just crumpled. It did not
give with a force that would throw everybody forward
because there was as much resistance in front as there
was behind. So it just seemed to crumple. At the
time I thought, 'Well, it can't have crumpled, they're
not supposed to do that', but afterwards I realised
that it had actually just collapsed.

So you did not actually see it collapse? - A. No.

Or did not feel it collapse? - A. No, I felt it
collapse, but something up here said, 'No, it's not
supposed to'.

Yes. When you say you felt it collapse, do you mean
that it completely collapsed onto the ground, or that
it merely moved forward? - A. The resistance against
my leg, my leg was over it, it just eased because the
barrier actually went down. It didn't fall to the
floor, it just moved downwards.

You can show us which one it was in a moment, you can
show us exactly where you were on a little plan. But
can you now relate this to the events on the field as
far as you are able? - A. No, I couldn't honestly say
what time that was.

You have mentioned the big cheer? - A. Yes.

Is it your impression that this happened before that
big cheer, at the big cheer, or after the big cheer? -
A. I couldn't honestly say.

Fair enough. I would rather you did not say if you
cannot, because it just confuses us if you guess. I
want to just take you a little bit further on. As you
                                                            60

                                                N. F. ABBOTT

     say, when the barrier apparently gave things actually
     eased a little bit for you personally, did they not? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   At least for a time? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you make your way, or were you carried forward
     towards the perimeter fence? - A. No. I managed to
     turn because the barrier was no longer stopping my
     left leg turning round.    So I turned   mybody     butmy
     leg was   still trapped by some of the   people,    andmaybe
     the barrier, and by that time there were less people
     in front of me then. There were still people there
     but not as many as there was before, but I couldn't
     move any further forward because my leg was trapped.
     When myleg was not trapped any longer,   then I was
     able to   try and get over the fence.

Q.   I think, in fact, at the point when you approached the
     fence you mentioned there was a ladder or something,
     is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.   Tell me about that just briefly? - A. They had had a
     ladder leaning against the railings.

Q.   On the outside, I take it? - A. On the outside, yes,
     with Police standing on the top trying to pull people
     out. So I jumped on the railings to try and climb
     over, and a Policewoman was trying to pull me over and
     succeeded only in pulling my jacket off because I had
     no strength left, so Ihad to give that up and
     actually try and get out through the back of the
     terrace.

Q.   I want you to go into that in a little bit more detail
     because what you are saying is that you could see the
     ladder? - A. Yes.

Q.   Here was a way of escape as far as you were concerned?
     - A. Yes.

Q.   You were on the inside, of course? - A. Yes.

Q.   So you were trying to climb up the railings on the
     inside? - A. Yes.

Q.   Was it a Policeman or a Policewoman? — A. A
     Policewoman and she was joined by a Policeman.

Q.   She lent over and tried to grab you, is that right? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   Why did she only get your jacket? Was it that it
     slipped off, or what, or that she could not hold you?
                                              N. F. ABBOTT


 - A. It was a very warm day and it just slid off and
 she couldn't hold me because she was getting no help
 from me. She was trying to pull me over on her own
 strength.

 So you fell back into the pen, or did you climb back
 in? - A. I was holding onto the cage trying to climb
 over, but I couldn't make it any more so I jumped
 back.

 Into the pen? - A. Yes.

Can you recollect whether at that point the match was
still in play, or had it finished then? - A. It had
stopped by then.

I think that must be right actually,   t   A. Yes.

Because you were near the ladder, were you not? - A.
Yes.

Then in due course you actually went out through that
little gate, is that right? No, you went out through
the tunnel, did you not? - A. I got out through the
back, yes. It never occurred to me to go through the
gate.

Perhaps it was a wise thing, but you re-assessed the
situation and discovered that you could get back? - A.
Yes.

And you went out through the tunnel and I am pleased
to see that you are here, which is good. Did you ever
get your jacket back? - A. I didn't really want it
back.

It did not really matter. - A. No.

I want to go back to a little bit earlier, because
when you were in the crowd you were against the
barrier, and so on. I think you heard people call out
for gates to be opened and things of that nature, is
that right? - A. Yes.

Was that when you were up against the barrier earlier?
- A. Yes. That was when I was over the barrier, yes.

You were facing the wrong way, were you not? - A. Yes.

Could you see the gate, as a matter of interest? - A.
Yes.

You could actually see it, you were not so far round?
- A. No. I still managed to look over my shoulder.
                                                           62

                                                N. F. ABBOTT


Q.   What was the position with regard to that as far as
     you recollect? - A. The first time I saw it there was
     a mass of people in front of it. You could see the
     top of it and you could see that also people were
     overlapped, if you like, over the front of it so that
     by pulling it open people can't just go through
     because there were so many people there. So it took
     quite a job to get the gate open in the first place.
     Then when they did, people didn't just pull through
     because they were in a nice line. They were all
     overlapped so one person had to squeeze out and then
     another person had to squeeze out so it was very, very
     slow to get the people out.

Q.   Would you say this was happening shortly after you
     arrived at the barrier, or later? Are you able to
     S3y?  If you are not able to say then say, "I don't
     know"? - A. Not with any degree of certainty.

Q.   I do not want to put words into your mouth so you must
     correct me, but it sounds to me as if, although you
     were very crushed and you were being moved by the
     crowd, even when you were up against the barrier with
     your leg across in the first instance, at that point
     you still were not in fear for your life, would that
     be right? - A. Not immediately.

Q.   How long did it take you before you realised, "My
     goodness me, this is something I don't want to see
     again"? - A. It must have been a minute really, and it
     was a minute in which chest movements were very
     restricted. You were panting like a dog in the sun
     and after a minute nothing seemed to be changing and
     you start worrying about it, so it was within a
     minute. Normally you would expect the crowd to abate,
     but it did not.

Q.   Was it during that minute that you heard the cries for
     people to open the gate, or was it at an earlier
     stage? - A. No, it was --

Q.   Around then? - A. Yes.

Q.   I think you also saw Police Officers, or people, maybe
     fans, on the fence shouting or indicating to move
     back? - A. Yes.

Q.   When was that? - A. From the very beginning the Police
     were saying, "Move back", and then after two or three
     minutes it actually became a lot more serious, saying
      "Move back, people are dying down here".
                                                           63

                                               N. F. ABBOTT


Q.   They actually said that, did they? - A. Yes. There
     was one Policeman who was on the fence shouting that
     that I could hear.

Q.   Could you tell whether that was still when the match
     was in play or later, or do you not know? - A. I
     couldn't tell.

Q.   Show us on a plan where you were against this barrier,
     please. (Witness marks plan)

          MSS. PERKINS:   C439.

Q*        THE CORONER: I think I have already asked you,
     you were not there in 1988, were you? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER: I am sure some of these ladies and
     gentlemen may want to ask you questions, but I think
     we ought to pause and have our lunch. I am sorry
     about that, but we have to stop otherwise we all
     collapse you see.   2 o'clock shall we say, if you
     would be good enough to be back. Because you are
     still on oath and giving evidence, technically you
     have not left the witness box, so you must not discuss
     the evidence with other people. That does not mean to
     say you are not allowed to talk to people, but just do
     not talk about the evidence.

                   (Luncheon Adjournment)
                                             N.   F.   ABBOTT


             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE;

Mr, Abbott, when you saw the Police trying to get the
people to go along to the ground, you know, I suppose,
that the Police for got no power to make people go
anywhere when they are out on the street? - A. I am
sorry?
Did you know the Police have no power to make people go
along to the ground? - A. No, I didn't.

But they were trying to get them anyway to go along to
the ground? - A. Yes.

About what time was that? - A. Really from about - it is
difficult to say - round two o'clock onwards, really.

There is just one other topic I would like to ask you
about.   You have described seeing the perimeter gates
being kept closed. - A. Yes.

Did it appear to you the reason for that was to try to
give the people inside the perimeter gates time to get
through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Without being crushed from the people behind? - A. Yes.

The attempt was successful for a little while? - A. I am
not sure.   They actually ended up opening the concertina
gate.   From where I was standing it looked as if to let
the people who could not get in because there were so
many people there, through that way.

            Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING;

Were you conscious of the Police trying to hold those
perimeter gates closed? - A. Physically?

Yes. - A. Yes.

Were you aware that physically they were pushed open by
the crowd on the other side? - A. No.

Did it appear to you that the crowd was trying to push
them open?   Could you see that at all? - A. I was near
the right hand set of gates, right against them, and it
didn't appear to me that they were actually pushed open
physically.

When you got in through the concertina gates, was that in
a big stream? - A. Yes, there were a fair few going
through.
                                              N.   F.   ABBOTT


You said you had to sort of shoulder or push your way to
get through the gates themselves? - A. That was to get
through the perimeter gates, not the concertina gates.

When you went through the concertina gates that is when
you were towards the middle of the numbers of people
going through? - A. Yes.

When you were standing on the terrace itself, you
described how you ended up on the barrier, in an awkward
position obviously, but said that at that stage you were
not frightened or scared because you thought there would
be an easing off? - A. Yes.

Is that your experience that there tends to be a push or
a crush just before kick-off time and that afterwards it
then eases off and you have some room? - A. Not
necessarily before kick-off time.   There are sort of
surges throughout the game when action moves down to one
end of the field, or depending which end of the field you
are at.   People who are smaller always tend to go on
tiptoes to try and see what is happening immediately
below them.

Were you conscious of the fact that whether willingly or
unwillingly you had ended up in a position which was
almost directly behind the goal, which is most often the
most crowded area? - A. It was unfortunate I had ended up
there but I saw no other way to actually get on to the
terracing.   Having said that, that was where I would
have liked to have stood in an optimum situation.

Knowing that it is, in many people's eyes, the place to
stand? - A. Yes.   It is where I am used to standing.
It might not be the best place to stand but it is where I
like to stand.

It may be the best in terms of the view but it may not be
such a good position in terms of the numbers of people
there and the crush that comes, as opposed to the side? -
A. Yes.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

It is obviously the place where most people want to
stand, from your experience? - A. Yes, nearest the goals.
You can see the ball hit the back of the net.

So if one was trying to think through where people are
likely to be, that isthe most obvious place they are
likely to go to? - A. Yes.

Can I just go back?   Were you aware this was acapacity
game?   I am sure you probably were. - A. Yes.
A                                                                     66

                                                         N.   F.   ABBOTT


    Q. And that there was going to be some 54,000 people
       attending? - A. Yes.

    Q. For how long were you looking for a ticket, walking up
B      and down, would you say? ~ A. About an hour and a half,
       just under.
    Q.    During that period you were conscious   of between twenty
         or thirty people doing a similar sort    of thing to you? -
         A. Yes.
    Q. You were covering a reasonable distance, I suppose? - A.
       Yes.
    Q. I am just trying to put it in comparison to the 54,000
       tickets which were sold for the game.   You can say you
       came across twenty to thirty people in that time who were
       looking for tickets? - A. Yes.
    Q.    By the time you got to the Leppings Lane end, round the
         turnstiles area, you said they were just shutting the
         perimeter gate just as you were arriving? - A. Not at the
D        turnstiles.    At the crowd outside the perimeter gates.

    Q. As you were arriving at the crowd outside the perimeter
       gates, they were just shutting the perimeter gates? - A.
       Yes.
    Q. What was it like on the other side of that perimeter
       gate, between the perimeter gate and the turnstile, at
       the time when you saw them just shutting... - A. Very
       congested.
    Q. Very congested.   Your evidence is that at the time they
       were starting to shut the perimeter gate it was already
       very congested inside? -A. Yes.

    Q. Then can I ask you this: you, of course, were on the
       outside of the perimeter gate.   You gave evidence there
       was no chance of moving within the crowd you were in
       outside the perimeter gates.   Is that right? - A. It was
       very congested.
    Q. You weren't able to move particularly? - A. Not a great
       distance.
    Q. However, you said that people were still joining from
       behind? - A. Yes.
    Q. That was the problem?   People from behind you were
       joining a crowd which was getting bigger and bigger? - A.
       Yes.




H
                                             N.   F.   ABBOTT


You at the front near the perimeter gate couldn't do
anything about it? - A. No.
You have told my learned friend Mr. Manning - the
gentleman who has just asked you questions - that you
went through that concertina gate in the middle of a
crowd, a stream of people.   You also told us you walked
through the gate, is that right? - A. Yes.
Is that true of the people around you, that you were all
walking through in a stream? - A. Yes.

I don't know if you have had a chance to see a video of
the scene as people entered through the concertina gate?
You haven’t seen that? - A. I have seen flashes on the
news.
But you haven't actually seen it.   So be it.   Your
evidence is that the stream of people were walking
through and once you got on the other side it wasn t as
if there was a riotous situation on the other side? - A.
No, people were stopping and turning around looking for
their friends.   I immediately was looking for how to get
on to the terrace.
You therefore headed for the tunnel because that was the
only way you could see of getting in? - A. Yes.

When you got to the end of the tunnel, that is, when you
were entering the terrace, you indicated that you knew
the position you would have liked to have been in? - A.
Yes.
Which, as I understand it, wasn't far from the exit point
of the tunnel? - A. No, it wouldn't have been, no.

It would be to the right and just a little down, would
it? - A. Yes.

You didn't in fact stay there? - A. No.

What made you decide you didn't want to stay there? - A.
There were just far too many people there around where I
had chosen to stand initially.

Did it seem to you unusual and not what you were
expecting at that time? -A. Well, I didn t go with any
expectations of the size of the crowd anyway.

So be it.   You described it to us as very, very packed?
- A. Yes.

As you were moving sideways it was in that movement
sideways you were turned round? - A. Yes.
                                                                    68

                                                       N.   F.   ABBOTT


    Q. Now being turned round must have been unusual for you? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. You were trapped? -   A. Yes.
B
    Q. That must have been   an unusual experience in a crowd for
       you?   That wasn't something which you would willingly
       have wanted? - A. No.

    Q. This is before you had reached the barrier because I
       think you have been turned round as you get to the
       barrier? - A. Yes.

    Q. Is your leg trapped   as you arrive atthe barrier? - A. I
       was moving backwards and was sort of half way covered by
       the barrier so when I came to where the barrier was half
       of me was trapped by it and the other half wasn't.

    Q. You must have been a little concerned at that stage for
       your own safety, to be in that position? - A. I just
       thought it was unusual but it would abate.

D   Q. But if it hadn't abated you would be in difficulty? - A.
       Yes, I was.
    Q. I think you told us you didn't know about the railings
       which went down the side of the terraces. So when
       Mr. Manning was asking you about the crowd easing off,
       that would be you expecting the crowd to ease sideways
       across the terrace? - A. Yes.

    Q. Of course, that wasn't possible if there were fences? -
       A. No.

    Q. Can I just go further forward to where you remember the
       Police indicating that the crowd should move back.   What
       was your position at that stage? - A. I was still with my
       back turned to the pitch and over the railing.

    Q. Were you in a position to move back? - A. No.

    Q. Why? - A. There were thousands of people between me and
       moving that way.

    Q. Although you were in a position in your position - and
       you have indicated on the plan - to hear what the Police
       were saying, you were in no position to respond to it? -
       A. No.




H
                                                          69
                                               N. F. ABBOTT


Q. That was not because you were being disobedient, it was
   just you could not respond to it? - A. No.

Q. You can't help us obviously on what the position was
   with regard to people hearing or seeing the Police at
   the back of the pen? - A. No.

             Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

Q. When you were outside the perimeter gates were you
   conscious it was getting closer and closer to kick-off?
   - A. Yes. Actually, there were several people around
   me and I also thought that maybe they would actually
   postpone the kick-off or put the kick-off back ten
   minutes or so, to allow the people outside to go in.

Q. So you thought it was getting that close to kick-off,
   it was obvious to you .... - A. Yes, and people were
   actually asking the Policemen if they could put the
   kick-off back at all.

0. I suppose there was a natural anxiety at that point,
   people getting worried about not seeing the kick-off? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You were there to see a match and enjoy yourself? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You used a very interesting expression when you were
   actually outside these gates, and the concertina gate
   opened, and you said that people swarmed round from the
   area inside the turnstiles? - A. Swung round - I said
   swung.

Q. Swung, sorry. Did they all go round in a, quite a lot
   of people going down in a mass .... - A. Well, the
   people that were already, were by the railing which
   divides the turnstiles, those were obviously the people
   nearest enough to actually just walk straight through,
   but I think the people at the back, near the railings
   where they were waiting to go through the turnstiles,
   obviously saw these people moving through and obviously
   joined on at the back.

Q. Did they look as if they were moving fairly rapidly? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Moving rapidly .... - A. They were going through the
   gate, a good volume.

0. So they are going through and then the impression is
   the perimeter gates where you were standing, they open
   and more people come in? - A. That is right.
                                                          70
                                                N. F. ABBOTT


Q. By now we are getting closer and closer to kick-off, I
   assume? - A. Yes.

Q. When you went through Gate C, the concertina gate we
   call Gate C, the first thing you see is a tunnel? - A.
   Yes.

0. You also said, I think, "We could see the pitch", as
   you go through? - A. Yes.

0. It also happened to be the place where you wouldn't
   normally want to stand, not knowing what the condition
   of the terrace was on the other-side? - A. I couldn't
   tell from where I was coming through the gates, but you
   could see that the pitch was beyond there and that is
   where you were supposed to go.

0. Would it be fair to say it is a reasonable guess if you
   have got a tunnel in the middle of the stand, which it
   plainly was, it was going to come out at the middle of
   that terrace end, is that fair? - A. Yes.

Q. At this time that was the most obvious and the shortest
   route to the   place that you wanted to get to?- A.That
   was the only   route I could see.

Q. But it was also the most obvious and the shortest
   route? - A. Yes.

0.   To the place where you wanted to get to? - A. Yes.

Q.   We^have just agreed it was very close to kick-off at
     this point? - A. Three or four minutes but it is only a
     matter of yards, so there was no need to rush, knowing
     you were going to get there, in plenty .of. time.

0.    I am not suggesting -- what I am saying is it is the
     most obvious and shortest route to where you wanted to
     go, at a time close to kick-off? - A. Yes.

                Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

Q. Having entered the terrace you have told us that you
   started to make your way across the terrace, as I
   understand it, to the right? - A. To the right, yes.

Q. Then you described being moved forward. Am I rightin
   thinking you   don't know the precise direction    from
   which the force moving you forward came? - A. Yes. It
   was coming from behind me, and it could have been from
   anywhere behind me.

Q. And the effect of that force behind you was to push you
   through the crowd? - A. The whole crowd moved as one.
                                                          71

                                                 N. F. ABBOTT


     It wasn't just me that was pushed through the middle
     and we parted ways, it was actually there was
     physically lots of people all moving in the same
     direction, being physically moved in the same direction
     I was.

Q. But you came up against the barrier? - A. Yes.

Q. There was no one else in front of you against the
   barrier? - A. Well, yes.

Q. Well was there? - A. No.    There was people in front of
     me but ....

0.   The barrier was against you, I think you said itwas
     against your back? - A. Yes, it  was, half against me.

0. So you were in actual contact with the barrier? - A.
   Yes.

0. Before you were moved forward by the force which moved
   you forward, there were a considerable number of people
   between you and that barrier? - A. Yes.

0. So to this extent is this right, the effect of the
   movement forward was that you, regardless of other
   people who.were being pushed forward with you, were
   pushed through the crowd so that you came up against
   the barrier?  - A. Okay, yes.

Q.   You told us,  and I hope I wrote your words down
     correctly, that it was very, very slow getting people
     out. This was afterwards when the .... - A. Through
     the front gate.

0. Through the gate, that is right? - A. Yes, because of
   the number of people pressing against the gate.

Q. We have heard from a previous witness, we have heard a
   previous witness use the phrase, "There was a tangle of
   bodies in front of the gate". - A. It depends, well,
   yes, but in terms of that I would use the word bodies
   if it was --- I would use people rather than bodies as
   3 • •• •

Q. A tangle of people and/or bodies? - A. Yes.

0. And it was a slow process to evacuate that tangle
   through the narrow gate? - A. Yes.

Q. It was a case of taking people one at a time,
   extricating them from the tangle? - A. Yes.
                                                               7?

                                                N. F. ABBOTT


0. A process which you recognise was a very slow one?- A.
   Yes.

Q. Thank you very much.

                    Further by THE CORONER

Q. I want to ask you one more question to do with when you
   were outside the perimeter gate. Mr. King asked you
   whether you were in a group and that you couldn't move
   within that group. Now, I had the impression that when
   I was asking you a similar series of questions that
   first of all you said that there was no pressure on the
   perimeter gate which you were against? - A. Right,
   which was the right hand one.

0. Yes, is that correct? - A. Yes.

Q. Secondly, my impression was that in the area in which
   you were the pressure on you from the crowd was not
   that great. You weren't .... - A. Initially, but when
   I moved, when I saw that probably the middle gate or
   the left hand gate was going to be the one through
   which we went to, I angled my way in there. I wasn't
   crushed up against the gate, but you were stood there
   and ....

Q. At that point you could have moved away? - A. I could
   have moved away.

0. At that point you could have moved away? - A. I could
   nave moved away.

Q.   What you are saying is that when the left hand gate was
     open you could see that that was a better way of
     getting in? - A. Yes.

Q. Presumably, you assumed, and when you moved into that
   part of the crowd, it was then that you were enveloped
   and caught, so to speak? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is right? - A. Yes.

Q.   It may, of course, have been that other people   didthe
     same as you? - A. Right.

Q. I thought I had got it right, but I wanted to be sure.
   Thank you very much.

          MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, we had spectacular success
     this morning, perhaps unintentionally, but can I ask
     the witness to look at a particular photograph.  It may
     be he is in it.
                                                            73

                                                 N. F. ABBOTT


          THE CORONER:   Yes, which one is it.

          HR. RUSSELL:   I am afraid it has not been
     exhibited yet so if he can identify himself first, and
     if he can see himself then ....

          THE CORONER:   Then we will use it.

          MR. RUSSELL:   It is PR1/10A.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Just have a look and see if you can
     find yourself. - A. Yes, that’s me.

0. You can identify yourself, can you? - A. The haircut is
   slightly different, but yes.

          THE CORONER:   Can we give it a number, please?

          MR. BEECHEY:   The number, sir, is C440.

0.        THE CORONER:    Is he pointing at the right spot? -
     A. Yes.




                   MR. RUSSELL:   Can I first
                                                  N. F. ABBOTT


     MR. RUSSELL: Can I first of all ask Sergeant
Griffiths if he has identified the same person that I
pointed out to Sergeant Griffiths.

Q.      THE CORONER:     Come and show us. Just put a mark
     on it, would you? - A. Yes.

Q. The cross marks your position, is that right? - A.
   Yes.

             Further Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL;
Q.       MR. RUSSELL: Looking at that photograph, does
     that help you in relation to when you felt the
     barrier give? - A. That was certainly before.
Q. That was before? - A. That was before I came on the
   barrier.

Q. When that photograph you... - A. Facing forward.
Q. You were still being propelled or making your way
   down towards the front of the pen? - A. Right.
Q. We can see in that photograph that the gate at the
   front of the pen is already   open? -    A. Yes.
Q.Police Officers are in that gate, do you see    that
   there? - A. Yes.

Q. We know that this photograph was taken at two minutes
   past three. - A. Right.

Q. With that information can you help the Court as to
   how long after that you came up against the barrier,
   given that that was your position at two minutes past
   three? - A. Certainly within the next minute or so.
Q. Within the next minute or so? - A. Yes.
Q. At that stage you are facing towards the pitch, are
   you not? - A. Yes.

Q.          THE CORONER: This photograph throws your
     timings a little bit. That is no complaint? - A. No.
     THE CORONER:    Is the two minutes corrected, Mr.
Russell?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Two minutes corrected.   It is 03 on the
photograph.
                                               N. F. ABBOTT


               Further bv THE CORONER:

     THE CORONER:   If it is two minutes after three
the match has been in play for at least two minutes.
The match had started just before three? - A. Yes.
You say that it took you a minute or so to get down
to the barrier from that position so far as you
remember? - A. Yes.

What about the rest of it, the giving way of the
barrier, would you say that was about another minute
after that? That is more or less what you said? - A.
That might have been a couple of minutes after
actually I arrived at the barrier there.
It shows you how difficult it is to get the times
right? - A. It is. My arms were rather constricted
then.

Thank you very much.    I am very much obliged to you.
- A. Thank you.

              RICHARD JOHN GREAVES Sworn
                      Bv THE CORONER:
You are Richard John Greaves, are you? - A. Yes.
Can you give your address please? - A.
Where is that? - A.

You are a supporter of Liverpool? - A. Yes.

You managed to get a ticket for the match before the
day, that is right, is it not? - A. That is right.
I think you travelled in a football special coach,
did you not? - A. That is right.

Do you know what time you left? - A. Half ten on the
Saturday morning.

What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. It was
about one o'clock.

I think it was a company called Sunspan who ran the
coaches, is that right? - A. Yes.
So far as you were concerned you had an uneventful
journey? - A. No, it was okay.
                                            R. J. GREAVES


The coach was stopped by Police, was it not? - A.
Yes, about eight miles from the ground after we came
off the motorway.

They checked for what? - A. They were checking for
alcohol and to see if everyone had a ticket.
Did everybody, in fact, have a ticket as a matter of
interest? - A. Yes.
You got to Sheffield at about 1 pm or thereabouts? -
A. That is right.

Having got here you went to the ground and you
stopped off at a place because you wanted to do some
other business, that is right, is it not? - A. That
is right.
You stayed in this particular place until about
quarter past two to twenty past two, something like
that? - A. That is right.

Then you continued on towards the ground? - A. That
is correct.

What time did you arrive at the ground? - A. About
twenty five past two.
About twenty five past two? - A. Yes.
I think I am right in saying there were quite a lot
of people there by then? - A. Yes, there were big
crowds then.

You joined the back of this crowd of people? - A.
That is right.

You were aiming to get through the turnstiles, is
that correct? - A. Correct.
I think you did eventually get up to the turnstiles,
is that right? - A. That is right.
Am I right in thinking there were still Police
Officers outside the turnstiles when you got there? -
A. There were Police Officers by the perimeter gate
but they were not giving any direction.
I am sorry? - A. They were not giving any direction
to anyone.

What were they doing, just standing there doing
nothing? - A. Yes.
                                                               77

                                                   R. J. GREAVES


    Q. Were the gates wide open or shut? - A. The gates were
       open.
B   Q. They were open when you got through. Then what? - A.
       Then when we got through the perimeter gate there
       were two Policemen on horses.
    Q. What were they doing? - A. Causing confusion really.
    Q. How many foot people did you see outside the
       perimeter gates? - A. I would not be able to put a
       number on it. I know there were Policemen about.
    Q. A fair number? - A. Yes.
    Q. Two mounted Officers who you did not think were
       helping? - A. No, they were trying to turn their
       horses round but there was not enough room to turn
       them round.

    Q. Which way were they facing when you first came in? -
D      A. I am sorry?
    Q. Which way were the horses facing when you first came
       in? - A. They were facing away from the ground.
    Q. They werewanting to turn to face into the ground, is
       that what you say? - A. That is right.

    Q. Are you saying they would have been better not there
       so far as you were concerned? - A. A lot of the
       supporters were telling them to try to form queues
       and to sort things out.
    Q. The supporters were saying to the Officers on their
       horses, "Try and form queues"? - A. That is right.
    Q. Are you saying the Officers were refusing to do that,
       unwilling to do it, incapable of doing it or unable
       to do it? - A. Incapable and unable I would say.
    Q. Incapable and unable. So they were inefficient and
       also not able to do it for what reason? - A. Because
       they had allowed so many people through the perimeter
       gate that you just could not move.
    Q. There were too many people there is what you are
       saying at that time? - A. That is right.
    Q. Your assessment was that they also did not know what
       they were doing? - A. No.
    Q. Pardon? - A. That is right, yes.




H
                                                                78

                                               R.   J.   GREAVES


Q.   I am interested in your comment that the supporters
     were saying to the Officers, "Form queues", that is
     what you said, is it not? - A. Right.

Q.   But does it follow then that the supporters realised
     what was needed? - A. Yes, because it was just a mass
     of people and there was no organisation at all.

Q.   The bit that puzzles me about that is are you saying
     that the supporters are unable to form a queue unless
     a Police Officer or somebody else tells them to do it?'
     - A. By the time I had actually got to the turnstile
     it was just a mass of people. So earlier on when it
     wasn't so packed perhaps the Police Officers should
     have made sure that proper queues were formed then.

Q.   You may be right, but what were you, you and the
     supporters who were telling the Police Officers to
     form queues, "Make us into queues", expecting them to
     do which you yourself could not do? - A. Just that we
     all just wanted them to do anything to relieve the
     pressure.

Q.   But you felt that what they were doing was not of any
     use? - A. That is right.

Q.   And there was nothing that you or any of the other
     supporters could have done for yourselves, you are
     saying, to help the situation? - A. Not once you were
     actually in that crowd.

Q.   So you were in the same situation as mounted Officers,
     in effect? - A. That is right.

Q.   We will move on. You got up to the turnstiles.       Did
     you go through a turnstile? - A. I did, yes.

Q.   Did you see any Police Officers just outside the
     turnstile area? - A. Yes, I think there was one on
     each gate.

Q.   What were they doing, if anything? - A. Very little
     really. They were just part of the crowd.

Q.   Were they able to search you at all, can you remember?
     - A. There were people being searched inside, but not
     outside.

Q.   Not outside? - A. No.

Q.   Because there were just too many people there, is that
     right? - A. It was too packed, yes.

Q.   You got through the turnstile - right? - A. Yes.
                                                                    79

                                                    R.    J.    GREAVES


Q.   You said that people were being searched.   Who was
      doing the searching? - A. Police Officers, I think.

Q.   How many did you see? - A. There again, I don't know.
      I wasn't actually searched myself, but other people
     were being searched.

Q.   You saw more than one, is that right? - A.          Yes.

Q.   But you cannot tell me now how many it was? - A. No.

Q.   You then went to the toilet, I believe, is          that right?
      - A. That is right.

Q.   Having been to the toilet you decided to go onto the
      terracing? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q.   Had you been to the ground before? - A. Yes, three
      times.

Q.   Were you there in 1988? - A. I was.
Q.   For the semi-final I mean? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q.   Were you on the terracing that year? - A. Yes.

Q.   Same place? - A. Yes, same   place.

Q.   We will come back to 1988.    When you went to go into
      the tunnel did you notice whether the big concertina
      gate was open or not? - A. I didn't notice, no.

Q.   You did not see it? -   A. I presume it wasn't.           I
      didn't notice.

Q.   You did not see anything anyway? - A.    No.

Q.   When you went into the tunnel,  was it free passage? -
     A. Yes, it was quite easy to walk down there.

Q.   You could get down there without much difficulty? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   When you got to the exit of the tunnel - you know what
      I mean by the exit, the other end in other words? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   Were you able to get out of the    tunnel without any
      difficulty onto the terracing?    - A. I was able to
      choose whether I went in Pen 3    or Pen 4, but once I
      had made that choice I couldn't   really have gone back.

Q.   So you were able to select left or right? - A. That is
      right.
                                         R.   J.   GREAVES


Which one did you choose? - A. I went to the right.

But once you had entered, things changed as far as you
were concerned? - A. Yes, because it started getting
more packed. I wouldn't have been able to get back
out.
When you got onto the terrace, just when you got on,
did you look to see what was going on on the pitch? -
A. Yes. When you get in you are constantly looking at
the pitch.
What was happening on the pitch at that point? - A.
Nothing that I can remember.

Nobody on the pitch? - A. No.   This is about 20-to/
quarter-to 3.
Could you remember at that point a beach ball being
knocked about? - A. No, not that I can remember.

Did you see that at all at any point? - A. No.

Or you do not remember at any rate? - A. I do not
remember, no.
Tell me then what happened. Tell me in your own words
what happened. - A. We took up a position in line with
the right-hand goal-post. Then we were okay there for
a bit, but there were still people coming in and there
was still a bit of movement in the crowd then. So we
decided to make our way to the right a little bit
while there was still movement there to move to the
right. Then we were probably in line with the 6-yard
box then, and then once we got there it became very
packed then and we could not move from there.

What I am trying to find out is what events were going
on on the pitch. Do you recollect the players being
announced? - A. I can, yes.

You remember that? - A. Yes.

Where were you when the players were being announced?
- A. I would have been in line with the 6-yard area by
then.

You had already moved by then to the 6-yard area? - A.
Yes.

It was at that point that you were very, very crowded,
is that right? - A. That is right.
                                                            81

                                              R.   J.   GREAVES


Q.   Can you remember players coming onto the pitch? - A.
     Yes, I can.
Q.   Do you remember the kick-off? - A. No, I didn't know
     the game was being played at all.

Q.   Did you see it end, or did you know the players had
     left the pitch? You did right at the end. - A. I knew
     the game had bean stopped. I did not actually see the
     players leave the pitch.
Q.   Then let us take it then when you moved over to the 6-
     yard line, and was it when you arrived there or just
     before that you heard the players being announced? -
     A. I wouldn't be able to put a time on it, but
     obviously you are listening for the team changes, so I
     can remember the team being announced.

Q.   You can or you cannot? - A. I can.

Q.   That is right, but what I am trying to find out is was
     that after you had actually taken up the position, or
     just as you were taking it up, or as you were going
     towards it? That is all I am trying to find out, if
     you can remember. If you cannot, it does not matter.
     - A. I would not be 100 per cent sure, but I would
     imagine I was already by the 6-yard line by then.

Q.   What did you feel it was like then at that point
     compared with, say, the 1988 match or any other major
     matches which you had been at? - A. I have always
     thought that was a bad ground. It always has been
     very packed, but you are just hoping that it will ease
     off once the match kicks off.

Q.   So what happened then, tell me. - A. My friend managed
     to get under a barrier because me and a couple of
     other lads were pushing against the barrier to try to
     create a bit of space by breathing in and he managed
      to squeeze down and I couldn't do that. So I tried to
     go over the top of the barrier and I got my leg
      trapped.

Q.   On the barrier? - A. Yes.

Q.   Sort of halfway over? - A. Yes, my right calf.

Q.   That was on the one side. A bit of you was in front
      and a bit of you was behind, is that what you are
      saying? - A. Yes.

Q.   What happened then? - A. I was just shouting for the
     lads behind and also for my friend to try to get my
                                                            82

                                              R.   J.   GREAVES


     leg free, which they managed to do, probably after
     about a minute.

Q.   They got you off it? - A. Yes, it seemed like a long
     time. Then we were probably about 10' from the
     dividing fence into Pen 2 and people in Pen 2 had
     their arms through the fence and were pushing people
     up. You couldn't have climbed over the fences as you
     would normally.

Q.   They were cupping their hands? - A. Yes, and you just .
      had to go up and then just fall over and people were
      catching you. As people were being dragged out like
      that, obviously you were being forced over to that
     way. You couldn't have made your way there, but as
      people were going out we gradually got nearer and
      nearer to that fence.

Q.   It created a little bit of room is what you are
      saying? - A. Yes.

Q.   Because as people got into Pen 2 there was a tiny bit
      of gap and you were able to edge your way that way? -
      A. Yes, slowly.

Q. Is that the way you actually got out, into Pen 2 in
    the end? - A. Yes, into Pen 2.

Q.   When this was happening, when people were going into
      Pen 2 and you were edging over, do you remember
      whether the game was in play? - A. I didn't know the
      game was taking place at all until I saw a few fans
      and a Police Officer on the pitch.

Q. I could not hear you. - A. I saw a Police Officer and
    a couple of fans on the pitch and they got it called
    off, but until then I wasn't aware that the game was
    being played.

Q.   You said you saw a Police Officer and a couple of fans
     on the pitch, and what else? I did not hear that last
     bit. - A. They were trying to get the game called off.

Q.   They were trying to get the game called off? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you see anybody or hear anybody shouting at the
     Police, or calling, making comments to the Police at
     any point? - A. Yes. There were fans on the railings
     shouting to the crowd, "Get back because there's
     people dying at the front", but we couldn't do
     anything about that, we couldn't move. No, nothing by
     the Police, no.
                                                            83

                                              R.   J.   GREAVES


Q.   In fact, what you are saying is that your realisation
     of the match was only when you saw people on the pitch
     and what looked like there might be some activity with
     regard to that from the people and the Police, is that
     right? - A. That was the first I could see of the
     pitch, yes.




                              /Q. You had been
                                                 R. J .   GREAVES


You had been there before        in 1988? - A. Yes.

Did you know about   the railing fences?     Thedividing
fences? -A. No.

But you had been on that same terrace? - A. I had.

Had you not noticed it? - A. I couldn't really remember
if they were there the year before or not.

If I asked you whether you knew there was a gate at the
back you wouldn't know? - A. I wouldn't know, no.

So you wouldn't know whether that would be open or shut
because you didn't see it anyway? - A. I didn't see one.

You didn't see the   little gate at the front,    I take    it? -
A. Only once I was   out on to the pitch.

But not while you were in the pen? - A. No.

By the time you got out it was open, wasn't it? - A. It
would have been by then.

So you can't help me about anything about that?  Not
from your own knowledge? - A. No. We got out of a gate
in pen 2 on to the pitch. I did see Police Officers
pushing people back in.

When did you see that? - A. That was when there were
other fans on the railings, trying to tell everyone to
get back and people were trying to drag people over the
railings and the Police Officers weren t having any of
that.

Where were you at that point? - A. I would have been in
front of the barrier I got over.

How many people did you see being pushed back, would you
say? - A. I only saw one actually.

That was, of course, before you got     into pen 2? - A.
That's right.

You can't relate it to anything on the pitch at that
time? - A. No.

Can you show us on the plan where you were?       (The witness
marked the plan)

     MR. BEECHEY:    That   is C.441.

     THE CORONER:   That was the barrier you gotyour leg
over, so to speak? - A. Yes.
                                              R.   J.   GREAVES


I forgot to ask you about 1988.   What time did you get
to the match in 1988? - A. It would have been roughly the
same time.

Two twenty-five? - A. Yes.

How did you enter on to the terrace in 1988? - A. In
exactly the same way.

The tunnel? - A. Yes.

Did you have free passage then? - A. I did.

It wasn't shut? - A. No.

Any Police Officers or stewards on the tunnel in 1988? -
A. Not that I can remember.

You just went straight down? - A. Yes.

So in that sense there was no difference, as far as you
were concerned, between 1988 and 1989? - A. Not for that
part, no.

When you were on the terrace itself you have already said
you didn't like this ground much.   Does that mean in
1988 you were also a bit crushed? - A. It was very packed
in 1988 as well.

When you first entered the terrace in 1989, when you were
in that first position which you have marked, how did
that compare with the 1988 situation? - A. The second
position I ended up in?

No, I want the first position. - A. When we went for the
1988 game I think we made our way to roundabout the same
position where we were for the second position here.
Obviously we must have come in past that first
position...

No, you have misunderstood me.   What I am trying to find
out is the worst condition in 1988 that you can remember,
how did that compare with the condition as it was when
you were in position 1 on your little plan? - A. Well, in
1988 there was always a bit of movement in the crowd
whereas in 1989 there was just nothing you could do.
There were too many people in there.

We know there was a crushing in 1989 which did not occur
in 1988. What I am trying to find out is you moved from
position 1 to position 2? - A. Yes.

In 1989.    I am not asking you about what it was like in
position 2.    You have told me that. What I am trying to
                                                  R. J .   GREAVES


find out is how your condition in position 1 compared
with 1988? - A. Probably the position we were in then,
for the amount of people around us would have been the
sdiD6 as • • •

Obviously you would have preferred it to be easier? - A.
Yes.

In both years? - A. Yes.

In 1989 definitely? - A. That's right.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

You know these mounted Policemen outside, did you
recognise any of them from Liverpool? - A. I did, yes,
because one of them spoke.

One of them spoke.   Do you know now whether that might
have been the Officer who has recently retired and I
think he has retired with his Police horse as well? - A.
I do because I have seen a photograph.

His name is PC Grunnill.   Did you see that Police
Officer trying to get people not to push? - A. He was
saying, "Can everybody stand still where you are?", but
that was the only instruction he gave to any of the fans.

That was the only instruction?    How close were you to
him? - A. A matter of feet.    A few feet.

You have seen that Officer working at Anfield? - A. No, I
saw a picture of him in a paper later on.

Would you agree with that Police Officer when he said
that the crowd was eager to push forward? - A. Not eager.
I mean, everyone was just trying to get into the ground.
Nobody is wanting to push forward.

The Officer said, "The crowd just got lost on that day.
They had an obsession about getting in.   If they won t
work with you, you can't work with them." - A. I don't
agree with that.

You know he is a Police Officer of some 33 years before
he retired as a Mounted Police Officer? - A. I didn't
know.

Do you agree that the crowd was pushing? - A. No.

Let me put to you what another Liverpool Police Officer
said - a mounted Officer - and see whether you can tell
us whether you observed any of this.   He said, "I
appealed to the crowd to wait and stop pushing.    I was
                                                               87
                                                  R. J .   GREAVES


     constantly appealing..."    This is PC Fry. - A. That is
     the only instruction I heard from the Police.    They were
     telling you to stand still.

Q. Did you see any member of the crowd attempt to grab the
   reins of a Police horse? - A. No.

Q.   Did you see any person punch a Police horse? - A. No.

Q.   Did you see Police horses being moved by the crowd? -A.
     Not particularly.   It was just a mass crowd.   The
     Police horse couldn't do much anyway.   He was trying to
     turn it round but he couldn't.

Q. Your observations of these Police Officers on the horses
   is that they were incapable of doing anything? - A. Yes.
   I also used another word.

Q. I am just looking for the words you have actually used -
   "They were incapable and unable. '? - A. Yes.

Q. "They also didn't know what they were doing."? - A.
   Right.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Just dealing with your perception and observation of
   events inside the perimeter area.   There was just a mass
   of people? - A. That's correct.

Q. Your view was that neither the Police nor the crowd could
   do anything about it?   Just too many people? - A. It was
   just too packed, yes.

Q. It has been put to you by Mr. Manning about what PC Fry
   and PC Grunnill said.   Ue heard another witness,
   Inspector Sykes, and I want you to comment on this, who
   said that when you had so many people in that perimeter
   are where you were it was just impossible to form queues.
   Does that tie in with what you observed? - A. At that
   stage they probably couldn't have formed queues.

Q. You were talking about they should have formed them
   earlier on? - A. Yes.

Q. But at the time you were there there were just too many
   people who had go in into the perimeter area? - A. Yes.

Q. That was causing the basic problem both for the Police,
   the horses and for you? - A. That's right.
                                              R. J .   GREAVES


           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

When you heard the instructions from the Police Officers
to stand still, were you able to stand still? - A. There
wasn't particularly that much movement anyway.   It was
just a solid mass of people.

Were you having any pressure forwards at all? - A. From
all around.

Was there pressure from behind that was taking you
forward? - A. There was pressure all around.

So from somewhere pressure was being caused? - A. Yes.

If there wasn't so much movement in the crowd why do you
think the Police Officer would be saying, "Stand still"?
That sounds as if he was observing movement. - A. I don't
know whether he was trying to stop people going through
the turnstiles for a minute until he sorted it out, or
what.   No-one seemed to know what they were doing.

You evidence is that you were effectively standing still.
You were subjected to pressure and you weren't going
anywhere? - A. It was just a solid mass of people,
obviously all making their way forward.

Is it your evidence that you were effectively standing
still, pressure from all sides, not going anywhere? - A.
That's right.

Notwithstanding that you managed to get forward through a
turnstile at some point? - A. Because gradually people
are making their way forward, but it wasn't as if
everyone was pushing forward.

There was pressure that was pushing you forward? - A. I
didn't say that.   I said people were not pressing
forward.   Gradually as people went in through the
terraces we were able to move forward, gradually, but
there was no significant movement. People were not
pushing to try to get in.

I am not saying people are standing there with their
hands pushing people in front deliberately.   What I am
trying to ask is: what was creating the crush?    Was
there pressure coming from behind?   Were there more
people coming behind you? - A. Obviously there were more
people coming behind because they only had about half a
dozen turnstiles for people to get in.

There was a movement forwards? - A. There is bound to be
if people are going through the turnstiles.
                                              R. J .   GREAVES


The Police Officers were saying, "Stand still"? - A. Yes.

There was this movement forwards.   Were you able to
stand still? - A. I was only moving very slightly forward
anyway.




            Q. Were you able to stand still
                                                            .   90

                                                  R. J .   GREAVES


Q.    Were you able to stand still?   - A. I was only moving
     very slightly forward anyway.

Q.   Were you able to stand still?    - A. Yes, because I was


0. Did you stand still? - A. Well, I was stood still 95
   per cent of the time anyway, because you were just
   making your way forward slowly.

Q. So your evidence is that you were moving forward,
   notwithstanding clear instructions from a Police
   Officer to stand still? That is your evidence?
   However quickly you were going, that is what you were
   doing, yes or no? - A. I was going forward, but ....

Q. Yes, is your answer. - A. Obviously everyone was trying
   to obey the Police Officers but there was nothing they
   could do because they had lost control.

Q. I think the answer is yes. - A. Yes to which?

          MISS ADDLEMAN:    Could I have C354 up, please?

                Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN

Q. Mr. Greaves, you have told us in your evidence, you
   were telling us of fans standing on the railings
   shouting for people to go back? - A. That is right.

Q. Because people were dying. Could you look at this
   photograph now that is in front of you, and we see
   people are standing on the railings, the perimeter
   railings at the front? - A. That is right.

Q. Is this the sort of thing that you were seeing when
   people, fans, were shouting, "Get back"? - A. It was,
   yes.

Q.   It was? - A. Yes.

0.    We have heard evidence from other witnesses that they
     saw Police Officers who were doing the same thing, and
     motioning with their hands forward for people to go
     back. Can you think whether you saw anything like
     that? - A. I only saw supporters on the fence. I
     didn't see Police Officers.

Q. You didn't see Police Officers? - A. No.

Q. You see I wonder about this, because you have confirmed
   for me that that is the sort of thing that you were
   seeing, fans like that on the railings, and you told us
   that you saw the Police Officer pushing someone back
                                                          91
                                             R. J .   GREAVES


   in, and at the same time fans were standing on the
   railings telling people to push back? - A. That's
   right.

Q. So where was this Police Officer then? - A. When we got
   over the fence into pen 2 and we got     outthroughthe
   gate in pen 2 and onto the pitch, then we could look
   back and see this.

Q. So there was a Police Officer on the railings as well?
   You did see one? - A. Not on the railings, no, by the
   gates, and they were restricting the     flow of people
   trying to get out of the gates;-

Q. He was restricting the flow? - A. It appeared that way
   to me, yes.

Q. So he pushed somebody back from the gate? - A. That is
   right.

Q. Is that right, and was the gate open as we see it in
   the picture here? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you able to then look a little beyond and see just
   what was happening at the other side of the gate, the
   pen side of the gate? - A. When we got out of the gate
   and onto the pitch we walked over to, I think it is the
   South Stand, and then we took one of the advertising
   hoardings off and helped carried the injured down the
   other end.

Q. I understand. So at this stage the gate was open,
   someone was pushed back. I wonder if you would agree
   with a description of another witness that there
   appeared to be a tangle of bodies at that gate? - A.
   Well, people are trying to get out.

Q. Of course they were trying to get out, yes, but the
   gate was crowded with people? - A. That is right.

0. And of course it is a very restricted opening, is it
   not? - A. That is right.

Q. Because it is restricted it was a very slow process to
   get people through that gate? - A. Yes. It was also
   very crowded round the gate in pen 2, and injured
   people were being passed over the heads and out of the
   gate there.

0. So people at gate 3 to pen 3, they really had to be
   coming out one by one, otherwise simply that the
   opening was becoming congested and nobody was getting
   out? - A. It appeared to me that it was congested. I
                                                             92

                                                R. J .   GREAVES


     mean, the Police weren't allowing a flow of people to
     get out.

Q. This is why I ask you do you know what the condition
   was immediately at the other side of that gate, how
   many people were pushing to get out, and what obstacles
   they may have had to traverse? - A. At the front of
   that terrace, I mean the whole terrace was iust packed
   solid.

                Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

Q.    It may be that I misheard what you said just now. Did
     you see that the entrance to pen 2 was very congested?
     - A. It was - getting out of pen 2?

Q.    Getting out of pen 2 was very congested - that was    the
     pen into which you climbed? - A. Yes.

Q. Over the perimeter fence? - A. Yes.

Q. What time do you recall the entrance to pen 2 being
   very congested? - A. You must be talking of about
   quarter-past-3 by then.

0. 0uarter-past-3? - A. Between 10-past and quarter-past.
   It was after the game was called off, because I was
   still in pen 3 when I seen the game actually called
   of f.

0. You had not got out of pen 3 when the game was stopped?
   ■ A • No*

                    Further by THE CORONER

Q. When you were saying that you saw a Police Officer push
   a fan back, I had not appreciated that what you meant
   was pushed them back through the gate. Is that what
   you are saying? - A. That is it, yes.

Q. And that you actually saw that from the outside, so to
   speak? You were already on the pitch when you saw
   that? - A. That is right.   It seemed to me that it
   would have been easier for people to just clear away
   from --- I mean, on that picture there, there is a lot
   of Police Officers gathering round the gate. Space was
   needed.

Q. Okay, that is an interpretation and for all I know you
   may be right about the matter. What I am trying to
   find out is what you actually saw, and as I understand
   your evidence now - I want to be sure I have understood
   it correctly - you saw one person being pushed back,
                                                              93

                                                R.   J.   GREAVES


   that is what you told me, that is right, isn't it? - A.
   Yes.

0. This was a person who was pushed back through the gate?
   - A. That is right.

Q. It was somebody who was pushed back whom you noticed
   when you were already on the pitch side of the gate? -
   A. Yes.

Q. After you had come out of gate 2? - A. Correct.

0. And although I don't suppose for a minute you know
   exactly what time you came out, it was well after the
   game was stopped? - A. I know it was after the game had
   stopped.

Q. Well after the game had stopped or just after? - A.
   Well, at least three or four minutes afterwards.

Q. It seems to me from your answers that you did not, and
   I am not blaming you for this in any way, nave a very
   clear view of what the situation in the gate was. In
   other words, you could not see right into the pen,
   would that be right? - A. No, because there was ....

Q. There were such a lot of people ...? - A. There were
   quite a few people round who were trying to help get
   people out.

Q. Okay, I am with you.

           THE CORONER:   Hr. Russell, did you want to come
   back?

           MR. RUSSELL    No, thank you.
           THE CORONER    Anybody else?

        THE WITNESS    There was also, when we were on the
   pitch, and trying to take fans down to the other end,
   there was a loudspeaker announcement shouting, "Can you
   clear the pitch".

       THE CORONER:   Yes. I don't think we need concern
  ourselves with that at this Inquest. Thank you very
  much indeed. Thank you for your help, I appreciate it.

        MR. PAYNE:    I do beg your pardon, could he come
  back?    Ido apologise, but I have been trying to find
  the witness who dealt with this business about pulling
  people out of pen 3. I have just found it and that is
  the reason I did not intervene before. Could you put
  up that photograph again, Mr. Griffiths?
                                                             94

                                               R.   J.   GREAVES


           Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Q. Don't feel that this is a criticism of you, because the
   sequence of events and timing is something that a lot
   of people have found difficult, but the evidence is
   that at about the time of this photograph a Policeman
   called Police Constable Taylor was outside this gate,
   and he and the other Policemen at that stage were
   trying to pull people out as fast as they could, but
   the problem was that although we can't see it in -the
   photograph, immediately inside that gate there was the
   most dreadful tangle of people. The timing of this
   photograph is just after 3 o'clock, and by that time
   you either had just gone in, or you were just going
   over the fence into pen 2, then you had to go round and
   you were out onto the field, right? - A. Yes.

Q. Then looking back at this pen? - A. That is correct.

Q. By that time, although you may be right about the best
   thing perhaps the Police should have moved away, but
   they were trying at that stage to disentangle the
   people immediately inside the gate. Do you follow
   that? - A. I do follow you, yes.

Q. Is that consistent with what you saw? - A. Well, if
   tney were trying to get them out that is fair enough,
   but they seemed to be creating more havoc than anything
   else.

Q. By doing what? - A. By crowding round the gate.

Q. By crowding round the gate, okay.

       THE CORONER:   There is one thing, you put, Mr.
  Payne, I think his evidence was that he was in pen 3
  when the match was finished, so he had not actually got
  out at this point.

        MR. PAYNE:    No, it was even later.

       THE CORONER:     It doesn't make any difference to


       MR. PAYNE:     It is just a matter of the timings.

       THE CORONER:  .... the substantive point.
  Anybody else? Mr. Greaves, thank you very much again.
                                                            95.

                                                  L. D. LLOYD


                LESLIE DUNCAN LLOYD Sworn

                      By THE CORONER

Q. You are Leslie Duncan Lloyd, is that right? - A. That
   is correct.


   Lancashire? - A. That is correct.
                                         J   Wigan in

Q. You were coming to the 1989 match, 15th April 1989, is
   that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. I take it you had a ticket and I think you were
   travelling by car? - A. That is right.

Q. I think you travelled with your nephew? - A. Two
   nephews.

Q. In fact, there were two cars travelling, so that means
   there must have been a slightly larger group? - A. Yes,
   there were six of us all together.

0. One of the people who came with you was Martin Kenneth
   Wild, is that right? - A. That is correct.

        THE CORONER:   I think Mr. and Mrs. Wild are here,
   is that right? Have they gone out. Do you want to see
   if they want to come in? They don't have to be in but
   I would not want them to miss the evidence, if they
   want to hear it, that is.

Q. Anyway, what time did you leave, about 10   o'clock, I
   think? - A. About 10 o'clock, yes.

Q. What time did you arrive? - A. Between one o'clock,
   1.30.

Q. I think you then parked up somewhere? - A. Yes.

0. I think we will take you up to the Leppings Lane
   entrance. You got there what time, about 1.40, is that
   right? - A. Round about that time.

Q. One of your people did not, in fact, have a ticket at
   that stage, that is right? - A. No. That was David
   McGee.

Q. Did he, in fact, get one? - A. Yes, he got one
   eventually.

Q. Did you wait for him to get a ticket or did you go in?
   - A. We split up for a while and met together again
   while we tried to find a ticket for him.
                                              L. D. LLOYD


You were all looking for tickets for the one chap, so
to speak? - A. We split up into two groups.
Did you do what everybody else seems to have done,
walk up and down and say "Spares" or words to that
effect? - A. We just walked along and we asked a few
people and then someone said, "There is lads round
the corner with tickets".
What time did you sort that out? I do not mean you
personally but when was the thing sorted out? - A. It
was probably about two o'clockish. We didn't wait
long. We just walked round to the other side of the
ground and then we walked back round.
Then I think you were making your way towards
Leppings Lane and you met a Police Officer I believe?
- A. Yes, we talked to a Police Officer.
You were chatting to him? - A. Yes, just passing the
time with him.

Nothing special? - A. No.

You happened to hear a radio message, is that
right? - A. "Trouble at the Leppings Lane end".
He left you at that point? - A. Yes.
Where was this? Was it near Leppings Lane? - A. It
was on Leppings Lane, sort of Leppings Lane end, but
by the houses further along.
Was he a flat capped Officer? - A. A flat capped
Officer, yes.
You would, of course, not know who he was? - A. No.
We had actually spoken to him at the other side of
the ground earlier on.
I see you had met him once before? - A. We had met
him once before. He seemed to have come from one
end. The streets were blocked off and so you could
not cut through. He was at one end and when we came
round he was at the other end.

He had come through? - A. Yes, he had come through.
You got to the ground yourself I think at about 2.30?
- A. About 2.30, yes.

We have already heard from a lot of people it was
crowded or what? - A. It was fairly crowded then,
yes.
                                                              97

                                                    L. D. LLOYD



Q. You too saw some Police Officers on horses? - A. Yes,
   I seen two Police Officers in the perimeter of the
   turnstiles. I think they were both from Liverpool.
Q. I think you heard them speak? - A. I heard one of
   them. One of them said, "We have never have this
   trouble at Goodison and Anfield".
Q. Did he say anything else? - A. He was shouting to
   back off, for people to back off at the back but the
   Police Officers at the back where we were seemed to
   be just pushing people back in, you know, shepherding
   people into that area and the area was too small for
   the size of the crowd that was being pushed into it.
Q. Your impression was that there were Officers at the
   back who were actually channelling people forward? -
   A. People forward.
Q. There were Officers in the front saying, "Push back"?
   - A. "Push back", yes.

Q. The Officers at the back, were they mounted or
   unmounted? - A. No, they were on foot.
Q. How many would you say there were? - A. Three or
   four.

Q. How far back were these? - A. They were just outside
   the perimeter gates.
Q. Were the gates open or shut? - A. They were open. We
   were asking for them to be shut. The area of the
   crowd I was in, we were shouting for them to be shut
   to allow so many people to go through and then open
   them again.

Q. You were actually making that suggestion? - A. That
   suggestion to ease the congestion.
Q. Wasit done or not? - A. It closed   for a second or   so
   and then it opened again.
Q. Youdid not see it wide open? - A.   No.
Q. Youcould not tell? - A. No, I could not tell it was
   wide open.

Q. You cannot say what caused that? - A. No, I cannot.

Q. You are saying you would not have minded those gates
   shut? - A. Until the crowd had eased inside.
                                                            98

                                                   L. D. LLOYD

Q. I think you mentioned the Police were shepherding
   people forward? - A. Yes.

Q. You formed that impression. Why did you think they
   were doing that? - A. They seemed to be trying to
   keep the road clear to allow the traffic to flow
   through.

Q. That is what I thought you might say. Can you tell
   me what the traffic was like? - A. There was quite a
   bit of traffic flowing up and down the road.

Q. When you say quite a bit, do you mean the odd bus? -
   A. Buses, cars.

Q. Would it surprise you that at around this time the
   intention was, or an order had been given, that the
   road should be closed at this time? - A. No, I did
   not know that.

Q. I realise that but I am asking you... - A. When I was
   walking down there was traffic on that road.

Q. You definitely saw traffic? - A. Yes, I saw traffic.

Q. You are right in that it was never totally traffic-
   free but what I am trying to find out is how much
   traffic did you see? - A. I could not honestly say
   how much traffic I did see. I did see a bus or two.
   You presumably went through the perimeter gates? - A.
   I went through the perimeter gates into the turnstile
   area.

Q. How did you get in? Was it through a turnstile? - A.
   No, I was told by one of the Policemen on horseback,
   I think it was a Sergeant, as Iwas trying to get out
   of the turnstile area away from the crowd,I was told
   to get out under this barrier and round through this
   side gate.

Q. Then you got in through the big gate? - A. I walked
   through the side gate with no problems.

Q. Were your friends with you or had you lost them? - A.
   Yes, we lost one. We lost Dave McGee.

Q. Was Mr. Wild in particular with you? - A. Yes, he was
   still with us.

Q. He came through the big gate as well, is that
   right? - A. Yes.

Q. Was the gate wide open, can you remember? - A. Yes,
   more or less wide open.
                                                                  99

                                                         L. D. LLOYD


     Q. Having got through were you rushed through or walked
B       through? - A. Walked through. There was no panic to
        get through. We just walked through.

     Q. What did you do?    Where did you go? - A. I went to
        the toilet.

     Q. And then? - A. Then I came out, looked round, saw the
        lads waiting. There were two of went to the toilet
        actually. We then got together and walked down
        through the tunnel.

     Q. Actually before I take you there, there is something
        I have noticed in your statement which I had
        forgotten and which I should ask you about. At one
        point I think there was a comment made in the crowd
        that the match was going to be delayed? - A. Yes, it
        w a s.

T)   Q. Do you remember that? - A. Someone shouted, "The
        match is being put back".

     Q. Where were you when that was being shouted? - A. I
        was part way, sort of middle-ish, sort of halfway
        down to the turnstiles.

     Q. In other words, you had already passed the perimeter
        gates? - A. Yes.

     Q. You were in that main area? - A. In the main area for
        the turnstiles.

     Q. At that point before the shout were you being
        crushed? - A. Yes, it was rather congested.

     Q. What happened after the shout? - A. It tended to ease
        a bit.

     Q. It eased? - A. Slightly.

     Q.    What   happened then? - A. Someone shouted, "It hasn't
          been called off. It hasn't been postponed".

     Q.   What   happened to thecrush? - A. It started again.

     Q.    You could perceive a very marked response to both
          those shouts? - A. Yes.

     Q. I said "very marked". That may be overstating it. I
        do not want you to overstate it. Was it marked, very
        marked, or how would you like to put it? - A. There
        was a slight relief but, as I say, it was still
        fairly congested.  It was still tight.



H
                                                                 100
                                                         L. D. LLOYD


      Q. There was an easing off? - A. It did seem to ease a
B        bit*
      Q. I am sorry about that. It was something I overlooked
         and which I thought was an interesting point. We are
         back to the tunnel? - A. Right.

      Q. You were about to enter it? - A. Pardon?

      Q. You were about to enter the tunnel? - A. Yes.

      Q. Did you look down to see what was going on on the
         pitch at that point? - A. When we met together again
         that was the only way I knew into the ground anyway
         because I could just see the pitch through it. You
         could see people on the other side of the pitch and
         you just headed through.

      Q. Could you see the players on the pitch? - A. No, I
I"!     did not notice the players on the pitch when I went
u       through.

      Q. Was the tunnel relatively free or not? - A. Fairly
         free, yes. There were a few going through but it was
         not congested or anything.

      Q. At the end of the tunnel where you exit, what was it
         like there? - A. We got in. The crowd was in. There
         was a fair few in but it did not tend to look any
         worse than any other game.

      Q. People have used different words, they wormed their
         way through, they wriggled through. Did you go
         through this crowd? - A. Yes, we went to the right
         and worked our way down. We were trying to get over
         to the right hand pen.

      Q. You did not want actually to be behind the goal, is
         that what you are saying? - A. No.

      Q. Were the players on the pitch by then? - A. I think
         they were just coming out.

      Q. What was it like when you first exited? I realise
         you did not want to be there, but what was it like? -
         A. It was tight trying to get through. We were
         struggling to get through.

      Q. You were then making your way towards the right? - A.
         Trying to move across to the right.




H
                                                                    101

                                                         L . D . LLOYD


    Q. What happened? Did it get tighter? - A. It got
       tighter and tighter until we just could not move
B      then.

    Q.    Did you feel any surges? - A.   I did feelsurgeslater
         on once the game had started.

    Q. Mr. Wild was still ahead of you at that point? - A.
       He was at the back of me and I got him through to the
       front of me.

    Q. I am sorry? - A. He was behind me when we were first
       coming in and because he had sort of been left behind
       I waited and let him through in front, and being the
       oldest I was trying to look after him.

    Q.    When you came to a standstill   which Itake ityou   did
         from what you have said? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was that when the game kicked off? - A. I think it
       would have been when the game kicked off, yes.
D
    Q. Did you manage to watch? - A. I just saw a few
       seconds of it and that was about it.

    Q. If nothing more had happened, I appreciate you were
       clearly uncomfortable in that position but would you
       have been prepared to have watched the match from
       that position? - A. I think I would have probably
       tried to move into a more comfortable position.

    Q. What I am trying to say is, were you in such a
       condition that you thought, "If I don't get out of
       here I'll be dead"? - A. Not at that moment in time.

    Q. When did that happen? - A. That happened with a surge
       which happened. The crowd just sort of pushed and it
       pushed and it did seem - when you go to a game you
       expect a push when something has happened on the
       pitch and you expect to go forward and then ease off
       but this did not ease off.

    Q. That was the cardinal feature, was it not, that it
       did not ease off? - A. It did not ease off. It just
       carried on crushing and crushing.

    Q. Your recollection so far as you were concerned was
       that this surge happened at some point after the
       kick-off? - A. Just after the kick-off.

    Q. What happened to poor Martin, did you see? - A. I
       lost Martin then.
                                                               102
                                                    L . D . LLOYD


Q. When did you lose him?    When did you last see him? -

     A. It was when that surge happened.

Q. Up to there you could see him? - A. Yes.

Q. It is a very hard question to answer, I know, but
   what did he look like up to that point? - A. He
   looked okay at that time.

Q. It is quite important for the family sometimes to
   know that. I know we cannot bring him back and that
   we have lost him for good but it sometimes helpful to
   know what he was like at a particular point in time.
   I am not trying to upset you or them. How did you
   get out yourself in the end? - A. Everyone seemed to
   go forward and it seemed to ease off and I know I was
   trapped with my legs. I sort of freed one leg and
   then someone pulled me. I was sort of, like, free
   then and so I made my way back towards the tunnel
   feeling very sort of dazed and weak and then all I
   know is that I collapsed in the tunnel.

Q. You may not remember this but when you were making
   your way back through the tunnel, had the match
   finished or do you not know? - A. I could not
   remember.  I just do not remember anything about it
   because I was starting to black out at the time.

Q.   I am just trying to find out if you had any idea    but
     you do not know? - A. I do not know.

Q.    I think the last thing you remember is that somebody
     was taking a corner kick or a throw in? - A. Or
     something like that.

Q. Was that at the time when the surge came, do you
   think, or do you not know? - A. It could have been
   but I do not know.

Q. Show us on a little plan where you were when you came
   to a standstill? It was just at kick-off I think you
   said? - A. Yes.




                                       /MR. BEECHEY___
                                                             103

                                                 L.   D.   LLOYD


          MR. BEECHEY:   C442, sir.

Q.        THE CORONER: I think you said there was a little
     surge at one point, not the main surge when you lost
     Martin, but there was a little movement forward? - A.
     You could feel pressure on you all the time.

Q. But when it eased off a little bit, when was that?
    You do not know? - A. I don't know whether it was when
    the barrier went or what. It just seemed to suddenly
    ease and then I know people were lying on my legs.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Lloyd, you gave a very interesting observation.
    Just see if I have got it right. Your impression was
    that the Police were shepherding people into the
    turnstile area and that area was too small for the
    numbers which were being allowed in? - A. Yes.

Q. It was obviously after that position had been reached
    when so many people had been allowed in that then an
    effort was made to close the perimeter gates? - A.
    Yes.

Q.   Just moving ahead to when you came through this
     concertina gate, you said you walked through and there
     wasn't any sort of panic or anything like that? - A.
     No, no panic whatsoever.

Q.   Was that true of all the people around you at the same
     time? - A. Pardon?

Q.   That was true of other people who came through with
      you? - A. Yes.

Q.   You went down the tunnel because that was the only way
     you could see into the terrace? - A. Yes, I couldn't
      see any signs to say.

Q.   But do I take it from that that had, in fact, you been
      directed elsewhere, be it by Police or otherwise, you
      would have taken directions? - A. Yes.

               Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q.   Mr. Lloyd, just before you collapsed did everything
      become hazy to you? It usually does just before
      people collapse. - A. I went very light-headed. I was
      going light-headed.

Q.   So would you know exactly what was happening or where
      you were, do you think, then? - A. I know I hadn't
      moved very far because I couldn't move. I know people
                                                               104

                                                   L.   D.   LLOYD


      were shouting round me for help.    They were screaming
      for help.

Q.    So you say you had not moved very far from where you
      were where you could not move? - A. You just couldn't
      move anywhere. There was nowhere to go.

                   Further by THE CORONER:

Q.   One more question. You know you said you were talking
     to this Police Officer and you heard the radio
     message? - A. Yes.

Q.   He left you, I take it? - A. Yes, he left us.

Q.   Then you went on towards Leppings Lane? - A. That is
     correct.

Q.   What time interval would you say there was between him
     leaving you and you arriving at these perimeter gates?
     - A. Two or three minutes.

Q.   A very short time? - A. Yes, a very short time.

          THE CORONER: It looks to me as if Mr. & Mrs. Wild
     have gone out, is that right, or are they still here?
     There they are, I am sorry, I lost you. Mr. & Mrs.
     Wild, I think it is the first time I have seen you, is
     it not? That is right. Let me say to you that I am
     very, very sorry that you lost   Martin, and I am glad
     that you have been able to make it today. I know it
     is not always easy and it is along way, and so on,
     but I am glad you are here and   I speak not only for
     myself, but I speak for everybody I am sure in this
     Court room when we say how very, very sorry we are
     that you lost your boy and I am glad you were able to
     hear his friend, and I take it your friend as well, I
     am sure, to tell you his experiences.

                    DANIEL JOHN MacARTHUR

                        By THE CORONER:

Q.   It is Daniel John MacArthur, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you give me your address, Mr. MacArthur, I have
     not got it? - A.                      I

Q.   Where is that? - A. Liverpool 4.

Q.   I think you came   to the match in 1989 and you came
     with your uncle,   was it? - A. My uncle and my two
      friends.
                                                                 105

                                                D.    J.   MacARTHUR


 Q.   The friends were Joseph Glover and Ian Glover, is that
      right? - A. Yes.

Q.    I think you came by car, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.    I do not know what time you left home, about 11 in the
      morning, I think, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q*    ^ think you say you got to Sheffield about quarter-
      past 2, do you say? - A. Yes, about quarter-past 2.

Q.    You were not driving, I do not suppose;        it was one of
      your uncles, I take it? - A. My uncle.

Q.    You parked and you came towards the ground, is that
      right? - A. Yes. On the way to the ground my uncle
      had a ticket for the North Stand and we separated from
      my uncle and me, Ian and Joe carried on towards
      Leppings Lane.

Q.    What time did you get to the turnstiles? - A. We went
      to a shop first and we came out, and we were talking,
      because we were saying to Ian and Joe, "Meet you back
      here at the end of the game by the gates", and they
      left me, and I was walking and the next minute I went
      through a gate, I think a perimeter fence, and there
      was a Policeman on a horse and this was like when the
      crowd was all building up inside that pen and I asked
      him which way in because I had a stand ticket for
      sitting down in the West Stand.

Q.    You had a stand ticket? - A. I had a stand ticket for
      sitting down, and I asked him "Which way in?" and he
      said, "Follow the crowd".

Q.    So you did not have a terrace ticket then?      - A. No.

Q.    Had you by this time left Joe and Ian?   - A.    Yes.

Q.    So you had split up and you were by yourself? - A.
      Yes.

Q.    You left them outside the ground? - A. No, they were
      heading towards the turnstiles.

Q.    But this was still outside the ground?   - A.    Yes.

Q.    But you were not with them? - A. No.

Q.    So you asked the Police Officer and said, "Where do I
      go?" and he said, "Follow the crowd"? - A. No. After
      a few minutes I walked in thinking I was going to the
      stands. I was on the perimeter fence and I went
      through the gate and the crowd was building up and
                                                               106

                                               D.   J.   MacARTHUR


     after a bit I think there were two on horses, I am not
     sure, but I definitely saw one and I more or less
     shouted at him, "Which way into the stand?" and he
     said, "Follow the crowd".

Q.   Can you walk up to the model. I do not know whether
     you will be able to help us, but can you show us which
     turnstiles you were going through? Point out the
     perimeter gates and the turnstiles, and the other ones
     as well.

          MR. GRIFFITHS:     He is indicating turnstiles A to
     G, sir.

          THE CORONER: Okay, come back.
Q.   You pointed to that area we know as turnstiles A to G?
     - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you actually go in through a turnstile? - A. No.

Q.   So how did   you get in? - A. Through the gates.

Q.   Which gate was that, do you know? - A. Well, the gate
     that got opened.

Q.   Three gates got opened, that is the difficulty. Do
     you know which one it was? Walk up to it and see if
     you can find it.

            MR. GRIFFITHS:   The witness has indicated Gate C,
     sir.

Q*        THE CORONER: Did you know that that gate had
     been opened? - A. Well, no.

Q.   What I am trying to find out is it seems to me from
     your statement that what you were saying in the
     statement was that you got swept in by a surge of
     people and that when you got in you had not even
     realised that you had gone through a big gate. Is
     that correct, or did you know you had got in through a
     big gate? - A. No, I didn't know I had gone in through
     a big gate. I was just following the crowd.

Q.   You followed the crowd? - A. Yes.

Q.   I see, so you did not actually know where you were
     going at that stage, apart from the fact that it
     looked as if it was going into the stadium? - A. Yes,
     judging by the Police Officer on the horse, he just
     said, "Follow the crowd".

Q.   So that is what you did? - A. Yes.
                                                             107

                                             D.   J.   MacARTHUR


Q.    I have understood you now. When you got Inside
      through that gate - yes? - A. Yes.

Q.    What happened then? You did not know it was a gate,
      but you were there in a big crowd. What happened to
      you? - A. I looked to see if there was anyone there
      for directions but there wasn't, so I carried on
      through the tunnel.

Q.    Which way did you continue? Where did you finish up,
      how did you carry on? - A. Do you mean through the
      pens?

Q.    Did you go into a tunnel? - A. I went through a
      tunnel, yes.

Q.    When you were following this crowd, could you have got
      out of the crowd? Was it a big crowd which was
      carrying you forward, or was it just a lot of people
      going in one direction? - A. A lot of people going in
      one direction.

Q.   You could have got to one side if you had wanted to?
     You could have stepped outside and waited? This is
     not a criticism. I am just asking how strong the
     crowd was, that is all? - A. I don't know.

Q.   Did you feel that the crowd was pushing you along, or
     were you able to make your own way? - A. Like I wasn't
     walking and I wasn't running. I was like walking
     fast.

Q.   It was a cross between walking and running, is that
     right? - A. Yes.

Q.   Was that what you were doing when you were going down
     the tunnel as well? - A. Through the tunnel, it seemed
     to take ages getting through the tunnel onto the
     terraces.

Q. Was that because there were so many people there?       - A.
    There were quite a few people there.

Q. When you got out of the terrace, were the players on
    the pitch already? - A. I couldn't see noplayers, but
    I think they were on the pitch, judging by the roars,
    I am not sure.

Q.   You heard a lot of roars but you did not see them     on
      the pitch? - A. No.

Q.   You are sure about that? - A. No,I seen   them but when
      I did see them I could only just see the bodies and
      the head.
                                                             1 08

                                             D.   J.   MacARTHUR


Q.   You saw the heads? - A. No, that is when I did see
      them. When I did see them eventually I could only
      just see the heads.

Q.   I see, but it was the teams who you saw? - A. Not
      straight away.

Q.   How long was it after that you saw the teams, how long
     did it take? - A. It could have been 5 or 10 minutes.




                                   /Q.   Did you see the.
                                           D. J .   MACARTHUR


Did you see the match kick-off? - A. No.

Did you see any play? - A. No.  I could only see like a
couple of players running. That's all.   I couldn't see
their legs or...

So you got on to the terrace? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. Well, I was on the terrace.
From the tunnel there are two directions and I am
positive I went to my right to pen 3 I think it is.    I
looked behind me and said, "I should be up there,"
judging it was the stands, but I couldn't get back out.
I must have got carried to the front not far away from
the barrier and at first I didn't think it was serious
because I had been in similar situations before. As the
seconds went by really it started getting tighter and
tighter and tighter and that is when I became scared.

How did you get out?   Do you remember?    You can't
remember, can you? - A. Yes, I can remember.

Do you want to leave that? - A. No.    As it was getting
tighter the fellow behind me was losing his breathing.
Before it was getting tighter I could turn my head round
but when it was getting really tight I couldn't move at
all.   The expression on his face looked like he was
dying and then I was getting more and more to the front
and the fence that I got out of, my head was at an angle
and my arm was coming like that.    As I was getting out I
think I cut my head on the fence but I am not too sure.
There was a body in between the fence and the pitch and a
Policewoman got me out.   As soon as she got me out I was
waiting for someone to come to my aid or something, but
no-one came and I started to run up to the terraces.

Daniel, shall we stop for a few minutes and carry on a
little later? - A. No. I will get it all over and done
with now.

We have almost finished actually.   I just want to ask
you one more question.   Did you see either of the Glover
boys in the pen at all? - A. No, unfortunately.

     THE CORONER:   Daniel, I can see how very, very
upsetting this is for you and so can everybody else. We
are very, very sorry that you lost your friend and that
you had such a terrible experience.    It is very good of
you to have come and to have told us your story.    You
have done it well.   Don't go home and think you have
disgraced ourself.   That doesn't matter one tiny bit.
On the contrary, it is quite good because it gives us an
impression of what it really felt like for you.    Thank
                                                                       1 10

                                                      D. J .   MACARTHUR


       you. Do you think you could show us where you were in
       the pen? (The witness marked the plan)

             MR. JONES:     That is C.443.
B
             THE CORONER:    You are happy with that position?

             THE WITNESS:    Yes.

            THE CORONER:     Thank you very much indeed.        Now    it
       is Mr. Lloyd.

                      THOMAS WILLIAM LLOYD Sworn

                             By THE CORONER:

    Q. You are Thomas William Lloyd? - A. Yes.
    Q. What is your address? - A.                      , Liverpool,
       5.

    Q. Perhaps you can give me your job? - A. At the present
D      moment I am unemployed.

    Q. What were you in 1989? - A. A fitter's mate.

    Q. I think you are also a football supporter of Liverpool? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. It was your intention to go to the match on the 15th
       April, 1989? - A. Yes.

    Q. You   went with an organised group? - A.Yes.

    Q. You   went on a minibus? - A. Yes.

    Q. That was an officially organised minibus? - A. Yes.            We
       had  gone through the complete rounds.

    Q. You don’t remember the name of the company, do you? - A.
       It was Flytime.   I have put Airtime down on my statement
       but it should be Flytime.

    Q. You set off from Liverpool.   How many were were there?             -
       A. There were thirteen of us, including the driver.

    Q. Did everybody have tickets? - A. Yes.

    Q. You set off from Liverpool at what time? - A. About nine
       o'clock.

    Q. What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. Well, we
       stopped at Stocksbridge at about twelve o'clock.




H
                                                                I ll

                                                    T.   W. LLOYD


Q. In fact it was the Silver Fox you stopped at? -A. Yes.
Q. Before you got to the Silver fox had you been stopped by
   the Police? - A. Yes.

Q. How many times? - A. Once,      We were held up for about
   twenty minutes.

Q. Just once you say? - A. Yes, it was after we left.      We
   had left the Silver Fox and we were stopped again.

Q. What was the checking for? - A. Well, when we were first
   stopped, we came over the Snake.Pass and it was the road
   that led off into Stocksbridge where we were stopped.
   The Policeman cameon and he asked if we had any alcohol
   and we said no and   thenhe checked for tickets.

Q. So he did both?      Alcohol and tickets? - A. Yes.

Q. Anyway, you went to the Silver Fox and I take it you had
   a couple of pints?     - A.Yes, and a meal.

   Nothing more? - A. No.    We were there for less than a
   hour.

Q. Then you set off again? - A. Yes.
Q. You say you were stopped again? - A. Yes.    When we came
   out of Stocksbridge we turned...    It was like a country
   lane.   As we got round the corner there was like a
   layby, but it was a grass verge and there was a Police
   minibus, a Police car - two Police cars - and we were
   pulled in.   Already there was a 50 seater coach and
   another minibus and our coach pulled in behind that.
   The Police came on and asked us to get off the coach.
   While we were off the coach the Police went on it and
   searched and then they had the driver, checking his
   travel documents and what have you.    Then we were
   searched as well before we got back on the bus.

   Did they re-check for tickets as well? - A. Yes, they
   checked for tickets, but we believe they went on the bus
   checking for alcohol, but there was none there.

Q. So they had another go, so to speak, at your particular
  minibus? - A. Yes.

Q. Then I think you continued...  Were you searched again?
  - A. Yes, we were stopped two more times.   It wasn t
  only us.   There were a number of other vehicles because
  I know when we left the layby I just happened to look
  back and there was a tailback of traffic.   The road was
  clear and the only reason I could think that there was a
                                               T.   W. LLOYD


tailback of traffic was that the Police were pulling
these in as well to check them.

So altogether you were stopped four times? - A. Yes.

Eventually you made it and you parked somewhere? - A.
Yes, we parked in the coach park in Halifax Road, which
is about 300 yards from the ground.

Do you know what time you got to Leppings Lane? - A. It
was roughly 2.40/2.35.

You had parked up at   about 2.30? - A. Yes.

Having got to there,   there were a lot of peopleoutside?
- A. Yes.

Did you have difficulty getting through the turnstiles? -
A. If I can just go back a little.    There is a point I
would like to make.    When we camealong Halifax Road
from the coach park into Leppings Lane, there were two
Police motor bikes.   They roared off down Halifax Road.
As I was in the road walking along I jumped out of the
way.   I turned into Leppings Lane and there was a coach
parked on the corner of Leppings Lane/Halifax Road.    It
was half on the side and half in the road.    I thought it
was strange there was a coach parked there.    Anyway,
when I looked it was full of Policemen.    Now I thought
to myself after that - I mean, this was travelling back
because obviously I didn't know about the events which
were going to happen - on my way back I thought to
myself, "Surely with all that crushing taking place down
Leppings Lane they could have easily told the Police who
were in that coach to form a cordon across the top of the
lane and ask everyone to hold back."




      Q. You are saying
                                            T.   W. LLOYD


So you are saying when you walked down Leppings Lane
there was a coach parked with Policemen in it? - A.
Yes.

At the bottom of Leppings Lane? - A. Well, it is at at
the top, at the junction of Leppings Lane and Halifax
Road.

what time was that? - A. I should say it was round
about 25-to-3, 20-to-3.

At that time you, of course, took no notice of it, you
just went on? - A. Yes.

Of course, you don't know what happened with regard to
that coach? - A. No.

But you passed it and you went on towards Leppings
Lane, right? - A. Yes.

Having got to Leppings Lane, what happened then? - A.
Ttiere was only me and the driver who actually had
tickets for the ground, and the rest of the coach party
were split up to go into the standing area, entrance to
the stands, sorry, so me and the coach driver made our
way into the turnstile area. There were the perimeter
gates, at that time when I went down they were open,
and when I got through the perimeter gates me and the
driver were split up. He went straight forward with
the crowd and I was pushed over to the right hand side.
At that time the pressure on the right hand side wasn't
that great but you could really see a lot of pressure
in the middle, you know, the people had just virtually
ground to a standstill.

I thought to myself, well let the crush go, and along
the back of the stand there is like an alleyway which
runs between the river, and I just stood against the
fence there thinking that maybe once all the crowd had
gone down I could join in again and get in through the
turnstiles, but the crowds got bigger again and I got
swept in, and on the right hand side you were just
virtually getting pushed down towards the turnstile
area, and there was a like a little handrail/barrier
kind of thing, which was on my right hand side. As I
walked forward towards the turnstiles the pressure
started getting great again. A Policeman came from
behind the corner, and I always remember the words he
said to us, "I don't know why you're pushing there
lads, we've opened a gatevfound the corner", so we
ducked under the fence and as we ducked under the fence
                                                                114

                                                    T.   W. LLOYD


Q. You mean the little bar? - A. The little bar, yes. As
   we ducked under the concertina gate was being opened.
   There was two Policemen pushing it back. Actually in
   my statement it states that I never seen anyone pushing
   the gate open. It is not true, I did see the Police,
   two Policemen, actually pushing the gate back.

Q.   So you went in through that gate, in fact?     - A. Yes.

Q.   In the end, so to speak? - A. Yes.

Q. When you went through, what was it like? Did you rush
   through, run through, walk through? - A. No, we just
   walked through normally and ....

Q.   Prior to that, had there been a lot of crushing in the
     area immediately outside the turnstiles? - A. I would
     say so because it really was packed. People just
     couldn't move and as I say I was lucky enough to be
     over on the right hand side and there was a little bit
     of ease there, but gradually people were getting pushed
     over to that side.

Q. Did you hear any announcements over the public address?
   - A. No.

Q.   Did you   see or hear a Land Rover? - A. No.

0.   Did you see any Officers, mounted or otherwise? -      A. I
     seen two mounted Policemen.

Q. Where were they? - A. They were in the middle of the
   crowd but they were pointing away from the ground.

Q. You did not see anybody outside the perimeter gates? -
   A. No.

Q.   You did not see any Officers come past you, you said
     you were on the right hand side, coming past you, past
     gate C, mounted Officers? - A. No, not past gate C. A
     Policeman did join the crowd down by the turnstiles but
     I think they were the ones who were at the turnstile -
     they were searching people as they were going through
     the turnstile.

Q. You didn't see anybody stand on that little bar which
   you were at, shouting or waving? - A. No.

Q. You didn't see any Police Officer there at all? - A.
   No.

Q. You didn't see that? - A. No.

Q. So you came in through the gate? - A. Yes.
                                                            115

                                                  T.   W. LLOYD


Q. Then you were in the big concourse area, weren't you? -
   A. Yes.

Q. What did you do then? - A. The only entrance that I
   could see was the entrance right in front of me. I
   went down the tunnel and at that time there was no
   pressure, I mean everyone was just walking normal, but
   about half way down the tunnel you could feel a
   pressure building up on you and you gradually were
   forced to walk quicker. When eventually you came out
   into daylight it was just running into a brick wall
   virtually, you know, the people were so jammed tight in
   there.

0. So what you are saying is when you first entered the
   tunnel it was okay? - A. Yes.

0. As you got half way down pressure from where? - A. From
   behind.

Q. Which was forcing you to quicken your pace? - A. Yes.

Q. And the tunnel is also downhill, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q.   Then as you exited from the tunnel, you say it was    like
     a brick wall? - A. It was just like running into a
     brick wall, the people ....

Q.    Were the people jammed into the tunnel or were you able
     to actually get onto the terracing? - A. I was able to
     get onto the terrace.    I think Iwas one of the first
     ones down that tunnel actually. There may have been
     two or three people in front of me, that's all.

0. When you got onto the terracing, we have been told by
   others that it is quite common to have a crowd right at
   the exit but that once you got through things are a bit
   different. Was it any different, or not? - A. No.
   With the force of the people who were coming in from
   behind you were just virtually getting pushed further
   and further forward, and I got pushed that far forward
   that I ended up behind the barrier that eventually
   snapped.  It never snapped while I was there but I
   ended up behind there, I ended up behind that barrier.

Q. So you went to pen 3, you went into the right hand
   side? - A. Yes.

Q. What was happening on the field? - A. I think the
   players were just kicking in, just warming up.
Q. Warming up? - A. Yes.
                                                              116

                                                    T.   W. LLOYD


Q. Did you see the match kick off at all? - A. I never,
   no.

Q. Did you see it end? - A. I never seen anything. The
   only thing I seen was maybe the players disappearing
   off the pitch when it was stopped.

Q. Right at the end, yes. So you have told us that you
   exited. When you first came out were the players
   already on the pitch warming up? - A. Yes.

Q.   You were then carried by the crowd? - A. Yes.

Q.    Towards this barrier which broke, but   you weren't there
     when it did break? - A. No.

Q. Where did you finish up? - A. I finished up in front of
   it. I knew that the pressure on me was such that I had
   to get away from behind that bar, and I asked the man
   who was alongside of me, I said, "I know it's virtually
   impossible but do you think you could get a bit of
   pressure off me and try and edge round the barrier?",
   and eventually we managed to get a little bit of
   breathing space, I edged round and I got my legs
   trapped edging round. When I got round the barrier I
   was facing the opposite way from the pitch.

Q. So you were facing uphill? - A. Yes, and with the
   momentum of me going round the bar, round the barrier,
   I ended up facing the pitch again, and then a surge
   came and we went forward, but when it came back I
   virtually ended up in the same place as where I had
   already been. At that point I thought, "I just can't
   stand here all the match.  I'm not going to enjoy the
   match standing here, I'll have to get away from it",
   and this man- not the same fella but another person, he
   said, "There s a gate at the front". He said, "It
   looks as though it's going to be the only way we're
   going to get out of here", and by this time people were
   screaming, you know, and there was people actually
   walking on your head like stepping stones, from the
   back to get over the barriers.

     Then another surge came and it took me over towards the
     left hand side of the pen. It was then that I just
     gave ujd. I thought that would be the end of me because
     I didn t think I would get anywhere down near the gate
     again, but another surge came and it carried me further
     down and over towards the gate. I must have been about
     10 foot away from it, but directly in line with it. By
     this time it was just getting opened and there was
     people piling out through the gate. Some of the fans
     who were outside the gate were shouting to me, "Just
     throw yourself forward and we'll catch you", and at
                                                             117
                                                 T.   W.   LLOYD


   that time my mind just went, I just blacked. The next
   thing I remember I was on the running track, but I do
   remember when I was caught I was pulledout by my arms,
   and there was a man lying across the entrance to that
   gate, face down. Obviously the man must have been
   dead, but when I ended up on the running track I turned
   round, I was looking back and I just couldn't believe
   what I was seeing.  I said to this Policeman who was
   standing there, he actually put his arm up my back at
   one stage leading me away, and I said, "There's people
   dying in there", I said, "Help that man, give me a hand
   to^help the man", and he said, "There's nothing we can
   do •

   The next thing he pushed me away and I ended up on the
   field. I came round on the field with a St. John's
   Ambulanceman over me, asking me if I was okay.     I said,
   "Yes, what's happened?", and he said, "Just lie there".
   He said, "We'll get some help to you".     Then the next
   thing I remember, I was lying there - I actually work
   at the ground, I am a disc jockey at Liverpool Football
   Club - and one of the girls who work on the bar, I
   heard her shout my name. When I looked up she was on
   the side of the pitch crying, she had been split up
   from her boyfriend, so I got up and the two of us just
   sat on the running track. One of the people in the
   stand said, "Put your girlfriend in the stand, we'll
   look after her for y o u , and I put her there and I just
   went back down and started helping as much as I could.

Q. It sounds to me as if you lost consciousness perhaps
   twice, would that be right?   A. Yes, possibly twice.

Q. From what you were saying, and it also sounds as if you
   - you obviously got out because you would not have been
   on the pitch side if you had not, but you can't say in
   relation to the game what time that was, can you? - A.
   No, not the condition I was in.

Q. Show us on a plan where you were? - A. Is this when I
   came into the ground?

Q. Not when you came into the ground.  I want you to show
   me - you have described three surges, do you remember?
   - A. Yes.

Q* The first surge, you said, took you forward and back? -
   A. Yes.

Q. The second surge was the one where you really felt you
   had had it? - A. Yes.

Q. That is the "x" I want you to mark, okay? - A. Yes.
   (The witness marked Exhibit C444)
                                                         118

                                               T.   W. LLOYD


        THE CORONER:   Mr. King, shall I let you go first?
   I am not asking you to leave then but if I let you go
   first you can get anything you need to ask and then if
   we finish in time you can stay and ask anything
   additional?

        MR. KING:   Sir, that is very kind. I am all
   right until half-past-4 but I am grateful for the
   offer.

                Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Mr. Lloyd, you very kindly have, told us about events
   after you reached Stocksbridge.   I just want to ask you
   about before you got to Stocksbridge because you set
   out, didn't you, at 9 o'clock in the morning? - A. Yes.

0. And you did not get to Stocksbridge until about 12
   o'clock? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. So that is three hours, which is quite a long time? -
   A. Yes.

Q. What was the reason for the delay between 9 and 12,
   getting to Stocksbridge? - A. We had two people to pick
   up, one was in the West Derby area of Liverpool and the
   other one was at Haydock. When we made the pick-ups it
   was roughly round about, I don't know, half-9, quarter-
   to-10 when we eventually got onto the East Lancs, road.
   Then we went up through Manchester, across the Snake
   Pass. When we got this side of Manchester, there were
   all different roads converging on each other and there
   was a hold up there because the Police were only
   letting so many from each lane join in, with the
   traffic that was going on the road, over the Snake
   Pass.

Q. This hold up, how long did that add to your journey, do
   you think? - A. I don t know. It could have been about
   20 minutes, it could have been half an hour. Then when
   we got through that hold up there was a little village
   called Tintwhistle that we went through, and with it
   being a narrow village, and there is only one road
   through, right in the middle of it there was a set of
   traffic lights, they held us up. When we eventually
   got onto the Snake Pass there was two sets of roadworks
   manned by mechanical traffic lights. When we got there
   it was virtually a straight run through then until we
   got stopped by the Police on the road through
   Stocksbridge.

Q. So to summarise, there was delay, as you put it, this
   side of Manchester, where roads converged and the
   Police were only allowing through so many at a time? -
                                                          1 19

                                               T.   W. LLOYD


   A. Yes, I think there was about five different roads
   all converged in the one area.

Q. Yes, then you had that problem through Tintwhistle? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Then roadworks on the Snake Pass and the roadworks
   delayed you for how long, about? - A. It is hard to say
   because the traffic was still moving, it never really
   came to a standstill as such. It was still moving but
   moving pretty slow.




                MR. KING:    Sir, so that .
                                                      T. W. LLOYD


     MR. KING:   Sir, so that everybody knows, I ask those
questions because this was a witness, I am told, who one of
my clients specifically wanted to hear and specifically
about roadworks which they had heard about.
        THE CORONER:      Yes, you are right and I am glad you
did.

     MR. KING:   It is always of interest to know the
background to travel.

                        Further bv THE CORONER:
Q. If I can repeat that; there were really five reasons
   why you were held up. One was because you had to
   pick a few people up? - A. Yes.
Q. Secondly, there was heavy traffic anyway? - A. Yes.
Q. Thirdly, because you were coming across the Snake
   Pass and little villages which had single roads? - A.
   There was only one little village.
Q. Tintwistle? - A. Yes.
Q. Fourthly, because there were roadworks? - A. Yes.
Q. Fifthly, because you were stopped and checked by the
   Police, is that right? - A. Yes.
        THE CORONER:      Mr. King, do you want to come back on
that?

        MR. KING:      No, sir.
Q.        THE CORONER:   You have mentioned this bus which
     was standing there? - A. Yes.

Q. I do not think we can take it any further because you
   told us what you saw. What I am interested in is
   that you saw Police Officers on the road, coming down
   the Halifax Road, not in the coach but on the road as
   you were walking down towards the ground? - A. What,
   walking towards the ground?
Q. Yes? - A. No, none that I could see.
Q. You did not have to go through a chicane of Officers
   or anything like that? - A. No.
Q. You were not checked at that roundabout or anywhere
   else? You were checked four times I know? - A. Yes.
                                                    T. W. LLOYD


 Q. But when you were walking, nobody looked whether you
    were carrying cans or anything as far as you
    remember? - A. No.
 Q. Thank you very much indeed for being here.   I very
    much appreciate your help. - A. Thank you.
      THE CORONER:   For tomorrow it will be Mr. Sweeney. I
 am very sorry about that but it is impossible to complete
 you today.

      MR. SWEENEY:   It is inconvenient tomorrow.
      THE CORONER:   We will try and fit you in on Monday if
 that is all right. We do not want to pick a day which is
 inconvenient. Can you have a word with Sergeant Tredgold,
 if he is about, and fix a specific date for Mr. Sweeney?
 There will be Mr. T. Cooper, Mr. B. Doyle, Mr. G. Hutt, Mr.
 R. Latham, Mr. T. Pitt, Mr. B. Scarratts, Mr. G. Seddon and
 Mr. A. Duncan. These are all supporters, of course.
 Ladies and gentlemen, leave us and have a nice evening. We
 will see you tomorrow at ten o'clock.

                 (The Jury retired from Courts
       THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, we were going to deal with
• legal submissions but Mr. King has an engagement and so we
 will defer it. I am sure nobody is going to object to
  that. Is there anything absolutely pressing before Mr.
  King and I go? No. Shall we say ten o'clock tomorrow?

        (The Inquests were adjourned until ten o'clock
                    the following morning\
