P M H t ~ N e t M fram Mfl
Ref. No. 7666




                  /JtLsdf

                LA-,
V




                                      First of S L Popper / /
                                      Sworn            /o///£2"
                                      on Behalf of Respondent
                                               Case No.» CQ/1009/92

    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

    QUEENS BENCH DIVISION

    CROWN OFFICE LIST


    IN THE MATTER of AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


    B E T W E E N   :-

                                  REGINA


                                  - and -



                         HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR
                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                 Ex parte
                            STRINGER AND OTHERS




                                AFFIDAVIT



    I STEFAN LEOPOLD POPPER, of

    ______                r MAKE OATH and say as follows:



    1.   I hold the following qualifications: LLB. B.Med.Sci. BM.

         B S. MRGCP. For 6 years I was Her Majesty's Coroner for

         South-Yorkshire (West District).     On the

         1st November 1991 I retired.      At various dated between

         the 18th April 1989 and the 28th March 1991 I conducted

         Inquests into the deaths of 95 individuals as a result of

         an incident at Hillsborough Stadium on Saturday the

         15th April 1989.    In total I sat for 96 days.
I make this Affidavit in response to those sworn by

Jeremy Hawthorn on the 5th May 1992 and €Ee~~

11th September 1992 filed on behalf of the 6 Applicants.

I make this Affidavit so that the Court may have the

benefit of my reasoning in acting in the way that I did.

Accordingly, what follows is put forward by way of

explanation.    I am content to leave all matters of

argument to Counsel instructed upon my behalf.



My attention has been drawn to the 7 grounds raised by

the Applicants in their Form 86A dated the 5th May 1992

and I will attempt to deal with each of those matters.        I

will commence by providing a summary of the form and

nature of the Inquests.     There is now produced and shown

to me and marked "SLP.l" a paginated exhibit bundle to

which reference is made in the body of this Affidavit.

That exhibit is divided into marked sub-sections which

indicate the contents.     I have attempted not to duplicate

material exhibited by Mr Hawthorn.    Further, I have made

an every effort to keep the volume of the exhibit within

a manageable amount.     During the course of the Inquest

there was generated an enormous volume of material which

I considered.    It would be intolerable for me to burden

this Court with all of that information.
Immediately, following the Hillsborough tragedy it fell

to me to conduct the Inquests into the deaths of the 95

individuals who suffered injury on tha't Saturday

15th April 1989 which led to their deaths.    In compliance

with my usual and well-established practice I considered

that the questions to be answered for each of the 95

Inquests within my inquisitorial jurisdiction and within

the parameters of the Coroners' Act 1988 were: Who? When?

Where? and How? - in other words who the person was,

where he/she was when they died; when he/she died and

finally how he/she died.



I opened the Inquests on the 95 deaths starting on the

18th April 1989.   At the initial hearings the bodies were

identified and the Inquests then adjourned.    Even at that

very early stage there were certain features of this

tragedy which were bound to impact upon the nature of the

Inquests; including



 (1)   The appointment on the 17th April 1989 of the Right

       Honourable Lord Justice Taylor by the Secretary of

       State for the Home Department to carry out an

       Inquiry:


       "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday

       football ground on the 15th April 1989 and to make

       recommendations about the needs of crowd control and

       safety at sports events."
(2)   The very large number of deaths and the nature of

      the circumstances in which they occurred coupled

      with what would be the extreme distress involved for

      the relatives and friends of the deceased.



I was acutely aware of attempting to balance the

practical imperatives of my inquisitorial purposes and

the eminently understandable desire on the part of all of

the relatives and friends of the deceased to know every

single piece of information concerning the lives of the

deceased on that fateful Saturday afternoon.



Following the identification carried out in April 1989

there followed the Interim Report by Lord Justice Taylor

in August 1989 and the Final Report in January 1990.      The

Inquiry and the Coronal process was assisted by an

independent Police Force - the West Midlands Constabulary

- who investigated the incident and gathered evidence for

the Inquiry.



Having opened each of the 95 Inquests in April 1989 and

then adjourned each, it had been my original intention

once the public inquiry had been completed to resume the

Inquests reasonably promptly and indeed initially I had

fixed the date for resumption as the 15th January 1990.
However, sometime after the Interim Report by Lord

Justice Taylor in August 1989 I was informed that

documentation was being prepared for submission to the

Director of Public Prosecutions in order to enable him to

consider bringing criminal charges arising out the

incident.



As a consequence of this I had determined that the

resumed Inquests would have to await the Director's

decision.   However, some time in I think early

February 1990 I received a letter from Miss Steele, a

solicitor connected with the Hillsborough Steering

Committee, enclosing a letter she had written to the DPP

regarding the provision of at least some limited

information regarding the deceased.    I reconsidered the

matter in the light of this request and following

consultation with the office of the Director of Public

Prosecutions decided that the Inquests could be resumed

on a limited basis at this stage.     In particular we would

not deal with the issued of "How".    Evidence would have

to be carefully adduced such that there could be no

possible prejudice to any criminal investigations should

the Director decide upon this course of action.



Accordingly, I arranged for a series of meetings to take

place to explore this option.   The first took place on

the 26th February 1990 with Mr Fraser representing the
                             - 6 -



interests of the families.     It was agreed that the

Inquests could proceed and all relevant interests could

be both promoted and protected by a two stage process -

firstly, answering the questions who, where and when (the

interim part of the Inquest) followed by a how element of

the Inquest depending upon any decision by the Director

of Public Prosecutions.



I arranged a further meeting on the 6th March 1990 where

a broader range of representation was able to attend.

The proposed method of proceeding was agreed.     I

explained fully the way in which I wanted the evidence to

be presented so as to meet the legitimate requirements of

everyone involved.   There was no dissent from the

proposals at this meeting.



Therefore, as can be appreciated from the above, in order

to complete my statutory function I had determined that

the factual evidence concerning the questions of who,

when and where, could and should be met by Officers of

the West Midlands Constabulary summarising for each of

the 95 cases the effect of the evidence they had gathered

and collected.   I had carefully explained to all

concerned in particular Mr Fraser, why I had chosen this

path (not least to avoid the possible pitfalls of

prejudicing the criminal investigations) and he was in

agreement with my proposals.     On the same questions, the

forensic pathology
                               - 7 -



     evidence would be dealt with by the pathologists who

     undertook the post mortem examinations.   The team of

     pathologists involved in the post mortem examinations

     included no less than 4 professors, one of whom was

     Professor Alan Usher - the Professor of Forensic Medicine

     at Sheffield.   He is a pathologist of international

     repute.   He and the team of pathologists had completed

     all the autopsies within 48 hours of the tragedy.



8.   Although the Final Report from the Inquiry was completed

     in January 1990, at that stage the possibility of serious

     criminal proceedings and disciplinary proceedings still

     remained open against certain Police Officers of the

     South Yorkshire Constabulary.



9.   As already described above and with agreement,    I decided

     that the questions of who, when and where should be

     decided at a preliminary part of the Inquest for each of

     the 95 individuals with the issue of how being held over

     until the decision regarding criminal proceedings (if

     any) was determined.



10. The Preliminary Inquests (otherwise known as the Interim

     or Mini Inquests)



     Each of the 95 Inquests was reconvened to deal with the

     preliminary aspects.   This part of the Inquest has been

     referred to as the interim or mini Inquests.     This part
of the Inquests started on the 18th April 1990 and

continued up to and including the 4th May 1990.    At that

time upward of 90 out of the 95 families were represented

by the Hillsborough Steering Committee.    The solicitor

either directly or as agent representing the vast

majority of the families was Mr Fraser and he was present

when I led the relevant evidence.



On the 18th April 1990 a jury was empanelled to deal with

the 95 Inquests.    This same jury heard all the evidence

at the preliminary hearings (or interim Inquests) and all

the evidence at the resumed Inquests staring on the

19th November 1990 and going through until the delivery

of the verdicts in each of these Inquests on the

28th March 1991.    The preliminary Inquests were heard

either at the Memorial Hall or the Medico-Legal Centre,

Sheffield.



T'   ’’     of representations on the 18th April 1990 w&£ jas

follows :



Mr Sean Smith, Counsel for the Medical and Dental Defence

Union of Scotland on behalf of Alexander Robert

Walker-Forest.



Mr Callaghan, Solicitor for Trent Regional Health

Authority and South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance

 Service.
                                - 9 -




   Mr Gregory, Solicitor for Sheffield City Council.



   Miss Thorpe, Solicitor for Messrs Eastwood and Partners.



   Miss Addleman, Counsel for the Police Federation of

   England and Wales.



   Mr Isaacs, Counsel for Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.



   Miss Norcliffe, Solicitor for the Chief Constable of

   South Yorkshire.



   Mr Catchpole, Counsel for Sheffield Wednesday Football

   Club.



11. I would emphasise the following points as to the

   procedure I adopted:



    (1)    As relevant to the six Inquests the subject matter

           of this application the pathological evidence was

           taken from Professor Alan Usher, Dr Slater (a

           Consultant Histopathologist) and Dr John Clark, a

           Pathologist from Glasgow.    In total 9 pathologists

           were involved in carrying out the post mortems

           within 48 hours of the tragedy.   The others involved

           in alphabetical order were Dr Lloyd Denmark,
      Professor Laurence Henry, Professor J S P Jones,

      Dr S S^v^aloganatham, Dr J R Shortland,    and

      Professor J Underwood.    My understanding of the

      overwhelming pathological evidence was that the

      victims died as a result of crush injuries received

      which in the overwhelming number of cases led to

      traumatic asphyxia and that the pathological

      evidence available to me was that the injury that

      caused the death was crushing.



      The representatives of all the families of the

      deceased who had requested theirthad been provided

      with copies of the post mortem reports prior to the

      18th April 1990.



(2)   I adopted the approach of asking West Midlands

      Officers to summarise the evidence.    It included the

      results of extensive and exhaustive study of TV

      recordings, video and photographic evidence and was

      intended inasmuch as was possible to give accurate

      and factual evidence in respect of the questions of

      who, when and where.     I have set out above the

      reasons why I used this approach.     Further, as a

      matter of common humanity it avoided or at least

      reduced the need for relatives and friends of the

      deceased to have to re-live acutely painful and

      distressing events.    I must stress that this

      procedure had been explained to the representatives
                            - 11 -



      of the families and there had been agreement from

      the representatives about this method of proceeding

      before 18th April 1990.
      The evidence that was given was given on oath by

      Officers (albeit hearsay evidence) - the written

      summaries themselves were not evidence.     These

      written summaries were circulated to the legal

      representatives before I called the evidence.       On

      the 18th April 1990 I explained to the jury how the

      presentation of the summaries was to take place,

      together with how they had been prepared.     I also

      explained the working of Rule 37 and how I intended

      to apply that Rule in the presentation of evidence.

      No representation was made by Mr Fraser about these

      matters.


(3)   At the reconvened hearing of a substantial number of

      the Inquests, I started by explaining the method I

      proposed to adopt to the members of the families

      present.   As far as I recall Mr Fraser was always

      present.   There was no objection from him as to the

      proposed procedure.    Further, insofar as I can

      recall, there was no substantial challenge by way of

      cross-examination to the summarised evidence

      provided by the Officers of West Midlands Force.         A

       number of families through Mr Fraser expressed their

      thanks for the work carried out by those Officers.
                                   - 12 -




    12. In the majority of the cases the uncontested evidence of

       the pathologists was that the pathological cause of death

       was traumatic asphyxia and that within a matter of

        seconds the individuals would have been unconscious and

       unaware of anything further and would have died within a

       matter of minutes thereafter.



    13. The "How" element of the Inquests



        Following the conclusion of the Preliminary Inquests on

        4th May 1990, I was informed in September 1990 that the

        Director of Public Prosecutions had decided not to

        prosecute anyone in respect of the disaster.     The

        Inquests had been adjourned to a date to be fixed and

        accordingly, I made arrangements for the "How" part of

        the Inquests to be held.



^   14. On the 30th October 1990 at the Medico-Legal Centre in

        Sheffield I convened a Business Meeting of the Legal

        Representatives of the interested parties.     This was

        specifically required by me in order to discuss procedure

        and the smooth running of the main part of the Inquests

       which were due to start on Monday 19th November 1990 and

       to be heard throughout at the Town Hall in Sheffield

        (where the Taylor Inquiry had sat).
 In the meeting I indicated that in general terms I

 proposed in this part of the Inquest to take the evidence

 together in respect of all 95.    I then proceeded to

 outline to the representatives the parameters of my

 inquiry on the "how question".     In particular, I

 identified the cut-off point for evidence that I had

 selected, namely the arrival of the first ambulance upon

 the pitch.    I had concluded that circulating the

 statements of witnesses before I called them would not

 take place.    In a similar vein I stated my initial views

 about the admissibility of the Taylor Inquiry Report.



 This was a Business Meeting and not part of the hearing

 itself.   It was not the appropriate forum for me to hear

 legal argument, but quite properly the legal

 representatives present used the occasion to inform me of

 the matters they would be raising.



 Mr King for the bereaved indicated in general terms his

 position on the "cut-off" point.



 I decided that all matters of a legal argument should be

 heard on the morning of Monday 19th November 1990.



. Whilst on the 30th October 1990 I had not made a

 preliminary ruling that in consideration the question of

 "How" I would be concerned with events up to and
    including the time of 3.15pm on Saturday 15th April 1989

    but not thereafter, I had reached a provisional decision

    that I would proceed in that fashion.   It was clear to me

    that an important issue for the "How" question was the

    manner in which the crushing on the terraces had come

    about.   As a marker I picked the arrival of the first

    ambulance on the pitch which was timed at 3.15pm because

    on the overwhelming pathological evidence available to

    me, by that time permanent irrecoverable damage would

    have already occurred.   I felt it right to draw a line in

    that regard and X had in mind the approach adopted by the

    Coroner in the Zeebruggee Inquest.   However, my decision

    was based mainly upon the expert pathological medical
    evidence.



16. Representation for this main part of the Inquest included
   the following:



   Mr Timothy King (Counsel): for 43 of the families.

   Mrs McBrien: lay representative for the McBrien family.

   Miss Hampton (Counsel) and Mr Maxwell Q.C.: Sheffield
   City Council.

   Mr Hale (Solicitor): Superintendent Marshall.

   Mr Manning (Solicitor): Superintendent Murray.

   Mr Payne (Counsel) and Mr Limb (Counsel): Chief Constable
   South Yorkshire.

  Mr Isaacs (Counsel).* Chief Superintendent Duekenfield.
                              - 15 -



   Miss Sinclair (Counsel): Eastwood and Partners.

   Mr Catchpole (Counsel): Sheffield Wednesday Football

   Club.
   Mr Callaghan (Solicitor): Ambulance Service.

   Miss Addelmann (Counsel): Police Federation.

   Mr Russell (Counsel): Superintendent Greenwood.



17. On Monday 19th November 1990 I heard argument from

   Counsel instructed for the families of the deceased about

   the way in which the answering of the "How" question was

   to be approached.     On that day 43 of the families were

    apparently represented by Mr Timothy King of Counsel who

    had been Junior Counsel instructed to represent the

    families before the Taylor Inquiry.



    In summary, Mr King made the following points to me in

    order to persuade me to a different view to the

    provisional view I had reached:



    (1)    Up to this point there had been no investigation or

           systematic analysis of what was the organisation of

           the rescue, what it might have been and whether it

           would have made a difference.   In that regard he was

           concentrating on that period of time after the

           individuals had been brought off the terraces and

           before death was certified.
                               - 16 -



   (2)    By reference to the case of Richard Jones he

          contended that there was material to support the

          general proposition that not allT the victims were

          necessarily dead by 3.15pm on that Saturday

          afternoon.



    (3)   There was material (in particular from

          Dr John Ashton) that the medical and rescue attempt

          were disorganised.



18. I think it right to record Mrs McBrien supported Mr King,

   Mr Hale was not entirely supportive of Mr King's

    submissions and Mr Callaghan was against his approach.

   Mr Payne made a point in support of Mr King, but he and

   the other legal representatives present adopted

   essentially a neutral position.



19. Having listened very carefully to these submissions I was

   not persuaded from my preliminary view.     I reminded

   Mr King that the Inquest was not a Judicial Inquiry.        In

   answer to the seven matters raised in the Form 86A and

   the six cases the subject of the application I deal more

   particularly with my reasoning within the exhibit to this

   Affidavit and further as set out below.



20. On that first day of the resumed Inquests into the 95

    deaths there was also a good deal of legal argument (in
                                 - l i ­




       the absence of the jury) about the rules against

       self-incrimination as they applied to Police witnesses.

       Those representatives also strongly urged'^fie" to consider

       whether the representations of the families at the

       adjourned Inquests was to elicit evidence in order to

       persuade the Director of Public Prosecutions to

       reconsider his decision not to prosecute any of the

       Officers and for the jury to bring in a verdict of



•
       unlawful killing.



    21. I was well aware of the emotions of the families, of the

        concerns of the Police Officers and of the particular

        interests of all other represented parties.    I could not

        but fail to be aware of the views of the interested

        parties.



    22. Following the legal argument on the Monday morning the

        19th November 1990 the jury returned in the afternoon and

^       the Inquests proceeded on the "How" question for a total

        of 80 days up to the delivery of the verdicts.     In broad

        terms, I called the evidence starting outside the ground

        and working inwards.   Th£(tf evidence was called about the

        arrival of the people to the outskirts of the town

        followed by evidence as to how they approached closer to

        the ground.   I then called evidence of the entrance of

        the crowd to the ground (from all perspectives).     I

        called evidence dealing with the opening of the gates,
                               - 18 -



   the concourse and the tunnel and the way in which people

   went on to the terraces.     I ensured that evidence was

   called which came from people within^ enclosures 3 and 4

   and further I called evidence from people who were

   outside those enclosures but had a different perspective

    from different parts of the stadium.    I then looked at

   the position by calling evidence from those who had been

   on or near the perimeter fence.      I called evidence about

   the broken barrier.     The Senior Police Officers at Gate C

   at the ground and those in the Control Room were called.

   Evidence was also taken from those representing the

   Licensing Authority.      I attempted to call evidence such

    that all points of view were put before the jury, namely

    from the spectators, the Police and others.



23. The summing-up and submissions on the verdicts available

    I dealt with in the following way.



    By Friday the 15th March 1991 (the 71st day of the "How”

    part of the Inquests) the evidence was beginning to draw

    to a close.     On that afternoon some of the

    representatives began to hand in their written legal

    submissions.     In particular, Mr Maxwell Q.C. and

    Mr Payne.     On Monday the 18th March 1991 the evidence was

    concluded.     On Thursday 19th March 1991 (the 73rd day of

    the "How" part of the Inquests) the legal representatives

    commenced making their submissions.     They made their
submissions in the following orders Mr Maxwell Q.C.,

Mr Payne, Mr Issacs, Mr Manning, Mr King, Mr Catchpole,

Mrs McBrien, Mr Russell, Miss Addleman and Mr Hale.



The submissions and further submissions were completed by

the afternoon of Wednesday 20th March 1991.    In summary,

all of the representatives made submissions as to whether

or not the verdict of unlawful killing should properly be

left open to the jury.   Not surprisingly they differed in

their conclusions.   Only one representative ( Mr Payne)

indicated what other verdicts should be considered and

left open to the jury, namely misadventure/accidental

death or an open verdict.   Both he and Mr Maxwell Q.C.

agreed that the order in which the jury should consider

their verdicts should be: unlawful killing; then

misadventure/accidental death; and finally an open

verdict.



No one made any submissions relating to any verdict of

lack of care or any verdict whereby the cause of death

was aggravated by lack of care - either on the part of

any Police Force or Police Officer or of any other body.

Mr King made submissions exclusively referable to the

verdict of unlawful killing.     It is also correct to say

that on most days of the main part of the Inquests the

legal representatives raised submissions concerning

points of law.   At no stage was I addressed upon verdicts

of the nature of lack of care.
                         - 20 -




On Thursday the 21st March 1991 (the 75th day) I started

my summing up and continued through Friday the

22nd March 1991, Monday the 25th March 1991 and completed

the summing up with the jury retiring at 12.33pm on

Tuesday the 26th March 1991.



As far as my summing up was concerned, I emphasised that

each Inquest had to be considered separately.    With

respect to the verdicts open to the jury, I directed them

but they were as follows: unlawful killing, accidental

death and an open verdict.     In explaining the verdict of

accidental death, I emphasised that it included events

where no one was to blame through to events where there

was negligence.   I made it clear that such a verdict did

not absolve everyone of blame.



I did indicate to the jury that under Rule 36(b) no rider

should be attached to any verdict.     I also drew their

attention to Rule 42.



On Thursday the 28th March 1991 at 12.08pm (the 80 day of

the main part of the Inquest) the jury returned majority

verdicts of accidental death in all of the 95 Inquests.
                             - 21 -



24. The Seven Grounds of Criticism in Form 86A



   With respect to the separate arguments made in respect of

    each of the 6 applicants I have set out my decisions (and

    where necessary reasoning) by way of separate.commentary

    in the exhibit to this Affidavit.



    I direct my evidence on this aspect specifically to the 6

    Inquests the subject matter of the application.



    Criticism (1)



    I have set out above the reasons why I adopted the

    procedure I did for the preliminary Inquests held in

    April and May 1990.   In the meetings beforehand this

    procedure was explained, understood and agreed.      In each

    of the 6 Inquests the subject of this application, the

    families were each represented by Mr Fraser.     He or his

    instructing solicitors had been provided with each of the

    written summaries beforehand.     At the outset of the

    Inquests I explained the procedure that I proposed to

    adopt to the families.   No objection was taken by

    Mr Fraser and there was very little questioning of the

    Officers giving the evidence.     I believe that in each

    instance the evidence as given in Court by the Officers

    was a fair and accurate statement of the evidence then

    available.
Criticism (2)



This is in effect the same criticism as in (1) above.



Criticism (3)



My understanding of the responsible and relevant expert

medical evidence available to me from pathologists of

high renown which had not at any stage been challenged

during that part of the Inquests held in April and

May 1990 was overwhelmingly to the effect that each of

the 95 victims were dead or had suffered irreversible

injury by 3.15pm.   Where appropriate, the pathologists

were invited to consider lay evidence relevant to each

particular case.    My task was to call relevant evidence

to put before the jury.    In the light of the unchallenged

expert testimony of the pathologists, together with the

other evidence already before the jury, there was not in

the circumstances of this disaster any other relevant or

reasonable medical or rescue evidence that would have had

any impact upon the cause of death.



I set out in the exhibit my comments upon the evidence of

Dr Burns.
Criticism (4)



I did not call either Dr Ashton or Dr Phillips.     I

considered the statements from both of these doctors.        In

the light of the uncontested pathological evidence I did

not consider their evidence to be relevant to the issue

of "How" in any of the 95 Inquests.     I had noted that

Dr Ashton and Dr Phillips had both given oral evidence to

the Taylor Inquiry.     I had read the Interim report in

particular paragraphs 296 to 298.     They provided as

follows:



     "No Fault by the Emergency Services

     296.   I say at the outset of this chapter that no

     valid criticism can be made of the response by the

     St Johns Ambulance Brigade by SYMAS or by the Fire

     Brigade on the 15th April.     Indeed, no represented

     party ventured any criticism of them.     The only

     attack on SYMAS came from 2 Liverpool doctors. One

     claimed that ambulances did not arrive swiftly or

     with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack

     of triage.    He was proved to be wrong in all 3

     respects.    Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on

     television on 15th April when he said more lives

     could have been saved if staff and equipment had

     arrived earlier.    Apart from being proved wrong in

     fact as to the time of arrival of ambulances, he
                              - 24 -



         conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say

         whether lives could have been saved.     His comments

         on television were irresponsible.   The other doctor

         complained of the absence of defibrillators.     I am

         satisfied on the overwhelming evidence that to

         attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with

         people milling about would have been highly

         dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the

         electric charge.



         297.   I find that all 3 of the emergency services

         named above responded promptly when alerted, that

         they brought appropriate equipment and that their

         personnel operated efficiently.



         298.   It would be unreasonable to expect, at any

         sports stadium, medical facilities capable of

         dealing with a major disaster such as occurred.      To

£        have in advance at the ground, oxygen,

         resuscitators, stretchers, other equipment and

         medical staff sufficient to deal with over 100

         casualties is not practicable."



    At paragraph 301 the Report said:

         "There was insufficiently close co-operation between

         the Police and the emergency services.     It is clear

         that SYMAS and the Fire Brigade should have been
       called earlier than they were.   However, in view of

       the nature and extent of the crushing, the time when

       Police rescue began and the pathetically short

       period for which those unable to breathe could

       survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to

       the emergency services would have saved more lives."



I was aware that Dr Phillips and Dr Ashton were the

doctors concerned in the observations made in paragraph

296.



In the light of the findings of the Lord Justice Taylor

Inquiry, the contents of their statements and of the

pathological evidence I had heard, I did not consider

that their evidence would assist the jury.



After the morning of the 19th November 1990 Mr King made

no further application with respect to Dr Phillips or

Dr Ashton.    I received letters from Mrs McBrien and

Mr Jones asking me to call these doctors.



For the above reasons I decided against this course.



Criticism (5)



Again, this criticism is really a repeat of the point

made in (3) above.
                               - 26 -




   Criticism (6)



   On the relevant evidence that I had led I directed the

   jury upon the verdicts that were in my opinion open to

   them.    I had invited and obtained legal submissions from

   all interested parties.     I have indicated in paragraph 23

   above what submissions were made to me and how I directed

   the jury.



   Criticism (7)



    X am confident that the evidence given in Court was an

    accurate and a fair summary on the evidence then

    available.



25. With respect to the matters exhibited to

    Jeremy Hawthorn's second Affidavit sworn on the

    11th September 1992, I comment as follows:



    (1)    At the time I gave an interview to the makers of the

           television programme, I had retired from the office

           of Her Majesty's Coroner.    However, the transcript

           accurately sets out certain of my answers (plainly

                                                            was
                             - 27 -




   (1)   However, I confirm that the views I expressed in

         those interviews represent my opinion.



   (3)   I have read and considered the 6 page report of the

         well known pathologist, Dr Iain West, dated

         20th August 1992.   He is an eminent man in his field

         - but then so is Professor Usher and so are Doctors

         Clark and Slater and the other pathologists.

         Professor Usher had held the post of Home Office

         Pathologist for South Yorkshire and East Midlands

         for 25 years, he has conducted approximately 27,000

         post mortems, 700 murder investigations and has

         professionally examined 40 to 50 cases of traumatic

         asphyxia.   In certain instances Dr West expresses a

         different view or opinion to the pathologists who

         gave evidence at the Inquest.   He was not present at

         Hillsborough, has seen none of the bodies, he

         carried out none of the post mortems and has not

         seen the post mortem photographs.   I see no reason

         why Dr West's opinion is to be preferred to the

         evidence given by the pathologists who carried out

         the autopsies.




SWORN by the said
STEFAN LEOPOLD POPPER
in the City of Nottingham
in the County of Nottinghamshire




kl/sp/278a
First of S L Popper
Sworn
on Behalf of
ResgondepJt
' tase^Ko. CO/1009/92

IN THE HIGH COURT OF
JUSTICE

QUEENS BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST


IN THE MATTER of AN
APPLICATION FOR
JUDICIAL REVIEW


B E T W E E N


        REGINA



        - and -


HER MAJESTY'S CORONER
 FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
       Ex parte
 STRINGER AND OTHERS




      AFFIDAVIT




Mark Webster
City Solicitor and
Head of Administration
Town Hall
Sheffield    SI 2HH



Counsel's ref; PR/C/
SHEFCC/1


kl/sp/278a
SECTION 1
                                                                                I




                                                     First of S. L. Popper
                                                     Sworn
                                                     on Behalf of Respondent
                                                         Ca.se No. CO/1009/92

    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
    QUEENS BENCH DIVISION
    CROWN OFFICE LIST

    IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

    B E T W E E N :


                                       REGINA


                  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                                       EX PART

                             STRINGER AND OTHERS




    This is the Exhibit marked "SLP1" referred to in the Affidavit of

    Stefan Leopold Popper attached hereto.




%
            Sworn this                      day of                 1993

    BEFORE ME.



    Solicitor/Commission for Oaths.




                                   /
                                                                    <? x


                             PAUL CARLILE



(1)    I opened the Inquest on Paul Carlile on 19th April 1989 when

       evidence of identification was taken.     The autopsy was

       carried out by Professor Alan Usher.



(2 )   On 3rd May 1990 the Inquest on Paul Carlile was reconvened.

       Mr. Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.     I explained

       the procedure I was proposing to adopt.     No objection was

       made by Mr. Fraser.



(3)    Professor Alan Usher gave evidence and in answer to me

stated:-



       "The typical signs of traumatic asphyxia were present both
       externally and internally".

       " ... I gave his cause of death as traumatic asphyxia".

(4)    Mr. Fraser put one question to Professor Usher who answered

       as follows:-

       " ... The reason for Paul's death was that his chest was
       held so tightly that he could not breath in or out and, once
       that had happened, then he would have been unconscious in a
       matter of seconds, between 10 to 20 seconds. He would have
       died within a few minutes but at the time, of course,
       subsequent to his unconsciousness, he would not have been
       aware of any pain".

       There was no other challenge to the pathological evidence.

(5)    WPC Geraldine Evans provided the summary of the evidence

       collected relating to Paul Carlile.     She summarised the

       evidence of 15 witnesses. Mr. Fraser neither objected to

       this procedure, not did he wish to ask any question of WPC

       Evans.


                             2
(6)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence

      available.   Again, Mr. Fraser neither objected to this

      procedure nor did he have any questions of the officer.



(7)   At the conclusion of this part of the Inquest on 3rd May

      1990 relating to Paul Carlile, Mr. Fraser read a note from

      the family


      "The note is from the family in general, Sir, and I read it
      out as it stands. They want to thank Michael Layton ^and
      Peter Hogan who, I understand, is an officer who assisted
      Inspection Layton, Sir, for their help throughout the
      Inquiry. They want to thank the two officers, Goulding and
      Pont, for the assistance which they gave to Paul on the day,
      together with the ambulance man whose name has not been
      traced.  Sir, they want to thank Maureen Rowe and^Peter Hyde
      from Moseley Social Services and they have beenf in the
      family's words, Sir, a 'lifeline for us throughout the last
      year'. Sir, they want to thank Michael Hollinghurst for
      trying to save Paul. They say, 'words will never express
      how we feel, but knowing that he was with Paul, we are all
      grateful'. Finally, Sir they want to thank you for being,
      again, their words 'so thorough and a gentleman' as you have
      been throughout these Inquests and, in particular, the
      Inquest into their loved one".

(8)   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest

      commenced on the 19th November 1990.    Much of that evidence

      was common to all of the 95 Inquests.    With particular

      respect to Paul Carlile, on 9th January 1991 (26th day of

      main part of the Inquests) I called Michael Hollinghurst and




                            3
       on 13th February 1991 (49th day of the main part of H;he

       Inquests) Ian Fearns.   Mr. Timothy King who appeared for the

       family during this part of the Inquest had the opportunity

       to question both of them and did so.



(9)    At no stage during this last part of the Inquest was it

       suggested on behalf of the family that Professor Usher's

       evidence was inaccurate or wrong.



(10) Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdicticn, the

       circumstances of this disaster, the findings of the lord

      Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to P.

      Carlile, it did not appear that there was any other

      responsible or any other relevant evidence relating to

      medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on
      the cause of death.



(11) There was plentiful evidence before the jury for this

      Inquest and the 94 others concerning the acts of thoss

      responsible for crowd control and safety.



(12) Apart from correspondence the only formal request I received

      in relation to the evidence of Dr. Phillips and Dr. A 3 hton

      was as follows.   Mr. King in his submissions on the morning

      of the 19th November 1990 mentioned these witnesses a;s

      indeed did he mention Mr. Eccleston.    However, after "hat

      submission he did not make any further application to

      persuade me to call any of the evidence from these
                                                                s

    witnesses.   The parents of Richard Jones wrote a letter to

    me dated 12th February 1991 in which they asked me to call

     the evidence from Dr. Phillips and Dr. Ashton.   For the

     reasons set out in the main body of the Affidavit I did not

     do so.




1.9apgt




                           5
                                                                  4    J ff r '




                            IAN GLOVER



(1)   I opened the Inquest on Ian Glover on iSTh*April 1989, when

      evidence of identification was taken.     The autopsy was

      carried out by Professor Alan Usher.



(2)   On 4th May 1990 the Inquest on Ian Glover was reconvened.

      Mr. Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.     I explained

      the procedure I was proposing to adopt.     No objection was

      made by Mr. Fraser.



(3)   Professor Usher gave evidence and in answer to me said:-



      "His body presented both externally and internally the
      typical appearances of traumatic asphyxia ... I give the
      cause of death as traumatic asphyxia ... He would take
      between four and six minutes to die. It would only be the
      first ten to twenty seconds he would be aware of".

(4)   Mr. Fraser had no questions for Professor Usher as to the

      cause of death.   His one question related to a neck device

      utilised by the undertakers.



(5)   WPC Geraldine Evans provided the summary of the evidence

      collected relating to Ian Glover.   She summarised the

      evidence of five witnesses.    Mr. Fraser neither objected to

      this procedure, nor did he have any questions for WPC Evans.



(6)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence

      available.   Again Mr. Fraser neither objected to this

      procedure nor did he have any questions of the officer.



                              6
                                                                     7

(7)   On 4th May 1990 Joseph Glover indicated to WPC Evans that

      whilst he was with the deceased in the temporary mortuary an

      unnamed doctor said that he detected a pulse.    Joseph Glover

      had not previously revealed this information.     I recalled

      Professor Usher.   In answer to me he indicated in effect

      that there could have been a mistake about the pulse, but

      that even if the finding were accurate the deceased would

      have been unconscious and severely brain damaged.    I took

      the step of recalling the pathologist to deal with this new

      point because I wished the family to hear any explanation in

      Court rather than to go away without the point having been

      considered.



(8)   At the conclusion of this part of the Inquest on 4th May

      1990 Mr. Fraser stated


      "Sir, just before you conclude taking evidence, I riss again
      at the specific instruction of Ian's family. They ars very
      conscious of the efforts that were made to save Ian cm the
      day and they are very appreciative of everybody at tha
      ground who did everything they possibly could and
      thereafter.

      Sir they are particularly impressed by the way people of
      Sheffield, with whom they had dealings on that day and
      since, responded to this tragedy to their family and they
      very much appreciate that".

(9)   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest

      commenced on the 19th November 1990.   Much of that evidence

      was common to all 95 Inquests.   I had received a letter

      dated 15th October 1990 from John Glover (the deceased's

      father).   On 29th January 1991 (day 40 of the
                                                                 8 &



    main part of the Inquests) I called Joseph GloverJ £ ^ £ ,
    deceased's brother) so that he could add anything^that he

    wished to the statement he first gave.' T r a i l e d him because

    he wanted to give evidence.


(10) Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the

    circumstances of this disaster, the findings of the Lord

    Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to I.

     Glover, it did not appear that there was any other

     responsible or any other relevant evidence relating to

     medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on

     the cause of death.




1.9bpgt
                                                                 ? *1


                              RICHARD JONES



(1)   I opened the Inquest on Richard Jones onfTith April 1989 and

      evidence of identification was taken.   The autopsy was

      carried out by Professor Alan Usher.



(2)   On 3rd May 1990 the Inquest concerning Richard Jones was

      reconvened.   Mr. Fraser appeared for the family. I did not

      in this case specifically explain the procedure I was to

      adopt, since Mr. Jones (the father) had been present on the

      first day when I had gone through the explanation.    I

      reminded him of this.    Mr. Fraser made no objection to the

      procedure.



(3)   In answer to me Professor Usher stated:-



      "There were obvious signs of traumatic asphyxia both
      externally and internally". "This young man died essentially
      because he could not move his chest in or out and that
      meant, of course, he could not breathe and that meant oxygen
      was cut off to his vital organs and, once that chest was
      fixed, he would have been unconscious in a matter of
      seconds, probably between 10 and 20 seconds, and he would be
      completely unknowing of anything that happened subsequent to
      that, though he would take a matter of minutes, perhaps
      between 4 and 6 minutes, to die".

      Whilst Mr. Fraser did ask some questions of Professor Usher

      directed towards a blood alcohol measurement, the

      pathological evidence relating to the cause of death was not

      in any way challenged.



(4)   Police Sergeant Killock provided the summary of the evidence

      collected and relating to Richard Jones.   He summarised the


                               Q
                                                                /o



      evidence of 9 witnesses.   Mr. Fraser neither objected to

      this procedure, nor did he wish to ask any questions of

      Police Sergeant Killock.



(5)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence

      available.   Mr. Fraser neither objected to this procedure

      and nor did he have any questions of this officer.



(6)   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest

      commenced on the 19th November 1990.   Much of the evidence

      was common to all 95 Inquests.   With particular reference to

      Richard Jones on 28th November 1990 (day 8 of the main part

      of the Inquests) I called Stephanie Jones (his sister).      Mr.

      Timothy King who appeared who appeared for the family during

      this part of the Inquest took the opportunity to question

      her.



(7)   At no stage during this last part of the Inquest was it

      suggested on behalf of the family that Professor Usher's

      evidence was inaccurate or wrong.



(8)   Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the

      circumstances of this disaster, the findings of the Lord

      Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to

      R.Jones, it did not appear that there was any other

      responsible or any other relevant evidence relating to

      medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on

      the cause of death.



                                 10
                                                                                   1

                                                                        /{   A 1




        (9)            It is correct that Mr. and Mrs. Jones wrote to me asking me

              to call Dr. Phillips and Dr. Ashton ^butTnot Mr. Eccleston -

              see their letter dated 12th February 1991).     I did not do so

              for the reasons set out in the body of the Affidavit.     In

              short, they could not add anything of relevance to the

              Inquiry before me.   No further application was made to me by

              Mr. King in the sense I have indicated above.    In his

    £         submission on the morning of Monday 19th November 1990 Mr.

              King had made specific reference to the evidence of these

              witnesses.    As far as I am aware it is incorrect that Mr.

              and Mrs. Jones submitted a report to me from Dr. James

              Burns.   Until my attention had been directed towards the

              material exhibited to the Affidavit of Mr. James Hawthorn I

              had not seen the report dated 11th March 1991 from Dr. James

              Burns.   Accordingly, as far as I am concerned I received no

              written request from Mr. and Mrs. Jones to call Dr. Burns.
I




        1.9cpgt




                                   11   ■   - f.
                           MICHAEL KELLY



(1)   I opened the Inquest on Michael Kelly on 18th April 1989 and

      evidence of identification was taken.   The autopsy was

      carried out by Dr. Clark.



(2)   On 1st May 1990 the Inquest concerning Michael Kelly was

      reconvened.   Mr. Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.

      I explained the procedure that I was proposing to adopt.     No

      objection was made by Mr. Fraser.



(3)   Dr. John Clark gave evidence and in answer to me stated:-



      "Cause of death was crush asphyxia. This was based on
      findings of signs of asphyxia in his face. His face was
      rather congested and had a bluish discoloration. These
      changes, I have to say, were fairly mild in comparison to a
      lot of the other people and one of the other features of
      asphyxia is to find little haemorrhages on the skin. These
      were not in fact present".

      " ... In any event there was nothing to indicate he suffered
      for any great length of time. He probably lost
      consciousness within a short period of time, 10 or 15
      seconds or so, and then knew nothing about it after that.
      As I said, there were not any major injuries internally".

      Mr. Fraser had no questions for Dr. Clark.



(4)   Dr. Clark was a Forensic Pathologist from the University of

      Glasgow who had been in Sheffield on the weekend of the

      tragedy.   Towards the end of my questioning he said in an

      entirely unsolicited comment after I had thanked him for his

      invaluable assistance:-




                                12
      "Can I say in turn as someone dealing with this sort of work
      and investigation of death very regularly how^impressed I
      have been with the professionalism and sensitivity with
      which the proceedings have been carrfLed->^uj43’-here, in
      particular your handling and explanations to the relatives
      of the bereaved people. I think it has given comfort to
      everyone who has worked here and I felt it a very
      appropriate atmosphere".
(5)   Inspector Sawers presented the summary of evidence collected

      which related to Michael Kelly. He summarised the evidence

      Bf 9 witnesses.   Mr. Fraser did not object to this

      procedure.   He had one question to ask Inspector Sawers

      relating to the likelihood of whether Michael Kelly had a

      ticket for the match.



(6)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence

      available.   His answers relating to the observable condition

      of Michael Kelly on the photographic evidence were the

      result of questions from me.   The relevant exchanges were as

      follows:-



      "Sir, on a photograph reference PR2/21 which is timed at
      15.08 that shows Michael in Enclosure No.3 and whilst the
      detail again is not great it appears to show him certainly
      alive at that time but I cannot say at what stage of the
      process medically he is at".

      "Question:     He looked a bit distressedyou   think   in that?
      - Answer: That is my impression".

      "Question:      You can't say whether he is conscious or
       unconscious, alive or dead at that particular point?" -
       Answer:   It is difficult. I would say he is probably still
       alive, Sir, but certainly in distress".

      There was no objection from Mr. Fraser to these questions.

      Mr. Fraser had no questions of this officer.



(7)   At the conclusion of this part of the Inquest on 1st May

      1990 Mr. Fraser said:-


                               13
"Again, Sir, before you conclude the evidence in this case,
Michael's mother, who as it were is the head of the family,
is unable to be with us today. She is in Liverpool tut
through her son and daughter they specifically want ne to
thank through you everybody who helped Michael on the day
obviously. Everybody's efforts are very much appreciated
and they want to offer their thanks to the officers cf the
West Midland Police as well".



The evidence relating to the main part of the Inquest

commenced on 19th November 1990.   Much of the evidence was

common to all 95 Inquests.   With particular reference to

Michael Kelly, on 14th March 1991 {day 70 of the main part

of the Inquests) I called Police Constable John Maughan.



Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the

circumstances of this disaster, the findings of the Lsrd

Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to M.

Kelly, it did not appear that there was any other

responsible or any other relevant evidence relating t:>

medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on
the cause of death.
                                                                   /■£ -S'




                           PETER TOOTLE



(1)   I opened the Inquest on Peter Tootle on 19th April 1989 when

      evidence of identification was taken.     The autopsy was

      carried out by Dr. Slater.



(2)   On 18th May 1990 the Inquest concerning Peter Tootle was

      reconvened.   Mr. Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.

      I explained the procedure I was proposing to adopt.     No

      objection was made by Mr. Fraser.



(3)   Dr. Slater in anwers to question from me stated



      "My examination of Peter showed that the general findings
      were those of asphyxia. These were indicated by extensive
      blueness on the face extending to the upper part of the
      chest."

      " ... I submitted my cause of death, Sir, as traumatic
      asphyxia."

      " ... Sir, unconsciousness occurs very rapidly, normally
      within 3 to 5 seconds,and after that there is no awareness
      of any pain or discomfort and death supervenes after another
      3 to 5 minutes."

      Mr. Fraser had no questions for Dr. Slater.


(4)   Police Sergeant Killock presented the summary of the

      evidence collected which related to Peter Tootle.     He

      summarised the evidence of 8 witnesses.     Mr. Fraser neither

      objected to this procedure nor did he have any questions to

      ask Police Sergeant Killock.




                              15
(5)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence

      available.   In answer to a question ^ronTme Detective

      Inspector Layton stated:


      "That photograph is timed at 15.03 and my perception of the
      photograph, Sir, is that Peter is at that time still alive
      although it is not possible to say at what stage of the
      medical process he has reached."

      Mr. Fraser did not object to the above procedure, nor the

      specific question and had no questions for this officer.



(6)   At the completion of this part of the Inquest on Peter

      Tootle on 18th May 1990 Mr. Fraser said:-



      "Sir, Mr and Mrs. Tootle simply want to express their
      gratitude to everybody who helped Peter on the day. They
      recognise that everybody did everything they could and they
      are only sorry their efforts were unfortunately
      unsuccessful. They recognise that everybody tried their
      very best."

(7)   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest

      commenced on 19th November 1990.     Much of the evidence was

      common to all 95 Inquests.      There was sufficient evidence

      from this source to deal with the "how" question in the case

      of Peter Tootle.   The jury had been present throughout the

      hearings in April and May of 1990 (including the 18th May

      1990) and from 19th November 1990 onwards.



(8)   Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the

      circumstances of this disaster, the findings of the Lord

      Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to P.

      Tootle, it did not appear that there was any other


                                 16
                                                             >7 sT


    responsible or any other relevant evidence relating to

    medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on

    the cause of death.               '



1.9epgt
                                                                     18 *




                            KEVIN WILLIAMS



(1)   I opened the Inquest on Kevin Williams on 18th April 1989

      when evidence of identification was taken.     The autopsy was

      carried out by Dr. Slater.



(2)   The Inquest concerning Kevin Williams     reconvened on 2nd May

      1990.     The family of the deceased were represented by Mr.

      Fraser.     I explained the procedure I was proposing to adopt.

      No objection was made by Mr. Fraser.



(3)   Dr. Slater in answer to me stated the following:-



      "My examination of Kevin showed that the main finding was
      that of asphyxia. This opinion was formed through the
      extensive blueness on the face and other part of the chest.
      In addition there were small haemorrhages in both the face
      and internal organs including the brain, heart and lungs.
      This asphyxia had clearly resulted from compression of the
      neck and chest and this opinion was supported by the
      presence of 3 small scratches on the left side of the neck
      and also over the front of the voice box. This had also
      resulted in 4 fractures to the small bones in the actual
      voice box. In addition there was evidence of bruising to
      the lungs, again supporting compression of the chest."

      "... In terms of the mode of death the compression of the
      neck or chest has occurred here and unconsciousness occurs
      very rapidly, certainly within a few seconds ... Following
      unconsciousness there is no discomfort and no pain. Death
      then occurs after approximately 3 to 5 minutes, Sir."



(4)   I was very well aware of the evidence of Debra Martin and I

      put her evidence specifically to Dr. Slater for him to deal

      with.     His answer was as follows:-




                             18
                                                                 /9   X


      "Well Sir, I was aware of this statement and therefore I
      have clearly given this matter considerable thought, Sir.   I
      think there are several comments to make but on the
      moderately large number of autopsie^X,.4isk-'f rom this
      incident, Sir, this was certainly the most severe case of
      traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with. This was
      both in terms of blueness of the face and also the area of
      pallor whiteness around the mouth. Sir, it was a very very
      severe form of asphyxia. I do not think that
      unconsciousness would have been quicker than 3 or 5 seconds.
      I have no reasons to alter what I have already said on that
      aspect."


(5)   The evidence of Dr. Slater in commenting upon Debra Martin's

      evidence was not challenged by Mr. Fraser.     I explained to

      the family that I had specifically taken the course of

      referring to this evidence so that nothing of relevance was

      hidden or concealed.   After the summary of evidence set out

      in (6) below, which covered the evidence of P. C. Bruder

      about convulsions, Mr. Fraser put the following questions to

      Dr. Slater (relating to convulsions):-


      "It is difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation up.
      Kevin at that stage was beyond help. He was as good as dead
      Answer:   Yes, that is right, absolutely. He would know
      nothing".
      Question: "And would feel nothing and know nothing? -
      Answer: "Absolutely. He would know nothing?"



(6)   Police Sergeant Killock presented the summary of the

      evidence collected relating to Kevin Williams.     He

      summarised the evidence of 15 witnesses.     No objection was

      taken to this procedure by Mr. Fraser and he did not ask any

      questions of Police Sergeant Killock.



(7)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence.

      No objection to this procedure was raised by Mr. Fraser and

      he asked no questions of this officer.
(8)   I explained to the family present why I felt it important

      that the evidence of P. C. Bruder and DeSra Martin be

      commented upon by Dr. Slater.    However, I continued to be

      concerned about the evidence of a convulsion and later of a

      word spoken and so I invited the Police to further

      investigate these aspects of the evidence and for Dr.

      Gumpert to attend the Inquest.    I understand that Dr. Slater

      contact P.C. Bruder direct to ask him in detail about what

      he saw.



(9)   I must emphasise that at no stage did I speak directly to

      either P.C. Bruder of Debra Martin. Dr. Gumpert, a
               >
      Consultant Neurologist and Clinical Neurophysiologist, made

      himself available for 4th May 1990.



(10) On 4th May 1990 Inspector Sawers reported the results of his

      further enquiries.   Mr. Fraser raised no questions on behalf

      of the family.



(11) Dr. Slater in an effort to explain his evidence on 2nd May

      1990 and incorporate his evaluation of the further evidence

      of P. C. Bruder and Debra Martin said:-



      "Death is a sequence of events. It is not one set of events
      and the sequence I will put to you is an individual becoming
      unconscious; whilst they are unconscious they quickly lose
      all sensation of pain and discomfort; then there is a
      period of various tissues in the body which are susceptible
      to a lack of oxygen, dying. The most important one of these
      is, of course, the brain and after about 3 to 6 minutes the
      brain undergoes irreversible brain damage. There is then a
      point which we call brain death. This is a difficult
      concept, but by this I am implying that the brain is

                           20
                                                              -?/ M '




    irreversibly damaged. The brain is no longer able to
    control respiration and in fact that person, for effective
    purposes, is dead, irreversibly. That,i§^-a,-niedico-legal
    definition, at least one medico-legal definition, of death."

    "... Having said that, Kevin had extremely severe asphyxia.
    I have no doubt in my own mind that he had suffered
    irrecoverable brain damage and death within the 3 to 6
    minutes that I said."



(12) Dr. Gumpert having listened to the evidence said:-

    "It seems clear to me, Sir, in this case that poor Kevin was
    probably dead before he was got out of the area in which he
    was standing."
    "I cannot explain the Liverpool Police Constable's term
    convulsion' because to me a convulsion is a major epileptic
    attack and he has quite clearly said he does not mean that,
    so I don't know what he does mean".


(13) I did what I felt was necessary to put before the jury at

    the conclusion of this part of the Inquest into the death of

    Kevin Williams all that was relevant on the issues of who,

    when and where.   I must emphasise that I was then and remain

     today (apart from the present allegations) wholly unaware of

     any allegations of improper pressure applied to witnesses.

     I must say that in the light of all that I knew of those

     officers who investigated the tragedy, I find such

     allegations highly improbable.



(14) The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest

     commenced on the 19th November 1990.   Much of the evidence

    was common to all 95 Inquests. On 12th February 1991 (day 48

     of the main part of the Inquests) I specifically called

    Andrew Duncan in relation to the Inquest concerning Kevin

    Williams.
(15) Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the

     circumstances of this disaster,' the findings of the Lord

     Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to K.

    Williams, it did not appear that there was any other

     responsible or any other relevant evidence relating to

     medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on

     the cause of death.



1.9fpgt




                           22
IN THE HIGH COURT OF'JUSTICE                     CASE CO/1009/92
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
CROWN OFFICE LIST
IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION
FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
BETWEEN:-                       J


                               REGINA

                                -v-

            HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                            Ex Parte

                    SANDRA STRINGER AND OTHERS



                            AFFIDAVIT


 I, JEREMY JOHN MURRAY HAWTHORN of Malcolm J Gregg & Co,           I

 Solicitors of 31 North John Street, Liverpool 2, MAKE OATH        |
 and say as follows:-
                                                                   i

 1.   I make this Affidavit on behalf of all six Applicants        j
 herein further to the Affidavit already sworn on 5th May 1992.    j
                                                                   i
                                                                   I
 2.   On 2nd June 1992, pursuant to the Direction given by this    i
 Court, I caused to be sent to the office of Her Majesty's         j
 Coroner for South Yorkshire a copy of the Form 86A and Affidavit;
 in Support which are filed herein.     Also included was a copy       ;
 of the Memorial submitted to the Attorney General and the             •
 two bundles of further material exhibited thereto.
                                                                       i
                                                                       I
                                                                       i
 3.   On 22nd June 1992 I caused to be sent a copy of the Form         \



  86A filed herein and a copy of the Memorial to the Attorney          j
                                                                       i
  General (not including the two bundles of further material)
            to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, the Chief Constable
                                                                                      i


            of the West Midlands and the South Yorkshire Metropolitan                 j


            Ambulance Paramedics Service.                                             I
                                                                                      I
            4.   Iinformed   both HM Coroner   and those bodieslisted    in the       j
                                                               J                      !

            previousparagraph that     the application herein was adjourned           j
            pending a decision to be made by the Attorney General upon the            j
            Memorial.    I can produce copies of each of those letters should             j
i the Court require.
I                                                                                 I
!
            5.   Since the hearing of this matter on 15th May 1992, I have
            come into possession of what purports to be a full transcript                 ;
                                                                                          i
            of a radio programme in the series "File on Four" broadcast by
            the BBC.    The said programme was broadcast on 3rd and 4th March
            1992 and concerned     the holding of Inquests.    One of those
            quoted was Doctor Stefan Popper who was the Coroner with conduct
            of the Hillsborough Inquest.       There are produced and shown to
    I
    I me as JJH/1 copies of                pages in which the said Coroner is             j
    !                                                                             j
    j        quoted.    I can produce the whole transcript if required.       The         I
    j        transcript is prefaced by a warning that the transcript was typed j
    »                                                                             ;
    | from a recording and that "because of the risk of mishearing and |
    j        the difficulty in some cases of identifying individual speakers,                 ;
            the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy".                                  I
                                                                                              j


                                                                                              i

    j 6.         On 18th August 1992 a letter was sent to my firm from the                    ;
    | Attorney General's Chambers.             There is produced and shown to me
        ! marked JJH/2 a copy of that letter.


        : 7.      On 20th August 1992 the Report was obtained in respect of
        ; certain of those who died in the Hillsborough Disaster from
        : Iain Eric West, Consultant Forensic Pathologist at Guys Hospital,
        : London.       There is produced and shown to me marked JJH/3 a copy
        i
        i
             of that Report.
        'I    Q&d*?        |

|   *


             Vyrtflk   1   j
S                          J   :   : ^




                                         t
SWORN AT LIVERPOOL                        )
IN THE COUNTY OF MERSEYSIDE               )
THIS   //^   DAY OF             1992 )


                                      J
              sQUc*jtes t c ^ y z ^
 Ikr* fi 1^-                       lr tt-            ^
        J^V—           t\wtu<—     J i ^ Ki» .iV'- ***\ \ £fcrw ~x~' ,nv>_           JjH | I
                                         - 10 -          IO^c>-^— d a>u ^fcj'                     .


BECK cont:                             gives the Coroner so much, discretion to
define the parameters of the investigation.                        The real question
for   the      coroners      is        why    they     use    their      discretion        so
conservatively.         Xn theory at least, their unique remit would
seem to allow th e m to take the investigation where they want.
So what's holding them back?                  Dr Stefan Popper was a coroner for
six years -     He retired last year after conducting the country's
longest inquests into the deaths at Hillsborough.                         He argues that
Coroners Courts need to be c o n s e r v a t i v e in their remit, because
they must avoid, influencing what happens in other courts, either
civil     or   criminal.          Dr    Popper       says [inquests      are   not    about
apportioning blame or liability.

 POPPER:                                If   the purpose      of   the    inquest     is to
 establish the four factors, who, when, where and how, then the
 inquest does actually have a part- to play and fits in to the
 other jurisdictions.             But I think in many cases, what people are
 actually looking for isn't the establishment of those fa cts7 what
 happened;      what   they       are    trying to establish             is   liability or
 blameworthiness,         and I don't think that as the law stands, the
 inquest is the right place for that.                        The civil court ought to
 be concerned wit h aspects of negligence and compensation - has
 somebody done something f or which a sum of.- money ought to be paid
 to compensate         the   injured?           And the criminal          court   is to be
  concerned,     or    should      be    concerned with the           question       of,    has
  somebody done something for which a punishment should be exacted?
  So those are the two venues where the issues of people liability,
  one civil,      one criminal,              ought to be dealt with,           not by some
  circuitous means of dealing with it through the coronal Court.


  BECK:                                  And the law makes clear that inquests
  must not stray into the territory of apportioning blame.                             It was
  changed in 1977         after an inquest jury named lord Lucan as the
  killer of his children's nanny.                     Today, if an inquest begins to
   point the finger of blame, the Coroner is legally obliged to stop
   it.     But the barrister, Ed Fitzgerald, argues that coroners are
   mistaken in making an assumption that deaths in contentious
                                           -    12   ~



                         chose to exercise his discretion
 ECK cont:                         nciuest. At the beginnxng of
specific manner                      considered all the - d i c a l
the hearing, he state
evidence at the mini-inquests ■
                                .
                                   ^      3 ^  J
                                       inte<J to the £act that the
                                                #             M    a
fans would have been                witnesses who had been at the
result, he would not be calling » y *
scene after 3.15 on the afternoon of the

                         My objective was to try, as far as it
POPPER:                               .. it was just one death.
was possible, to deal with the ca                    led astray
 x thought that if I applied » * « « « •                                              ^       a coroner
 and be diverted from the parameters or t h e ^                               ^                   ^   _
 has.    The underlying princip e w                                  ^ road traffic incident
 „hat would X do ^ ^                                     overwhelming evidence which w e
 where one person had di               .                        &          Qf traumatic
 had    was   that   these   poor _Pe<*                  ®   toey suffered            irretrievable
  asphyxia, or virtual y a                                            having      been        achieved,
  damage within minutes, of                    the                   ^ ^ ^ ^         ^            ^
  whichever way you looked at it,                                ^                ^ didn't and X
  have taken place with each and eve                             ,       ■^               ^
  don't feel that it is a          c   o   r   onaljas* ^ ^              ^                       ,f m y ,

  the quality of ^       ^         ge"cy s                           ^        take again the road
  should be made   In the                                         in what happened, why the
  tx.ffic accident. One is                                   ^   ^               follow the
   car crashed, if y ou llk •                                                     do w e go into the
   ambulance all the way down to t h e ^ h o s p l ^                          ^     ^

   resuscitation room         no                                     ^   ^    evidence, that the
   out what happens. X felt,   i         ^ v ^ - i a which these poor
   injury which had caused the death was asphyxia, which
    people suffered on the terraces.
                                               several people were affected by the 3.15
    BECK:                                     ,_   tjVirtcci son Paul died
    cut off point, including the Stringer^ am    , ^ ^                ^
    »t Hillsborough.         Although o n e ^ o f ^ ^ ^                       ^   ^                       Qf

    the terraces, Paul was o  y         stringers have no idea what
    the inquest's 3.15 cut o  pom ,                  declared dead,
    happened to Paul in the 80 minutes before he
*FCK cont:                  Donna,   Paul's   sister   and    his    mother
Sandra, heard his name mentioned only once in the entire 80 day

main inquest.


HRS STRINGER:             "*«> I « ked     Clert' 1     told ^
the witnesses I had requested to be brought in were after quarter
past three, and I couldn't have them brought in.


BECK:                       Why?

 MRS STRINGER:               Because Dr Popper had decided on cutting
 the inquest's time for quarter past three,        and he told-me the
 damage was already done then, that there was no need to bring
 witnesses after quarter.past three.      I kept asking why Pau          was
 never taken in an ambulance to a hospital.      I'm stll      wal
 that question to be answered.        I still don't know why           e was
 left; he was first to be taken from the terraces, at 3.15 - I was
 told that by a West Midlands police officer.

  SISTER. :                    Because Paul died together with 94 other
  people", it was just like some sort of conveyor belt.             The times
  from quarter past three to 4.35 we don't know anything about;
  what time he was taken to the temporary mortuary, how long h e was
  left there, who he was with,       and it's just torment.           All the
  time.      You lie awake thinking who was he with, did anyone he p
  him?     It's just torture    all the time because         you don't    stop

  asking the questions.

   BECK.                        There is no doubt that the 3.15 cut off
   point caused more dispute than any other single decision at the
   inquest.     Professor Phil Scraton is a lecturer in criminology at
   Edge Hill college.      His department is conducting a long term
   study into the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster and whilst
   he accepts t h a t .Dr Popper was completely within his powers to
    implement the cut off point, he thinks it was a wrong decision.
 ■RATON:                           I feel that it was a p r o f o u n d mistake
  at the coroner ruled that there should be a 3.15 cut off.                               I
feel that a lot of evidence that came after 3.15 s h o u l d have been
heard.      I think it is an absolutely crucial issue, because what
we're dealing wit h here is not the immediate m o m e n t                        at which
death is invoked.         I understand the logistical p r o b l e m of calling
all   those   people      to    give evidence,     and how       much        longer the
procedure would, have gone on, but let me just p u t it this way.
The reason that most families are upset over the 3.15 cut off is
because there is crucial evidence that they k n o w exists about
people trying to revive and resuscitate their l o v e d ones which
was never heard before the court.               Now they have a r ig h t to hear
that evidence heard, because it could be that in t h a t situation,
not, enough was done or too much of the wrong t h i n g was given or
whatever; I'm n o t in any way trying to assume g u i l t as to what
happened after 3.15, but there is a right to i nvestigate it and
there is a right to make an informed judgement o n it.                        That right
has been completely abolished in this case.                    I j u s t find it one
of    the   saddest      aspects    of   the    Hillsborough       disaster;         it's
certainly the one that has had the most profound effect on the
families.


BECK:                     Dr Popper accepts that t h e c u t off point
caused distress at the time of the inquest. But he believes that
it stemmed mainly from a mismatch between the expectations of the
families and his remit as Coroner.


POPPER:                            X toov, this cause(i a lot of anxiety to
families, but I think it is misunderstanding of the duties and
the powers that the Coroner has got.                    Had p e o p l e      felt really
strongly that          I was making a mistake,          they w e r e      all    advised,
legally advised          I mean,    there was     opportunity          for    appeal and
judicial review.          I made it quite plain right f r o m th e beginning
what I was intending to do; I gave my reasons for w h a t they were
worth,      and it was open to people to challenge                     them,     and they
should have challenged them if they really felt strongly then.
That's      not   to    say    that ;somebody    else    may    no t    h a ve    taken       a
    PPER cont:                        different view; I'm not saying that I'm
   nfallibly right.         What I am saying is, that was the view I took,
|Jfand I did it to the best of my ability at the time.

  BEC*;:                              Although        the Coroner          appears to have
  great discretion to conduct broad or narrow investigations of
  contentious deaths,         in practice the pressure is mostly in the
  direction of conservatism.                Better to be safe than sorry.                        But
  ^||rrister Tim Owen argues that the system can no longer afford
  to rely on its inquisitorial purity.                      Controversial deaths, by
  their very nature, beg to be looked at in a wider context.


  OWEN:                               In controversial cases, the idea that
  you can avoid, if you like, an adversarial contest or conflict
  is absurd.        There plainly are frequently different views about
  culpability, whether proper care was given, and it's absurd to
  think that an        inquest       process       can be shorn            of    that type        of
  controversy.        And once you accept that the controversy exists,
  then     the    current     procedure       is      not   a       satisfactory         one     for
  resolving it, because it leaves too much discretion in the hands
  of coroners, it keeps too much information back from people who
  ftave    a   legitimate     interest       in     knowing         about       it    before     the
  inquest, and it leaves the jury and the Coroner with too narrow
  a function, if you like,             in returning the verdict, because the
  verdicts,       as they are now returned,                 are simply too brief                 and
  don't disclose           in clear    terms       the full         circumstances           in   how
  somebody died, and what measures are necessary to prevent death
  in the future.


  BECK:                               21 years ago, the Brodrick Report looked
  at all aspects of the Coroners Court and made its recommendations
   -r advance      disclosure,       legal     ai d    and wider           rights      of   appeal
   against verdicts were             all    put    forward      as ways          of    making the
   system more acceptable to both sides.                    They were largely ignored,
   as were the recommendations of a committee in 1986 which looked
   at    the     inquest    system    and    suggested          a    way    of       dealing     with
   controversial deaths.             Evan Stone, QC was the chairman of that
 SCRATON cont:                  much of the work of the. coroner can be
 done     efficiently     and     effectively       through        the        present
 inquisitorial      system.     The    investigation      work     is    okay,    the
inquest wo r k is okay and the outcome is generally satisfactory.
However, m       these high profile cases where clearly liability is
a contradictory construct, then it's important that another tier
exists,    and    I think what    we    need is a       tier    which    is   openly
adversarial, where cross-examination is as thorough as it needs
to be, where rules that we would accept in other courts, more
normal courtroom rules, apply; where families are actually legal
aided so    they have a right          of representation,         and where      the
person who       is presiding over it has experience              of working in
high-profile adversarial         circumstances      -   in     other words,      I'm
thinking of a judge.


                          W e have been tol d that the idea of
inquests becoming more like public inquiries, at least for deaths
in contentious circumstances,          is now being seriously discussek
by coroners.      The Coroners Society, however, refuses to comment
on it publicly.       it's perhaps no surprise that those who seem
especially interested in the new system are coroners who've had
to conduct inquests after major disasters.                Dr Stefan Popper's
experience at the Hillsborough inquest has convinced him that it
is now time to grasp the nettle of reform.


                              I think that there is a dichotomy in
expectation.       It seems to me that the legislature has tended to
limit the powers of coroners whereas the public, certainly at the
moment,   is expanding their expectations.              A n d I think what is
needed is either the coroners should be more given more teeth, so
that they can actually do and say things which carry true weight
or, and this may possibly be a better solution,                   that coroners
inquests should be turned into fact finding exercises, and the
conclusions and verdicts should be deleted altogether from
power, so that their power is to establish the facts,                     and for
others, civil or criminal courts, to draw whatever conclusions
need to be drawn from a particular event.           Somebody, and by that
POPPER cont:                      I mean Parliament, has got to make up
their mind what they want.             Do they want inquests to carry on as
they are, or do they want them restricted, or do they want them
expanded?     I don't think that carrying on as we are is the best
way forward.       A n d as I say, the public expectation seems to me
that they want more from Coroners Court, and they want more power
there.     If that's         what the public want,       in a democracy,        then
there's no reason they shouldn't have it .


BECK:                             Inquests were once regarded as & legal
backwater.        But    a    series   of   major   public disasters      and    the
controversy surrounding individual cases has. changed all that.
The     weaknesses       of    the     system   are    being   highlighted        by
dissatisfied families and lawyers who recognise that deaths in
controversial circumstances can't be examined in the same way as
others.     But as yet, there are few signs that the' legislators
have recognised the problems.                It's significant,        for example,
that the Royal Commission/ which is examining all aspects of the
legal system,      is not investigating inquests.              To barrister Ed
Fitzgerald, what is at stake is the credibility of the inquest
system in the eyes of the public.


FITZGERALD:                          If we don't reform the system now, there
will be a great injustice to the families of the deceased.                      They
will continue to be left with a sense of real grievance,                        that
they haven't had proper inquests, that they haven't been able to
participate in          inquests on a basis         of equality w i t h   those in
 authority who may have been responsible for the deaths of their
 relatives.       If we don't reform the system, the w orst result of
 all will be that families will continue to have to live with a
 lifetime    of   bi t t e r n e s s , that the questions      that    they   really
 needed answered were not answered at the inquest.


 SIGNATURE TUNE
            Tut. fi tM. <*Lviv                     {f {fc.          ^
                                  mu-w^              Ju^v^ h^v.         /\         IVU-     ^        .


                                                                         (jj-V^X_ci JDAa OsJ ^ CoQ/yt3>-_yn
                                                         THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS
                                                                    ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS
                                                                                9 BUCKINGHAM GATE
                                                                                   LONDON SW1E 6JP
G eneral enquiries 071-828 7155
Direct line        071-828         1721


        Messrs Malcolm J. Gregg & Co.                                   Your ref: JH/LF/H359
        Second Floor,
        Century Buildings,                                                   Our ref: INQ/4/92
        31 North John Street,
        Liverpool, L2 6RG                                                          August 1992




        Dear Sirs,


               — CAKLILE,           IAN    GLOVER,     RICHARD     JONES,     MICHAEL   KELLY,
        PETER       TOOLE         and     KEVIN   WILLIAMS

        1 H & L I C K F L C N     UNDER    SECTION     13    OF   THE   CORONERS    ACT   1988)


         Further to my letter of 21 April 1992, the Law Officers have now
         given very careful consideration to the application made by your
         clients for authority under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988
         to apply to the High Court for an order directing a fresh inquest
         in relation to the above named persons who died in the Hills­
         borough disaster on the 15 April 1989.     The material submitted
         under cover of your letter of 3 June 1992 has also been taken
         into account together with representations received on behalf of
         some of your clients from Members of Parliament with Merseyside
         constituencies and a letter received direct from Mrs Teresa
         Glover.

         As you will know section 13 of the Act applies when an inquest
         has been held and, "by reason of fraud, rejection of evidence,
         irregularity of proceedings, insufficiency of inquiry, the
         discovery of new facts or otherwise, it is necessary or desirable
         in the interests of justice that another inquest should be held."

         H?6     °fficers have considered the matter very carefully but
         they have come to the conclusion that there is nothing which
         would justify authorising an application to the High Court for
         a new inquest in any of the above cases.

         They have reached this decision on the grounds that the applica­
         tion would have no reasonable prospect of establishing that it
         is necessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a fresh
         inquest to be held.
The Law Officers recognise the importance to the families of the
deceased of having the fullest possible information about the
precise circumstances of the deaths and hu.ve taken that carefully
into account when considering the sufficiency of the inquiry made
by the Coroner and his directions to the jury.    All these issues
must, however, be considered in the context of the statutory
framework within which Coroners are required to work and the
questions required to be answered on the inquisition.    It is not
appropriate, therefore, that they authorise an application to the
High Court under section 13 unless it could be said, with
reasonable confidence, that further information would be likely
to be elicited which would have a bearing on the issues to be
considered at any such further inquest.

The Law Officers recognise that this decision will be deeply
disappointing to your clients. They are aware of the strength of
the continuing feeling on the part of those whose friends and
relatives died or were.^injured , in the ,tragic events--at
Hillsborough but their task has been to evaluate the application
obaectiyely against the statutory criteria.  Their decision does
not indicate any lack of feeling for the families of those who
died at Hillsborough for whom they have the deepest sympathy.,*

Yours faithfully,




S. J. WOOLER
         -fWo C>           -t^krviv-     JiHt        ir C^.                  $
                           K u .r^iy _               /w(i»«. W j \ l '—'   ^ if- \               l*\vv.
                        DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                                  GUY'S HOSPITAL                          Io js~ 0
                                                (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)                      ^


Dr. LE.WEST, MJB., Ch.B„ F.R .C.Path., D.MJ.                                         UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc„ M i . B.S., M .R.CJath, D.MJ.                                GUY'S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                                     LONDON BRIDGE. SE1 9RT
Direct Telephone Line 071-407 0378 / 071-403 1118)                                   TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext: 3118 / 3119
(Fax: 071-403 7292)




 SCO:21/92/IEW                                                                                     20th August 1992


 I have studied the papers that you have submitted to me regarding the
^Kragic deaths of these young people.      They include the post mortem
^Rports on Paul Carlisle, Gary Church, Ian Glover, Richard Jones, Michael
 David Kelly, Peter Tootle, Kevin Daniel Williams and Philip Hammond. I
 have also studied the relevant extract from the inquest, -.the overview
 prepared by Professor Usher, the report prepared by Dr. Burns and the
 ground's on which applications are to be made to set aside the original
 inquest.
  I have experience of a substantial number of deaths from traumatic
  asphyxia, including victims of the Clapham Rail distaster and explosion
  at the Grand Hotel, Brighton.
  It is clear from post mortem appearances that we are dealing with two
  different patterns of injury, namely a number of victims who showed the
  classic appearances of traumatic asphyxia and other where the classic
  signs of traumatic asphyxia were absent or slight.   The difference is,
  I think, relevant in respect of the precise mechanism by which each
  individual died. It may well be that some confusion has developed over
  the use of the term traumatic asphyxia.

^ C n the classic sense traumatic asphyxia is taken to imply injuries caused
   by the application of mechanical pressure to the chest arid,^ in some
   instances, the abdomen, so that death results from asphyxiation.      The
   mechanism of asphyxiation in the classic case is thought to be twofold.
   First there is a mechanical impedence of the movement of the chest wall
   and diaphragm, thereby severely restricting inspiratory       respiratory
   movements.   The second mechanism and one which accounts^ for the most
   striking findings found in cases of traumatic asphyxiqa is compression
   of the chest and abdomen resulting in direct compression over the
   superior vena cava, thereby causing a sudden and dramatic rise in the
   pressure within the superior vena cava resulting in engorgement of the
   blood vessels in the head and neck.     It is this displacement of blood
   into the superior vena cava and the failure to drain blood from the
   superior vena cava which accounts for the swelling of the facial features
   and the gross petechial haemorrhages so regularly seen in the face, neck
   and chest above the level of constriction.

   Where no obstruction to the venous circulation occurs then the usual
   signs of asphyxia are present but not those of the classic traumatic
   asphyxial death. The face may be suffused and cyanosed and there may be
   fine petechial haemorrhages, in some instances scanty or even absent. The
   facial features do not appear strikingly swollen and the coarse petechial
   haemorrhages are not apparent.
                     DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                             GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                          (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

i        ^ ________ I, FJR.C.Path., D.MJ.                          UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
       JPHERD B.Sc„ M i., B.S., M.R.CJath.. D.M.J.                 GUY’S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                   LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
     Jephone Line 071-407 0378 / 071-403 1118)
                                                                   TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext: 3118/3119
    /1-403 7292)




Unfortunately it has become a habit for pathologists to call all such
deaths traumatic asphyxia and it may well be correct in one sense in as
much as trauma to the chest has resulted in the mechanical obstruction
of respiration. In pathological terms there is probably little relevance
in distinguishing between the two mechanisms as the term merely implies
that death has resulted from a mechanical obstruction to respiration
resulting from pressure being applied to the torso.

In clinical terms however there does seem to be a difference in the two
different types of traumatic asphyxia with a much graver prognosis being
present in those where there has been evidence of a sudden and acute
severe rise in the venous pressure in the upper part of the body. In fact
most of the individuals who suffer from this classic form of traumatic
asphyxia do not survive if they are severely affected and not rescued
rapidly.

Where the individual suffers primarily an obstruction to his movements
of respiration death will occur as the result of hypoxic damage to the
brain.  This may take a much longer time than in individuals who have
been crushed so impedence of the venous return to the heart occurred.
Indeed   some  individuals   will  survive   but   remain  permanently
neurologically damaged as a result of suffering severe anoxic cerebral
injury.

It is probable that a period of at least some 10 minutes or so would be
necessary before one would be able to state categorically that absent
respiratory movement would lead to death. Consciousness may be lost quite
rapidly but where the obstruction has not been complete consciousness may
take a considerable time to be lost.    I have experience of cases where
individuals have died through anaesthetic accidents whereby no oxygen was
being supplied to the lungs whilst they were paralysed during surgery.
In two of the cases in excess of 10 minutes elapsed before the surgeon
noticed that the heart action was in the terminal stages of failure.

It is also known that individuals who have suffered severe hypoxic damage
may not die immediately.     They may be recovered unconscious with an
active circulation but the circulation rapidly fails despite all attempts
at resuscitation. This may well represent concomitant damage to the heart
muscle leading to what is in effect a heart attack (anoxic myocardial
infarction).    Severe hypoxia of several minutes duration would be
necessary for this to occur.   It is therefore possible that a young man
who had been asphyxiated by being crushed, would be capable, after being
removed from danger, of some conscious activity but could still die as
a result of hypoxia in the ensuing minutes.
                      / DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                     $F                         GUY’S HOSPITAL
                 /                          (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

         J f . M i.. C h i., F.R.C.Path-, DJvlJ.                     UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
       ^iEPHERD B.Sc., M J , B.S., M.R.C-Path., D.M.J.               GUY’S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                     LONDON BRIDGE. SE1 9RT
      telephone Line 071-407 0378 / 071-403 1118)
                                                                     TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext: 3118 / 3119
     #71-403 7292)




Anoxic brain damage could also be aggravated by the failure to maintain
a patent airway in individuals who were unconscious but still- capable of
respiration when retrieved from the crowd.     The failure to place the
individual in the recovery position, for instance, could lead to
^bsequent respiratory obstruction.

Experience from a number of instances where individuals have died from
traumatic asphyxia has also demonstrated that not all individuals appear
to have been effected at the same time. Some could have been effected by
movement of the crowd in the minutes after the, disaster occurred. Others
could have had only partial or incomplete respiratory obstruction
initially and then either suffered complete mechanical obstruction of
respiration or died as the result of prolonged incomplete respiratory
obstruction. This could take many minutes to cause death and it is
entirely possible that death would occur more than 15 minutes after the
incident began.

I have not seen the post mortem photographs and therefore am having to
rely solely on the description provided in the post mortem reports.  I
will deal with each case individually.

1.        Paul Carlisle - He was examined by Professor Usher who describes
          suffusion of the upper body and petechial haemorrhages on the
          forehead, eyelids and within the conjunctivae.     These would be
•         consistent with the classic traumatic asphyxia whereby there has
          been a mechanical obstruction and mechanical interference with the
          circulation.

2.        Richard Jones - He was examined by Professor Usher who again found
          signs which would be consistent with the classic features of
          traumatic asphyxia. The petechial haemorrhages noted in his loins
          are probably the result of pressure causing local obstruction to the
          circulation in that area.

3.        Ian Glover - Again examined by Professor Usher. The examination
          revealed changes of asphyxia,      ie the cyanosis and visceral
          haemorrhages.   The signs of venous obstruction were relatively
          slight and in the form of small petechial haemorrhages in the upper
          eyelids and conjunctiva of the left eye.        There were scanty
          petechiae also found in the larynx.     In my opinion he has died
          primarily as the result of impedence of respiration and any
          interference with his venous circulation was minimal.

4.        Peter Tootle - Was examined by Dr. Slater. Dr. Slater described
          changes in Mr. Tootle which are consistent with a degree of classic
          traumatic asphyxia but I suspect that the main reason for death has
          been compression of the chest resulting in impedence of respiratory
                     DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                              GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                          (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)


      '/EST. M i., Ch.B., F.R.C.Path., D.MJ.                       UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
  £ . SHEPHERD B.Sc., MJB., B.S., M.R.C-Path., D.M.J.              GUYS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                   LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
>ct Telephone Line 071-407 0378 / 071-403 1118)                    TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Exu 3118/3119
v. 071-403 7292)




       movement. Without the post mortem photographs^ I am not clear as to
       why Dr. Slater feels that there has been intensive blunt compression
       of the right side of his face.
       Kevin Williams   -   Was examined by Dr. Slater who describes the
       external features of classic traumatic asphyxia with cyanosis of the
       face extending onto the chest with numerous petechial arid larger
       haemorrhages on the face and neck. He found bilateral -fractures of
       the hyoid bone and of the superior horns- of the thyroid cartilage
       on both sides of the larynx-. These appear related to a number of
       linear abrasions over the front of his neck and on the undersurface
       of the chin. There appears to have been local pressure to his neck.
       It was possible that when he was crushed in the crowd, the front of
       his neck was pushed against some rigid 'structure.       It is also
       possible that, for instance, he could have been trodden on during
       the panic subsequent to the incident occurring.

        I do not believe it is possible to say how long consciousness would
        have been retained but he certainly would not have become
        unconscious between 3 and 5 seconds of being crushed. Again I would
        not agree with Dr. Slater in estimating how long the deceased would
        have survived. Although he has suffered injuries to the neck these
        are by no means invariably fatal and can be seen in those surviving.
        strangulation and quite striking signs of classic traumatic asphyxia
        can be seen in individuals who survive crush incidents because they
        are removed from danger in time to prevent death. As I have already
        indicated he could well have survived for a considerable period,
        well beyond 3.15 pm.

        He suffered convulsions as the result of anoxic brain damage.
        Whether Mr. Brooder saw convulsions or twitching is irrelevant.
        A dead body neither convulses or twitches. Dr. Gompert's point that
        bodies may twitch after brain stem death.has taken place is, of
        course, correct and to some degree reflects the dilemma over
        precisely defining death.     One sees it in individuals who are
        maintained on a respirator but whose heart is still functioning.
        One also may see it during the process of dying as the heart is
        stopping and for a very short period after the heart stops.    This
        phenomenon only occurs for a very short period after death unless
        muscles are electrically stimulated. Twitching movements, however,
        suggest that one is much more likely to be dealing with a live body
        than with a dead one.
         The evidence of Special Constable Martin is difficult to refute in
         some respects. Whilst it is possible for an individual examining a
         dead body to mistakenly feel an apparent pulse it is usually
         difficult to be mistaken over whether somebody is making breathing
                   DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                              GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                       (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

  jidST, M i.. Ch.B„ F.R.CJPath„ DJvIJ.
                                                               UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
^SHEPHERD B.Sc., M J , B.S., M.R.CJPath., D.M.J.               GUY’S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
I Telephone Line 071-407 0378/07J-403 1118)                    LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
071-403 7292)                                                  TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Exu 3118/3119




    movements or not.                I am, of course, making the assumption here that
    of J e S i r S n  f h i ? iS     t h a t W e a r e r e f e r r i n g to movements
                 •   and not merely sounds.        Sounds frequently emanate
    moved      air passages of a recently dead body when it is being


    S h t S , -           He was examined by Dr. Slater who found changes
    a rticinr i *be consistent with classic traumatic asphyxia. He had
       dislocated right sternoclavicular joint. This type of iniury is
    most likely to occur as the result of falling.              if would r e S i ^
    : S Y^ r er\ CrUSh               to dislocate the s t e r n o c la v i cu l ar j oS ?
    pressure5 ‘on            f^ ndln^ do not appear to reflect severe local
    received                     or shoulder area.   It is possible that he
    e s c a T a n ? h L 3U,r? as the result of falling over in an attempt to
    injury.             suffered pain and discomfort consequent upon this


                     .Kelly “ He was examined by Dr. John Clark who found
    evidence ofC^ii9n^       asphyx.ia'* the external appearances do not show
    on h                   traumatlc asphyxia. The petechial haemorrhages
    in thl a?™ arm * SU,re        ref lect a obstruction to the circulation
    revealed no             Y i°Cai •Pressure*     The internal examination
    resulted fr-nm a r * exP lan?^:i?n for death other than it having.
           * ,1     u anoxia and it is probable here that we are dealing
    t h f larap v.       ' I f ^ n° evidence whatsoever of obstruction tl
    result of      „nS ^ w Y but where death has occurred as the
     esuit of progressive cerebral anoxia resulting from prolonaed and
    severe compression of the chest.                           proxongea ana

   sucSssful         trea.te5 ^ d e s c r i b e d by PC Maughan and apparently
   ?he          L ht       ■               111 13 P°ss^ l e that he has died as
   o f ™           5yP°X15 dama?e affecting his heart or as the result
   t o f h L n ni    / ” ■of respiratory obstruction.         He appears not to
   material    Sh     • ln    ® recoYeri' position and this may well be
   d i d bv 3        1S "°? i19^ 0 lndicate that this man was definitely
   otterw/se      P '     “    63 thS evidence available to me suggest^


   ofifr^™!,a^ f 0nd V,' -this young b°y does not bear the classic signs
   and evidence of y^ la                ,ugh there are generalised asphyxial signs
                         „3 f .an°*lc da“age to the brain.        Dr. Slater Sho
   and a 1 acp, , H Post mortem found extensive haemorrhage in both lungs
   riqht M r i h            , ,1 ^ / 5     ^     associated with a fracture of the
   comoliciH-ort A,                    he death of this young man is rather more
      mplicated than some             of the other cases. There is certainlv
   i ^ h i s ^ b r a i n h? haS =uff.  ered from asphyxia and there is evidence
                brain of anoxic damage.           However, the primary pathology
                 /    DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
               ^                              GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                          (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

                                                                   UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
      / /EST, MJB.. Ch-B., F.R.C.Path., D.M J.
       SHEPHERD B.Sc., MJB., B.S., M.R.CPaih., DJvlJ.              GUY’S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                   LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
 f* Telephone Line 071-407 0378 / 071-403 1118)                    TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext: 3118 /3119
'£x: 071-403 7292)




         appears to be in his lungs which were bruised with a laceration of
         the right lung associated with a rib injury.     The rib injury and
         bruising of the adjacent intercostal spaces suggests a localised
         pressure or impact in that region of the right chest. It is likely
         to have been due to localised pressure, probably on the young man's
         back, forcing the right side of his chest against an object^ causing
       . the right sided ribs to be forced inwards towards the spine.      If
         this pressure were maintained then death would undoubtedly occur
         very rapidly but I would have expected to have found some-evidence
         of the more classic changes associated with traumatic asphyxia. If,
         however, the pressure is relieved then death from injuries of this
         type may take considerable time to supervene.     Unconsciousness^is
         likely to be fairly rapid but death could have taken a substantial
         number of minutes and it would be impossible, from a medical point
         of view, to state that this boy was dead at 3.15 pm.

 In conclusion there is clear evidence that some of the victims have
 suffered severe traumatic asphyxia in the classic sense in which tihe term
 is employed. Unconsciousness is likely to have occurred quite rapidly,
 in probably somewhere between 15 and 45 seconds but death would have been
 delayed for a number of minutes. In those who where severely crushed so
 the venous drainage from the head was impeded then it is probable that
 death would have occurred within 10 minutes of sustained pressure
 commencing.    If the pressure was not continuous survival could be for
 a longer period.

 In the individuals who have scanty signs or no signs of traumatic
 asphyxia it is much more difficult to predict the survival time.       To
 reduce the survival time to a very short number of minutes would require
 continuous sustained severe compression of the chest.     Because of the
 nature of the incident it is impossible in many instance to know when
 mechanical compression of the chest would have commenced. I feel it is
 impossible to state purely from the medical point of view that a number
 of the young men that I have indicated above could not been alive at 3.15
 pm. Those dying as the result of anoxic damage consequent to their chests
 being crushed could well have survived for a much longer period only to
 die subsequently from the effects of irreversible anoxia.




  Iain Eric West, M.B. , CfT. B . , fTr .c'rfirth!., D.M. J. ,
  Consultant Forensic Pathologist,
  Director, Department of Forensic Medicine,
  United Medical Schools of Guy's and St. Thomas',
  Guy's Hospital,
i London, SE1 9RT.
                                                        MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE
OFFICE OF H .M . C O R O N ER                                W ATERY STREET
SOU TH Y ORK SHIRE                                                SHEFFIELD
(West District)                                                        S3 7ET

H .M . C o ro n e r
                                                                         Telephone:
Christopher P. Dorries                                       Sheffield (0742) 738721




 CPD/PMS                                                  16 June 1992




 Mr M Webster
 City Solicitor                                                                    m z
 Sheffield City Council
 Legal & Admin Department
 Town Hall
 SHEFFIELD




 Dear Mike

 HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

  I have received a bundle of papers from Messrs Malcolm Gregg & Co, Solicitors
  of Liverpool and enclose the same herewith for your attention.  I have
  retained a copy of the application to the Attorney General and of the High
  Court papers but not of the bundle of statements.

  I am on leave for a week from this Friday (Majorca!) but suggest     that we    have
  a discussion about  the situation shortly thereafter.

  I did not manage to speak to Stefan Popper about thisbefore     itbecame public
  and he has not been in touch with me since.

  I look forward to hearing from you.




  Yours sincerely
                          IN T H E HIGH C O U R T OF JU ST IC E



A pplicant’s R eference         Notice of Application for                                   Crown Office R eference
Num ber                         Leave to Apply for                                          Num ber
       J Ht H3 ^                Judicial Review

             This form must be read together with Notes for G uidance
            __________    Obtainable from the Crown Office          *

                           To the M aster of the Crown Office
                                 Royal Courts of Justice
                                         Strand
                                  London WC2A 2LL
Name, Address and Description         (1)                  Sandra Stringer & D o n n a Carlile, the
of Applicants                                              mother and sister of Paul Carlile,
                                                           deceased.

                                      (2)                  John & Theresa Glover, the father
                                                            and mother of Ian Glover, deceased.

                                      (3)                  Joan Sinclair, th e sister of Michael
                                                            Kelly, deceased.

                                      (4)                  Leslie & Doreen Jones, th e father and
                                                           m other of Richard Jones, deceased.

                                      (5)                  Peter & Joan Tootle, the fath er and
                                                           mother of Peter Tootle, deceased.

                                      (6)                  James Stephen & A n n e Williams, the
                                                           father and m other of Kevin Williams,
                                                           deceased.
Judgment, O rder, Decision or
                                      (1)                  Various decisions of H e r M ajesty’s
O th e r Proceedings in R espect                           Coroner for .Sowtt. Y orkshire in the
o f Which Relief is Sought
                         o                                 course of the inquest held betw een
                                                           the 18th day of April 1989 and the
                                                           28th day of March 1991 into the
                                                           deaths of the deceased h e reinb efore
                                                           mentioned and others at the
                                                           Hillsborough Stadium on ISth April
                                                           1989.

                                      (2)                  Conclusion or verdict rec o rd e d bv the
                                                           Coroner’s jury at the end o f the said
                                                           inquest that-these were cases of
                                                           "Accidental Death"
                                     --------------------- — -----------------— -------------------------------   v   -
                                    R E L IE F S O U G H T




(1)       Leave to move for judicial review out of time.




(2)       A n O rd e r of Certiorari to remove into this Honourable C ourt and quash the

          conclusion or verdict of A ccident D eath recorded by the jury at the end of the

          inquest hearing on 28th M arch 1991.




(3)       Such fu rth e r or o ther relief, including declaratory relief, as this H onourable

          C ourt thinks fit to grant.




                      GROUNDS ON WHICH RELIEF IS SOUGHT



                                FACTUAL BACKGROUND



The background facts of this case are set out in full in the M emorial to the A ttorney

G eneral which is exhibited to th e Affidavit of Jeremy H awthorn, th e Applicants'

 Solicitor. This H onourable Court is respectfully referred to the said Memorial whose

 contents will not be reported here.




                                   REASONS FOR DELAY



 The reasons for the delay are set out in full in the summary of the steps taken by the

 Applicants to challenge the inquest verdict and o ther^ elated decisions which is
      }                                                                          X-


                                               -1-                           4
    Jiibited to the Affidavit of their Solicitor, Jeremy Hawthorn.           It is respectfully

submitted that the delay is excused by the extreme difficulties the Applicants

experienced in obtaining legal representation, the difficulties of a new solicitor and

counsel in obtaining details of wh*£\vent on at the unusually protracted inquest, and

the discovery of new evidence = a process which is going on till this day.                It was

necessary to settle a Memorial to the Attorney G en eral since at first this a p p ea red the

more appropriate remedy w here subsequent developments were a relevant factor. But

    it has also become clear that, whereas the statutory procedure initiated by the Attorney

    G e n era l’s Fiat can provide only one remedy, namely th a t the inquest be quashed and
m
    a fresh inquest be held, this H onourable Court has a m ore flexible range o f rem edies

    in judicial review proceedings and could strike down the conclusion without ordering

    a fresh inquest. It is therefore submitted that leave should be granted in the public

    interest, even so far out of time, so that the High Court, in reviewing this m atter, can

    have available to it the fullest range of remedies and the alternative option of striking

    down the conclusion without necessarily having to o rd er a fresh inquest. [This option

     was exercised by the Divisional C ourt in the case of R -v- St. Pancras C oroners’ C ourt

^     - p irt~ Higgins C o /1285/87. in which judgment was given on 23rd May 1988].




                 GROUNDS ON WHICH SUBSTANTIVE RELIEF IS SOUGHT




      (1)       T h e L earned C o ro n e r wrongly conducted th e mini-inquests into th e question

                of "who the dec eased w ere, where an d w hen "they met their d e a th s by

                reference to su m m aries o f the statem ents ok^aye witnesses which w e re read

            j                                                                        x-
out and whose contents could therefore not be tested by oial evidence and

questioning.   This was particularly unfortunate and im proper because the

statem ents read raised controversial issues of w hether the deceased s deaths

w ere "instantaneous" or not, which in turn raised im portant questions as to

w h e th e r those who may have been alive for some time after they sustained the

crush injuries which ultimately proved fatal could have b e e n saved by

p ro m p te r and b e tte r responses by the emergency services.




T h e C o ro n er failed to comply with R ule 37 of the C oroners’ R u lejw h e n he

 a n n o u n c e d his intention of introducing documentary evidence into the mini­

 inquests w ithout going through the procedures laid down of first summarising

 the contents and ascertaining whether there was any objection to the

 pro p o se d course.



 T h e C o ro n e r wrongly introduced a cut-off point of 3.15pm into the scope of

  the inquest’s inquiry at the outset of the main inquest into the issue of how

  the deceased m et their deaths:       H e wrongly rejected the submissions of

  C ounsel for the family against the imposition of this limitation on the scope

  of the inquest. T h e decision was particularly wrong because th ere was clear

  evidence that at least four of the deceased were, or may have been, still alive

  after 3.15pm and lack of evidence in relation to the other two that left the

   issue o pen th a t they too were alive after 3.15pm.     M oreover, the decision

   m eant th at there was no inquiry into whether or how far th eir deaths were

   caused in part by the delay in calling the emergency services, and any
sh o itcom ings in the response of the police, and em ergency services to the

plight of th e d e c e a s e d after 3.15pm.




The C oroner wrongly refused to call as witnesses Dr. John Ashton and Dr.

Glyn Phillips, the significance of whose evidence is sum m arised in paragraphs

12 and 13 of the Memorial to the Attorney General. Again this had the effect

of restricting the scope of the full inquiry into "how" the deceased met their

deaths which th e law requires.




The C oroner wrongly limited the inquiry into "how" the deceased met their

deaths so as to exclude inquiry into whether lives could have been saved by

calling the emergency services sooner and providing b e tte r emergency care for

the injured thereafter.




The C oroner wrongly failed to direct the jury as to the availability of a verdict

of 'lack of care" or a verdict incorporating some reference to the fact th at the

cause of d e ath was "aggravated by" lack of care, or not prevented from

proving fatal by "lack of care". It is submitted that the verdict of "lack o f care"

should have been left to the jury both:




(a)       because there was clear evidence that negligence by the police had

          c a u s e d th e original build-up that resulted in th e crush injuries which

          p roved fatal; and
i



           (b)      because      there    w a s c l e a r e vid ence     th a t d e s p i t e   th e   lim i ta t io n s

                    i m p o s e d o n t h e s c o p e o f th e inquiry, a m ore timely s u m m o n i n g o f

                    th e e m e r g e n c y servic e s a n d / o r a m ore syste m a tic r e s p o n s e by t h e m

                    could have resulted in the saving of lives.



           Finally, there is now available som e evidence that the C oroner and his jury

           were not given a full picture of the evidence of some of the witnesses w hose

            statem ents were partially sum m arised at the mini-inquests, and that the result

            was that the proceedings w ere vitiated by the omission of certain facts

            [although it is recognised th at the motives for such omissions as there were,

            were well intentioned].



                      CONSEQUENCES OF AFORESAID DEFECTS



    It is submitted that it is open to this H onourable Court, in exercise of its common law

    powers of judicial review, either to quash the inquests as a whole and order fresh

    inquests into the d eaths of these six deceased or, alternatively, to strike down the

    conclusion or verdict w ithout going on to order a fresh inquest - as was done by the

    Divisional Court in the case of R -v- St. Pancras Coroners’ C ourt ex parte R o b e rt

    Higgins (23rd May 1988).
                                                                                                EDWARD FITZGERALD




    INVOLVED APPLICANTS SOLICITORS                                                         Malcolm J Gregg & Co
                                                                                           31 North John Street
                                                                                           Liverpool, L2 6RG
                                                                            “•SB-
    DATE                 (cVe\'L-                                             signed        .. J^7777. ).
                                                                                                                      1V


                                                         -   6-
      IN THE     HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

      QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

      DIVISIONAL COURT



      IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR
      JUDICIAL REVIEW


      AND IN THE MATTER OF DECISIONS MADE BY HER MAJESTY'S CORONER
      FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE BETWEEN 18TH APRIL 1989 AND 28TH MARCH 1 9 9 1 ‘




                                    AFFIDAVIT




      I,   JEREMY JOHN MURRAY HAWTHORN,     of Malcolm J Gregg & Co, Solicitors

      of 31 North John Street, Liverpool 2, MAKE OATH and say as
      follows:-



      1-         I am aSolicitor in the firm of Malcolm J Gregg & Co of

      31   North John Street,   Liverpool 2 , and make this Affidavit in

      support of the application by all six applicants herein for leave

      to apply for Judicial Review.        I have authority to make this

      Affidavit on the applicants'       behalf.



      2.       On the 15th April 1992 I caused to be sent to the office of

      the Attorney General a memorial made on behalf of the applicants,

      to   which were annexed   two volumes of exhibted material.    There is

      produced    and shown to me marked "JJH/l" a copy of the said
U°/   memorial anlexhibited bundles.



      3-       I confirm that: the contents of the said memorial are true

      to the best of my knowledge and belief.




                                                                           v -




                                                               4
§4.      There    is further produced and shown to me marked "JJH/2 1

 a schedule showing the submission of the applicants as to the

■delay in submitting this application.              These submissions are

 likewise true to the best of my knowledge and belief.



 5.           accordingly as this Honourable Court to grant the relief

I sought by the applicants herein.




  SWORN at Liverpool in           )

  the County of Merseyside )

  this5^C day of May 1992         )




  Before me


                 So 1 ici tor/Cuminis'ST'Ofrtfi' fui— Bafebs
    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

    QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

    DIVISIONAL COURT




    IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO
    APPLY FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

    AND IN THE MATTER OF DECISIONS MADE BY HER
    MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
    BETWEEN 18TH APRIL 1989 AND 28TH MARCH 1991




                                                  *»




                         AFFIDAVIT




        Malcolm J Gr e g g & Co
        31 North John Street
        LIVERPOOL
        L2 6RG



j
           "Tu^li «»           ^''cWU'V    JiVs [l_      b                      ^                          J jH| 9
                       J-*~~              V\wa^—      j\~»^__ l-ti,    5^        \     r^*~\ (^Vi_
     1                                          ? ubmiSSIONS as to delay               (£Xo^J

     I                                                                                  $±L^&-
                                                                                         U aS^Y5^
     IGENERAL SUBMISSIONS


      1.   The Solicitors and Counsel who present this application were not instructed by

           any party in either the inquest or any of. the various proceedings which'arose
            from the Hillsborough Disaster of 15th April 1989.



     |2.   Counsel has been required to read the lengthy transcripts of the relevant

     I      "mini inquest*’, the resumed inquest and all other documenation gathered and
           supplied by the Applicants.




I    3.    .Certain items of new evidence have been discovered which have been included in

            the memorial to the Attorney General.
           and to assess their value to the overall case.
                                                                  It has taken time to assimilate these




     THE SPECIFIC CHRONOLOGY



H 28th March 1991


     Inquest verdict announced.



     April 1991


1 Families seek advice of the Steering Committee of lawyers involved in the

j H i l l s b o r o u g h cases as   to the prospect of overturning the inquest verdict.
m Advised against pursuing any                further action.



i F a m i 1 ies seek advice of Hillsborough project and Liverpool City Council's

     Hillsborough Disaster Working Party.                    Advised   to seek a legal opinion outside
gjthe Steering Committee .



     May 1991


 .Terry Munyard of Counsel                meer:J with families and          adviswon   a number of issues.
®ihe discussion            is inconclusive.

                 i                                                                                   N.-


                                                                                                4

 j
    families seek Counsel              to pursue an appeal against the verdict.



    Aay 1991


    One bereaved father requests his Solicitor to seek leave for Judicial Review and

    Ito apply for Legal Aid for that purpose.              Solicitor agrees and later confirms to

    father that he has submitted an application to the Legal Aid Board.



    June 1991

    •Advice sought from INQUEST Organisation.



     J u a ^ — October 1991

     Contact is made by Sheila Coleman,             researcher from the Hillsborough Project, with

     June Tweedie of INQUEST.              After discussions it is recommended to contract Edward

     Fitzgerald of Counsel.



     October 1991

I    Families visit Edward Fitzgerald in London for a preliminary assessment.



     November 1991


     Bereaved father discovers that his Solicitor has never applied for Legal Aid or

     sought leave to apply for Judicial Review.


I    Alternative Solicitor is sought.



     November 1991


     Malcolm J Gregg & Co, Solicitors,              agree to act.



      Edward Fitzgerald, formally instructed by Malcolm               J   Gregg & Co, visits Liverpool

      on 29th November 1991 for further discussion.                 It is recognised that the relevant


9     fac i.s regarding each of the deceased must be set out in the proposed nemoria.l to
      rhe   Attorney   G e n e ra l.


■
mk
m
                                                                                                    N-




                                                                                                         j
si




I
s cember 1991

      n Sinclair,      one of the Applicants,   is delayed in compiling the facts relating
I
p      the death of her brother, Michael Kelly, by reason of her mother's terminal

      I.n e ss .




r
?r son.
       e Williams,      an Applicant herein,   traces an off-duty Police Officer who assisted

                   She meets him on 15th December 1991 and he reveals what she considers to

       vital information.        Solicitors endeavour to contact the officer at his place of

i ;
!Wrk.


      nuary 1992

      licitor interviews the off-duty Police Officer on 10th January 1992, who declines

!o make a further statement.



      *idividual statements of the families are forwarded to Counsel.



      ^nuary - February 1992

jbuth Yorkshire Police refuse to release statements of witnesses even though all

police Disciplinary Proceedings have been discontinued.



February 1992

      tatements of witnesses sought from the Cronorier's Office.



      nne Williams receives statements of two witnesses.          She makes contact with an
IPS
    ex-Special Constable who reveals facts relating to the making of             a   second

      ratement.



      pril 1992


    Edward Fitzgerald of Counsel meets Applicant families on 8th April 1992 and

      rvi-.ents draft of memorial      to the Attorney General.   Some corrections are proposed.
I

i-ieniorinl        is submitted to the Attorney General on 15th April    1992.
s
gpoutn         /orrfshire   Police todate are still refusing statements to the Applicants.
3
TN THE MATTER OF THE CORONERS’ ACT 1988

AND IN THE MATTER OF THE DEATHS OF:


                        PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE
                         IAN THOMAS GLOVER
                           RICHARD JONES
                           MICHAEL KELLY
                            PETER TOOTLE
                        KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


TO JiE R MAJESTY’S ATTORNEY GENERAL:


                     THE HUMBLE MEMORIAL OF

               SANDRA STRINGER AND DONNA CARLILE
                    (the mother and sister of Paul Cariile)
                       JOHN AND THERESA GLOVER
                     (the father and mother of Ian Glover)
                               JOAN SINCLAIR
                          (the sister of Michael Kelly)
                        LESLIE AND DOREEN JONES
                  (the father and mother of Richard Jones)
                         PETER AND JOAN TOOTLE
                   (the father and mother of Peter Tootle)
                JAMES STEPHEN AND ANNE WILLIAMS
                 (the father and mother of Kevin Williams)


SHEWETH THAT:

(1)   Your Memorialists are:



      (i)     Sandra Stringer and Donna Cariile, the mother and sister of Paul

              Cariile, deceased.



                                    -1-

                                                                  4
IN THE MATTER OF THE CORONERS’ ACT 1988

AND IN THE MATTER OF THE DEATHS OF:


            PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE
             IAN THOMAS GLOVER
               RICHARD JONES
               MICHAEL KELLY
                PETER TOOTLE
            KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


TO HER MAJESTY’S ATTORNEY GENERAL:


         . THE HUMBLE MEMORIAL OF

   SANDRA STRINGER AND DONNA CARLILE
        (the mother and sister of Paul Cariile)
           JOHN AND THERESA GLOVER
         (the father and mother of Ian Glover)
                    JOAN SINCLAIR
               (the sister of Michael Kelly)
            LESLIE AND DOREEN JONES
      (the father and mother of Richard Jones)
             PETER AND JOAN TOOTLE
       (the father and mother of Peter Tootle)
    JAMES STEPHEN AND ANNE WILLIAMS
     (the father and mother of Kevin Williams)




Malcolm J. Gregg & Co
Second Floor
Century Buildings
31 North Street
Liverpool
L2 6RG

Solicitors for the Memorialists



                                  v
(ii)    John and T heresa Glover, th e fath er an d m o th e r o f Ia n Glover,

         deceased.



(iii)   Joan Sinclair, the sister of Michael Kelly, deceased.



(iv)    Leslie and Doreen Jones, the father and mother of Richard Jones,,

         deceased.



(v)     Peter and Joan Tootle, the father and mother of Peter Tootle,

         deceased.



(vi)    James Stephen and Anne Williams, the father and mother of Kevin

         Williams, deceased.



Between the 18th day o f April 1989 and the 28th day o f March 1991 an

inquest was held before Doctor Popper, one of H er Majesty’s Coroners,

. touching the deaths of the six. deceased named hereinbefore and some 89

 others who had died as a result of the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on the

 15th April 1989.



 At the said inquest the jury returned and the Coroner recorded that the six

 deceased named hereinbefore had died of multiple crush injuries and the

 conclusion of the verdict was accidental death.
A

    1-)   Y our M em orialists h ereb y seek your authority u n d e r Section 13 of th e

          C o ro n ers’ Act 1988 to apply to th e High C ourt for an O rd e r q u ash in g the s-id

          inquisition and ordering a fresh in q u e s t They do so on th e g ro u n d s that th e

          said inquest was vitiated by th e wrongful rejection o f evidence by "irregularity

          o f proceedings" by "insufficiency o f inquiry" and by a failure to d ire c t the jury

          correctly as to th e verdicts available to them on th e facts an d in particu lar th e

          om ission to m ake any m ention a t all o f th e alternative verdicts o f "lack o f

          care", accidental d e ath due to lack o f care" and "accidental d e a th aggravated

          by lack o f care".    T hey fu rth e r subm it th at in som e cases a t lea st th ere has

          been a su b seq uent "discovery o f new facts o r evidence" th a t justifies th e

          quashing o f th e inquisition a n d th e holding o f a fresh in q u e s t




          Your Memorialists respectfully refer you to the individual summaries

          appended hereto which set out the particular facts o f their individual cases.

          In what follows your Memorialists will develop some o f the points common to

          all their submissions which have caused them to seek your authority to apply

          to the High Court under Section 13. But they accept that each case will have

          to be looked at individually in deciding whether to grant your authority to

          some or all of them. All of them complain that the Coroner wrongly failed

          to direct the jury as to the verdicts of lack of care or accidental death due to

           or "aggravated by lack o f care". They do so firstly on the basis that the

           negligence of the police in causing the tragedy was self-evident and has

           indeed been admitted; this justified leaving the verdict of "lack o f care" to the

           jury on the basis of the police’s failure to perfornv-their duty of care to the

           <                                                                                     v-

                                                 -3-                                  4
deceased.    But, additionally and in the alternative, they com plain th at the

Coroner wrongly excluded evidence o f lack of care in th e em ergency services’

an d police’s reaction to th e deceased’s initial injuries, wrongly insisted on a

cut-off point of 3.15pm for the evidence heard at th e m ain in q u est (despite

evidence th at th e deceased were, o r may have been, still alive a fte r th a t tim e)

an d wrongly failed to direct th e jury on the availability o f a verdict o f

accidental d eath aggravated by lack of care or lack o f care b a se d on the

failure of the various responsible agencies to provide the d e ce ased with

a d eq u a te m edical a tte n tio n after they had sustained th e ir original: injuries.




                  BACKGROUND TO THE INQUEST



The inquest arose out o f the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium Sheffield which

occurred on 15th April 1989. On that day the semi-final of the Football

Association Cup was arranged to be played at the Stadium between the

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Football Clubs. What happened next can

be summarised in the words o f Lord Keith in his Judgment on the case of

Cooper & Others -v- Wright:



T h e South Yorkshire Police Force, which was responsible for crowd control

at the match, allowed an excessively large number of intending spectators to

enter the ground at the Leppings Lane end, an area reserved for Liverpool

Supporters. They crammed into pens 3 and 4, below the West Stand, and in

the resulting crush 95 people were killed and 400^hysically injured".
As is recorded in L ord K eith’s Judgm ent, the South Y o rk sh ire Police have

subsequently adm itted th at th e ir negligence was responsible for th e said

injuries and deaths.



Before the inquest hearing opened on 18th April 1990, there had been an

official inquiry ordered by the Secretary of State for the Home D e^ ftin en t .

on 17th April 1989. This inquiry was carried out by Lord Justice Taylor with

the help of two assessors. In his Interim Report on the "events at Sheffield

Wednesday Football Grounds on 15th April 1989" which was presented to

Parliament in August 1989, Lord-Justice Taylor had established a chronology

o f the key events and made certain findings of relevance to this Memorial.

Your Memorialists respectfully summarise the chronology of findings to assist

you by way of background to their complaints about the conduct of the

subsequent inquest- Lord Justice Taylor’s findings can, then, be summarised

as follows, on the basis of his Interim Report:



(i)      Before the kick-off o f the match, which was scheduled for 3.00pm,

         there was a build-up of supporters outside the Leppings Lane

         entrance to the grounds which caused pressure and discomfort to

         those trying to get into the ground through the turnstiles.



(ii)     At 2J>2pm Chief Superintendent Duckenfield - who was the police

          officer in charge of crowd control at the match decided that, in order

          to relieve the pressure at the turnstiles, he^y/ould give permission for
the gates to the ground at the Leppings Lane entrance to be opened.

The'opening of one of the gates, Gate C, resulted in a sudden influx

of supporters through the tunnel and into the spectators’ pens 3 and

4, building up an intolerable pressure on the supporters at the front

of the pens. This decision to open the gate was found by Lord

Justice Taylor to be a negligent "blunder". He. also found that the

police had thereafter further misjudged the situation by failing to

take any steps to divert supporters from pens 3 and 4. H e found

that, had this been done, they could have prevented the fatal build­

up of pressure in the pens during the minutes after 2.52pm - which

eventually resulted in the supporters being crushed against the

perimeter wall and the wire mesh of the fence above it. Lord Justice

Taylor also found that the police had made a fatal error in deciding

not to postpone the match, once the problems at the turnstiles

became clear, and that postponement of the match to enable a

slower and more orderly entrance into the ground could also have

averted the resulting disaster.



Lord Justice Taylor found that the pressure on those at the front had

already become intense and life-threatening by 2.59pm, but that the

dangerous situation went "unheeded" and "unremedied" by the

police.



The match Idcked-off just before 3pm and^hortly after that at
3.04pm a further surge caused by the spectators’ response to a

narrow miss at goal by Beardsley for Liverpool further increased the

pressure on the supporters crushed against the wall at the front. By

then, if not before, many of the supporters had suffered the severe

crush injuries from which they died. The exact time of death v.as

not established by Lord Justice Taylor since this was clearly not a n

essential part of his inquiry’s task.



To the front of the crowd, there was delay by the police in opening

the perimeter gates in pens 3 and 4 to the track which ran alongside

the pitch- These were not open until 3.00pm, and until they were

opened the victims of the crush had no means of escaping from the

pens during the build-up of pressure between 2-52pm and 2-59pm-

It was only after 3.00pm that spectators were able to escape by those

gates onto the track and the pitch.



The match was not stopped until 3.05pm and it was only then that

 the gravity of the situation appears to have been appreciated.



 There was then a delay in evacuating the casualties from pens 3 and

 4 and in responding to the magnitude of the disaster. In particular.

 Lord Justice Taylor made the following findings:



  (a)      Initially no officer took effective charge of the evacuatio-rb
of casualties from the pens.



It was not until 3.12pm that chief Superintendent Nesbit

arrived on the pitch and organised a chain of officers to

simplify and expedite the evacuation o f casualties from the

pitch.



Though it was not clear when the Major Disaster Plan was

initiated, it was certainly not initiated until 3.06pm

(subsequent evidence suggests that the existence of a major

disaster was not communicated to the ambulance services

for some time).



 Ambulances from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Area

 began to arrive at Leppings Lane at 3.13pm and at the

 Peniston Road entrance at 3.17pm.
                               *


 No request for the fire-brigade or for cutting gear was

 made until 3.13pm (it would obviously have helped to

 evacuate the injured from behind the wiring had the fire-

 brigade and cutting equipment been available sooner).



  No request for help was broadcast to doctors and nurses in

  the grounds until 3.29pm when**according to Lord Justice

                                                           v,-


                  -8-                            A
                  T aylor’s findings, "it w as too late".




It is plain then that, on the basis of the evidence heard by Lord Justice Taylor

(which to a large ex ten t was reheard by the Coroner and his jury at the

inquest) there was clear evidence that police blunders and negligence was

responsible for the fatal crush which caused the deaths of the deceased. If

then the jury were, as a matter of law, entitled to reflect that negligence m a

verdict (whether of "lack of care" or some other verbal formula falling short

of the gross negligence or recklessness necessary to constitute unlawful killing

by manslaughter), such a verdict should have been left to them on the facts.



Secondly, it is plain that Lord Justice Taylor found some serious deficiencies

in the police response to the plight of the injured once they had sustained

their injuries at some time between 2-52pm and 3.05pm, or even later. It is

true that he had concluded that many o f the injuries and deaths were

probably inevitable once the fatal crush had built up. But heTecognised that

 a quicker response to the emergency by the police to ensure the early

 attendance of the emergency services might have saved at least some lives.

 These findings did at least raise the further question o f whether the cause of

 death (Le. crush injuries) had not in some cases been aggravated by "lack of

 care" in the sense of a failure to respond swifdy enough to the plight of the

 injured and provide them with the necessary medical care to avert death.
(10)        Lord Justice Taylor did find th a t "there was insufficiently close co-operation

            betw een the police and the emergency services", and fu rth e r found th at "it is

            clear th a t S YMAS and the Fire Brigade should have b e e n called earlier than

            they were". But, in view o f his finding as to the "pathetically sh o rt period for

            which those unable to breathe could survive" he found th a t it is "improbable

            th a t quicker recourse to the em ergency services could h ave saved m ore lives".

            M oreover, h e rejected the criticism that, once they h ad been called, the S t

            Jo h n A m bulance Brigade, the F ire Brigade and SYMAS (th e S outh Yorkshire

            M etropolitan A m bulance Service) had been slow to resp on d o r inappropriate

        • in th e ir response o r th a t th ere was any insufficiency o f equipm ent o r lack of

            triage. How ever, it is clear th at he did not rule out th e possibility th a t some

            lives may have b een saved by calling the emergency services in e a rlie r and his

            conclusion th a t in m ost cases th e injuries would have b e e n fatal in any event

            after a very sh o rt period o f crush asphyxia d e p e n d e d on a particular

            pathological prem ise (nam ely th a t fatal crush in ju ries w ere d u e to a
    i
            continuing pressure which made death inevitable in a matter o f minutes)

            which has subsequently been challenged and is inconsistent with the fact that

    w       some of the dead appeared to have revived briefly and many of the injured

            who got medical attention'promptly did survive (See BMJ article dated 30th

            November 1991 and annexed hereto). As to his view that the emergency

            services could not be validly criticised, this was based on a rejection of the

I           evidence of two doctors present at the ground with which a jury (had they

I           been allowed to hear their evidence at the inquest) might not have concurred.




                                               -   10   -




        ^         —               i
                      T O — r r ^— —                        .   .   ”   " ^ T T T T i r f a . i ^ i   iji. . h t t t   v; jhw   im w i   i.   >   .   ■ n   j   itt:
So despite his reservations about the number of lives that might have been

saved by a swifter response Lord Justice Taylor did make findings which

suggested that the lives of some of the dead might have been saved if there

had ; sen a more timely response by the police to the crisis and if they had

called in the emergency services more quickly. But, as indicated above, there

was additional evidence considered by Lord Justice Taylor, and available to

the Coroner, which went considerably further.       This evidence principally

consisted of the statements of two doctors and a nurse who had been present

at the match and attempted to assist and treat the casualties - namely Dr.

 Glyn Phillips, Dr. John Ashton' and Mr. FJ. Eccleston, a senior nursing

 manager.



 Dr. Glvn Phillips



 Dr. Glyn Phillips has provided a statement to the Coroner, a copy of which

 is annexed hereto. In summary, he remarks in his statement how h e had been

 a spectator at the match, and had experienced the crush as the crowd surged

  forward in the pen, and had managed to escape from the pen over the

  perimeter fence. H e then made various attempts to resuscitate unconscious

  spectators lying on the pitch. In one case he succeeded in reviving a spectator

  who was lying unconscious by the goal line, cyanosed and pulseless, when he

  first came upon him. After some fifteen minutes of cardiac massage and

  mouth to mouth resuscitation Dr. Phillips noticed the young man began to

   make his own breathing efforts. He got him to aryimbulance and told the
           ambulance m an th a t he n e e d e d an am bulance "now" - but th e        am o u iaacc


           told him   th a t   he   c o u l d n ’t   get the ambulance o u t The time, on the basis of

           Dr. Phillips’ estimations, must by then have been sometime after 3.21pm. His

           evidence is significant in that it demonstrates the possibility that lives could

           have been saved with proper emergency help after the crush injuries sustained

           at around 3.00pm - 3.04pm. It also indicates that there were matters which

           deserve investigation in inquiring as to the cause of death which occurred

           after 3.15pm (the "cut-off1 point selected by the Coroner).                    Dr. Phillips’

I          evidence is also significant in that he called for a ventilator whilst attending

|          the victim who revived and was told that there was none; and he also asked

I          for an oxygen cylinder, and was provided with an empty one. This did point
                                                                                                               S
            to a significant ‘lack of equipment’ as a problem that may have contributed

1          to the deaths of some of the deceased.


I

j13)        Dr. John Ashton



'           Dr. John Ashton, who had attended the match as a spectator with his two

|      ®     sons and nephew, is a medical practitioner and senior lecturer in Community

             Health at University of UverpooL In a statement dated 19th April 1989 he

             gave a detailed account of the events that unfolded from about 3.15pm

             onwards which highlighted the serious shortcomings in the response of the

              police and the emergency services. His account was as follows:



              (a)         When he got a view of the pitch shortly before 3.15pm he said:
                                                                              **<»
                                                                                                          v-
                                                              -   12
                                                                   -



                                                                                              4
                                                                   ^                        J.UJUMMUtt.MHag
      "There seemed to be a few St. John’s Ambulance people attending

      the people who were lying around the pitch and I could see people

      lying on the pitch unattended.      There was a large line of police

      officers across the pitch at the centre circle".



(b)   At about 3.15pm he was able to get a better view of what was going

      on the pitch and described what he saw as follows:



      "The overwhelming impression was of a large and growing number

      of casualties and not much response.       The supporters were now

      impatient and angry at the slowness of the response to the

      emergencies. There appeared to be only one or two stretchers on

      the pitch and one ambulance was making its way around from the far

      comer." H e then described how the supporters were chanting for

      assistance to be brought to the injured on the pitch and how many

      o f them began to tear down the advertising boards and organise

      themselves into stretcher parties. It was around this time that he

      heard the tannoy appeal for doctors to help. This took place at

      about 3.29pm.



(c)   Dr. Ashton asked several policemen who he could report to to help

       and was told they did not know. Finally, a senior police officer

       (Inspector Grace) was pointed out to him but he too said that he did

       not know who was in charge of emergencies or whom he should
 (                                                              V;-


                                                               4
                               -13-
report to to help.



Dr. Ashton then went out into Leppings Lane at around 3.30pm to

3.35pm and found that there was only one ambulance there.



Dr. Ashton found that there was no triage system in operation to

identify those most in need of medical aid so he organised a triage

system himself as to whom to put in the ambulance.



Dr. Ashton recounted how there was no steady flow of ambulances

until between 3.45pm and 3.50pm. Once they began to arrive he and

a local practitioner worked together sorting out the casualties and

dispatching them in ambulances.



It was not until then that "an anaesthetist arrived from somewhere

and fire engines came with resuscitation equipment, but all of this

was really too late". Dr. Ashton took the view that, by 430p m it was

"all over".



 Dr. Ashton recorded his view that "on this occasion crowd safety

 took second place to crowd control" and that the emergency service

 was '‘woefully inadequate". He recognised the difficulty of assessing

 how many lives might have been saved by a more timely response,

 but clearly his statement raised this issue most clearly.
M r. E ccleston



Mr. Eccleston is a qualified nurse and Senior Nurse Manager who made a

statement dated 18th April 1989 giving his account of the disaster in which he

had been caught up after attending the match as a Liverpool supporter with

his son. In his statement which is appended to this Memorial, he gives an

account of the events which occurred after the match was stopped.             His

account of events can be briefly summarised as follows:



 (a)       He was allowed onto the pitch by a steward when he explained he

           was a trained nurse.



 (b)     * He then helped the police pull casualties through the gates of the

           pens onto the pitch.      The first casualties were conscious and

           recovered but they then began to pull out unconscious bodies.



  (c)       He recalls resuscitating one young man to the point where he

            regained consciousness and was able to talk (pages 3-4) and then

            taking him on a stretcher to the St. John’s Ambulance room.



   (d)      Later on at about 15.30 he strove to resuscitate another young man

            but "lost the battle for the young man’s life". H e records that at that

             stage "we still had no equipment of any sort to work with".
It w as sh o rtly a fte r 15.30pm th a t th e first a m b u la n c e s b e g a n to m a k e


th e ir way o n to th e p itch .




H e later went to the gymnasium w here the space was divided into a

p a rt set aside for the presum ed dead and a p a rt fo r the living. This

was about 15.55pm and th e scene was "absolute chaos".



 Your Memorialists would particularly draw attention to his

 conclusions (6) and (7) which were as follows:



  «(6)        Observing from the outside it appears to have taken far too

              long to decide that it was not a security problem and that

              the fans genuinely needed help.                      Working with and

          •   alongside the individual police officers in the immediate

               disaster area, I have enormous praise and admiration for

               their efforts. Overall at the scene, however, there appeared

               to be a lack of coordination and genuine leadership.



   "(7)         For an ex trem ely long time we were without any medical

                equipment of any description. I still can’t understand why

                the local Health Authority’s Major Medical Disaster Team

                was not called upon.                I understand that all Health

                 Authorities in this country have a major disaster policy. It

                 is im p o ssib le to accurately estimate the difference this
                        would have m ade in saving life. I do how ever believe th at

                         the Liverpool fans should have b een given th e chance".




Issues R aised bv Evidence Disclosed to C oroner



It is plain then that the general evidence disclosed to the Coroner when he

embarked upon the Inquest proceedings in April 1990 raised at least two

issues that deserved investigation and might result in a verdict that reflected

culpable failure on the part of the police and/or the emergency services:



(i)              Firstly there was the negligence of the police in permitting the

                 situation to develop to a point where the "fatal" pens were so

                 crowded that the crush injuries resulted which proved fatal to the

                 deceased.



(ii)             Secondly, there was the slow response by the police and emergency

                 services to the plight of the injured, the evidence that some could

                 have been saved by a more timely response, and the general

                 evidence of chaos, lack of leadership, lack o f equipment and lack of

                 ambulances during the crucial time from 3.04pm until 3.30pm and

                 thereafter.



  These were all matters which, it is submitted, require investigation in order

   to determine properly "how” the deceased met their deaths, and they made


  <                                                                                                                                      ^
                                                                  -17-

 .............               ||M|   || r , |   ■   im   <i   i|    II   Jll'l   .'"'I' I   '   .   j   I n iij i   i   in   in i   ' I       I   1
    t h e C o r o n e r ’s s u b s e q u e n t d e c isio n to fix a 3 .1 5 p m c u t- o f f p o in t u n la w fu l an d

    u n ju s tifia b le . A g a in s t t h a t b a c k g ro u n d y o u r M e m o ria lis ts t u r n to t h e c o n d u c t

    o f th e I n q u e s t itself.


     i


)   Opening o f Inquest with Jury - 18th April 1990



    The Coroner swore in a jury and commenced the inquest before the jury on

    the 18th of April 1990.                      On that occasion the Coroner explained the

     procedures that he proposed to adopt to the jury and to the representatives

®    of your Memorialists’ families. The situation was complicated by the fact that

     the Director of Public Prosecutions was still contemplating the initiation of

     criminal proceedings against officers of the South Yorkshire Police for their

         part in permitting the disaster to occur. The Coroner therefore decided to

         open the inquests and hear evidence in the first stage at a series of mim-

         inquests which would be confined in their scope to the statutory question of
»

         "who" the deceased was in each case and "when and where" he m et his death.

#        H e indicated that he would postpone all wider investigation into the further

         question of "how" the deceased came by their deaths - and the extent to which

         fault played a part in that causation - until after the Director o f Public

         Prosecutions had reached a decision on whether to initiate criminal

         proceedings. H e therefore explained his intentions as follows.



                     He would firstly hold a series of mini-inquests into the deaths of
          (0
                     each of th e . deceased confined to the investigation of "who the

                                                                                                                              n   .-
          i
        d e c r e a s e d was, when he died, as far as it can be established and

        where he died, as far as it can be established" (page 10 G-H of

        transcript of proceedings on 18th April 1990). At the end o f each of

        these mini-inquests he would adjourn pending the decision of the

        Director of Public Prosecutions on criminal proceedings.



(ii)    He would not permit any investigation of the wider question of "how",

        the deceased met their deaths at these preliminary inquests and "no

        criticism or attack on any person or corporations will be permitted

        and if a question is asked I will not allow it" (page 128).



(iii)   The evidence o f these mini-inquests would be presented in the form

        of "summaries" read out by presenting officers- These "summaries"

        would summarise the statements taken from eye-witnesses as to the

        movements of the deceased on the day of the disaster, the sightings

        made of them at the time of the fatal crush, the finding of their

        bodies on the pitch, any attempts at resuscitation made, and the

        taking o f their bodies to the temporaiy mortuary in the gym, and the

        certification of death. There would be no oral evidence at these

        mini-inquests save for the reading out of these summaries, based on

        statements taken, by presenting officers and the evidence of

        pathologists as to the cause of death (pages 13F - 14F).




(iv)    The Coroner admitted that he was not complying with the
 t                                                                      v-


                                                                    4
                                 -19-
         requirements of Rule 37 of the Coroners5Rules which lays down the

         procedure that must be followed before documentary evidence is put

         before an inquest instead of original viva voce evidence (page 17D

         18C). In particular, he was not going to summarise the contents o f

         the summaries and then invite the consent of the interested parties

         to this mode of adducing evidence as Rule 37 requires. H e justified

         this departure from the requirements of Rule 37 on grounds of

         practicality.



The mini-inquests of the six young men whose deaths are the subject of this

Memorial took place between the 1st and 4th of May. Detailed accounts are

included in the individual statements relative to the deceased individually

which are appended herewith. But the six mini-inquests had the following

features in common:




(i)     A t each o f them post-mortem evidence was given by pathologists to

        the effect that death was due to traumatic asphyxia or crush

        asphyxia. Put simply this means that the pressure o f the crush o f

        bodies on them prevented their chests from moving in or out so that

        they could not breathe and oxygen was cut off from their vital

        organs. As a result they lost consciousness and subsequently died.

        In each case, the pathologists claimed that the deceased would have

        lost consciousness in a matter of seconds and that they would have

        died within a matter of a few minutes.
At each of them the evidence of eye-witnesses relating to the

deceaseds’ movements prior to death, the injuries they sustained,

their condition on being found and the certification of death was

primarily given by way of reading out a documentary ‘summary’

which collated and summarised the statements o f the contemporary

eye-witnesses. With few exceptions none of the eye-witnesses gave

oral evidence and the families of the deceased had to rely on the

accuracy of the summary presented in order to gain an account of

the last hours o f their sons’ deaths and the circumstances of their

deaths.



In four o f the cases there was some evidence that the deceased were

still alive after sustaining their initial crush injuries and for longer

perhaps than had been said seemed to be possible by the

pathologists. These were the cases of Paul Carlile, Ian Glover, and

Kevin W illiams and Michael Kelly. Coupled with the evidence that

some of the other victims who survived were found unconscious after

the initial crush but revived by timely medical intervention (see

paragraphs 11-14), this has raised in the minds of the deceaseds’

families the question of whether their lives could have been saved by

a more timely medical response and suitable efforts at resuscitation.

This, in turn,   raises the issue of whether the causation of their

deaths was referrable to or "aggravated by" "lack of care" in the

accepted sense o f that expression as defined in cases such as ex_
        parte Hicks 09871 1 WLR 1524. Similarly in the two cases where

        there is no evidence of life after 3.04pm, the cases of Richard Jones

        and Peter Tootle, their families are left with reason to suspect that

        the deceased may have still been alive and capable of being saved

        between the time of the crush and the time when they were certified

        dead (at 4.00pm in the case of Richard Jones, and 3.54pm in the

        case of Peter Tootle). The evidence relating to the four who showed

        signs of life after 3.04pm and may have been alive after 3.15pm and

        capable of being saved, will be briefly summarised below.



In respect of three cases of Paul Carlile, Ian Glover and Michael Kelly the

evidence (as fully set out in the families’ individual appended statements) can

be summarised as follows with regard to the question of. survival:



(i)      Paul Carlile



         The evidence of Professor Usher was that Paul Carlile, who was not

         in fact certified dead until 435pm, would have fallen unconscipus

         within ten to twenty seconds of sustaining his crush injuries and died

         within minutes thereafter. This claim appears to conflict with the

         statement of the off-duty nurse Michael Hoilinghurst which was

         shown to his mother, Sandra Stringer.        In that statement, Mr.

         Hollinghurst describes how he first became aware of Paul Carlile

         when he felt him ‘climbing up his legs’. He was seen to be pulling
himself up by holding onto Mr. Hollinghurst’s trousers. This would

have taken .place between 3.03pm and 3.15pm and suggests that Paul

Carlile was alive and conscious when first found by Mr. HollinghursL

In the statement Mr. Hoilinghurst describes his attempts at

resuscitation, and how he was told to leave the enclosure by a

policeman or ambulance man who said he could achieve no more.

This has raised in his family’s minds the suspicion that Paul Carlile

could have been saved by a more sustained attempt at resuscitation.

It is questionable whether Paul was in fact dead at the p oin t There

was no electro-cardiogram to test for a pulse (which is extremely low

in traumatic asphyxia cases).   Given that he had been conscious

when he was trying to pull himself up, Paul’s family believe that he

might have been saved had Mr. Hollinghurst been allowed to stay

with him longer. They are also very concerned that though he was

one of the first casualties to be taken out through the tunnel to the

Leppings Lane area shortly after 3.15pm, he was, however, never

placed in an ambulance and was still on the ground in that area at

435pm when Dr. Monaghan certified him dead. A final matter of

concern raising the question of possible survival is the fact that Mr.

Monaghan requested the use of a machine when attending to Mr.

Carlile. This may suggest that, even then, it was not certain whether

he was dead or not A further point to note is that when Michael

Hollinghurst gave evidence at the resumed inquest none of the

details relating to Paul’s attempts to sta&d up were raised as an
Ian G lover




Ian Glover was removed from Pen 3 by two police officers and was

placed on his back on the ground. His brother Joseph attempted

mouth-to-mouth resuscitation but was stopped by a police officer

who pronounced Ian dead and placed a jumper over his face. No

equipment was used to ascertain the presence of a pulse.          The

evidence of Professor Usher was that he died of traumatic asphyxia,

and that his injuries would have created unconsciousness within ten

to twenty seconds and made death inevitable within four to six

minutes. This, however, was inconsistent with the evidence of his

brother, Joseph, which was not given orally to the mini-inquest but

indirectly via the Reporting Officer Geraldine Evans. She states (at

page 5B of the mini-inquest transcript for 4th May 1990):



"Sir, I have to include that I have spoken with Joseph this, morning

and he wishes to state that in the gymnasium a doctor was present

and when he examined Ian he did in fact find a pulse and attempted

to resuscitate him for about fifteen minutes but was unsuccessful".



It is clear that these attempts at resuscitation would have taken place

during the period between 3.25pm and 3.40pm and suggest the

possibility both that Ian was alive after 3.15pm and that he might

have survived had there been a more timely attempt at resuscitation
                                             **<»•

                                                                          V

                        -24-
                                                              4
by a q u a lifie d p e rs o n . T h e fa c t th a t his fa c e h a d b e e n c o v e r e d w hilst

h e w as o n th e p itc h possibly p r e v e n te d s u c h a n a tte m p t.




M ichael Kelly




In Michael Kelly’s case the pathologist, Dr. John Clark, gave

evidence at the m inynquest on the 1st of May 1989 that he died o f

crush asphyxia but that the asphyxial changes in him were relatively

mild. There was evidence that he was still alive at 3.08pm (10D of

mini-inquest transcript) which tends to negative any suggestion of

instantaneous unconsciousness and death minutes after. Moreover,

PC Maugham gave evidence that he reached Michael Kelly at some

time around 3.08pm, gave him artificial resuscitation, and carried him

to the Spion Kop End on a hoarding improvised to serve as a

stretcher. That would have been some time around or after 3.15pm

and PC Maugham was quite confident that M ichael Kelly was still

alive at that stage.              H e described how Michael Kelly was still

breathing for himself when he handed him over to the S t John’s

Ambulance Service. Moreover Michael’s Post-Mortem details reveal

 no evidence o f brain damage and he agreed with Counsel for the

 family that he was confident that he "had won through" in Michael

 Kelly’s case and resuscitated him. Naturally this evidence, together

 with the evidence that Mr. Kelly’s asphyxial changes were relatively

 mild, suggested to his family that his death was preventable and that



                                   -25-
                                                                                             4

             ‘ JWmUnmuj-j.iie-v   - ■- ■ ■■■ ■•    ~~           "—"          1           *
                            he only ceased to breathe subsequently and died because of some

                            shortcomings in the care he received after he was handed over to the

                            St. John’s Ambulance Service.    He was not certified dead until

                           3.59pm.
       I


’1 9 )]        Kevin Williams’ Mini-Inquest
      . i -‘

       I■                                                                          '

               At Kevin Williams’ mini-inquest on 2nd May Dr. Slater, the pathologist, gave
        i              /


               evidence that death was due to asphyxia and that his injuries were likely to

 £             have resulted in unconsciousness within seconds and in death within three to

               five minutes (page 3B-E).       However, evidence was then read out, in the

               course of the summary, from two police officers which suggested that he might

               still have been alive for some considerable time after he sustained his original

               injuries and capable of being saved. The evidence took the following form:


  f

               (i)         There was first a statement from a PC Bruder which was referred to

                           in the summary in which he stated that he had come upon Kevin

                           Williams lying on the ground of the pitch having convulsions (the

                           rest of his statement in which he referred to Kevin Williams’

                        vomiting and to him having a pulse was not read out at this hearins

                        though this clearly provided further evidence that he was still alive).

                           Clearly this evidence suggested that Kevin Williams was still alive

                        and moving a considerable time after his original injuries and even

                        after being moved onto the pitch. This raised the question of

                i                                                                             v

                                                 -26-
                                                                                    4
 w h e th e r h e could h av e b een resu scitated th o u g h P C B ru d e r sta te d

 th a t his own a tte m p ts a t resuscitation ev en tu ally failed an d th a t

 K evin W illiam s w ent grey.




However, a further statement was then referred to from a Special

Constable Deborah Martin who had made a statement to the effect

that Kevin Williams was alive and had been briefly resuscitated as

late as about 4pm. In the original, statement she made which was

not read out at the inquest but merely referred to, she said:



"He stopped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart

massage and a doctor also helped. He started breathing and opened

his eyes, his only word was "Mom" and then he died".



This statement was referred to with some scepticism (page 6F of

transcript and page 7D-E). But clearly it once again raises the

possibility o f survival long after 3.15pm (as late as 4pm) and the

question o f whether death might have been prevented by more

timely medical intervention. The Coroner was sufficiently concerned '

about this evidence to call further evidence on the matter on 4th

May at a resumed mini-inquest into the death o f Kevin Williams.
 K evin Williams (th e resum ed mini-inrjn^ct)




When the mini-inquest was resumed on 4th May the Coroner called further

evidence which was undoubtedly intended to discredit the suggestion that

Kevin Williams had survived for some considerable time after sustaining his

crush injuries and to reassure the family by qualifying and undermining the

testimony of PC Bruder and Special Constable Martin. H ie further evidence,

took the following form:




(i)      An Inspector Robert Sawers was called who stated that he had re-

         interviewed PC Bruder on 3rd May and that, in the light of the

         further questions put to him, PC Bruder now accepted that his

         description of the deceased as ‘having convulsions’ should be altered

        and the ‘movement’ was best described as a ‘twitch’ (6C). H e also

        reported that PC Bruder had now qualified his claim to have ‘"felt

        a slight pulse" and that he now accepted that "whatever h e felt there

        he cannot be categoric it was a pulse" (page 6G ). H e further reports

        that PC Braden now accepted that he had not witnessed Kevin

        Williams being sick (page 7b).




U)      Dr- David SIater> ^     pathologist, was then recalled. His evidence

        was that Kevin Williams’ death was caused by a 'Very very severe

        case of asphyxia" and that there "was four fractures to the voice box".

        In his view unconsciousness would have resulted from the crush
              injuries within seconds and irrecoverable brain dam age d e a th would

              have occurred w ithin th ree to six minutes th e re a fte r but w hole body

              death may not have resulted until som etim e th e re a fte r (pagers 10-

              12). This might explain the apparent twitches some considerable

             time a fte r he had b een taken from the terraces. B ut h e was sure

             th at Kevin Williams had died before Special C onstable M artin

             arrived on th e scene.




 (iii)       In addition, a Dr. Ernest Gumpert was called to explain further- the

             distinctions between brain death and whole body death and to record

             his view that Kevin Williams was brain dead before he got out of the

             area where he was standing, when he lost consciousness.



Subsequent Developments Regarding Williams’ Inquest




Subsequent investigations have revealed that considerable pressure was put

on both Special Constable Martin and PC Bruder to retract or qualify their

evidence as to the signs of life they described in Kevin Williams. These are

set out more fully in the statement of Kevin Williams’ mother, appended

herewith. But the manner in which the very significant evidence o f these two

witnesses was presented to the mini-inquest was highly unsatisfactory. Clearly

the jury and the family should have had the benefit of hearing oral evidence

rather than somewhat misleading second-hand accounts of their original

statements and of the qualifications they had subsequently been persuaded to


         i                                                                        V-
                                      -29-
 make to their original evidence.      And clearly the edited version of their

 evidence actually presented was, at the very least, not a com plete picture of

their eye-witness accounts.




M ini-inquests concerning R ichard Jones and Peter Tonfle.




The mini-inquests into the deaths of Peter Tootle and Richard Jones revealed .

no positive evidence of signs of life after they suffered from the crush injuries

which resulted in their deaths. The only evidence in respect of these two

after they suffered their injuries was as follows:



(O'      Richard Jones




         Richard Jones, who was found to have died of traumatic asphvxia

        has been identified standing in enclosure 3 at 2.50pm. The only

        evidence of what happened to him after this time came from Police

        Sergeant Killoch who disclosed in his summary that sometime later

        Police Constable Paul Bromley joined a group o f supporters who

        were carrying Richard Jones across the pitch to the north stand on

        a makeshift stretcher.     Once there, the constable attempted to

        resuscitate him but was unsuccessful. He then assisted in earning

        Richard Jones into the temporary mortuary where at 4pm he was

        certified dead.   The very lack of evidence has made his family

        concerned that his life might have been say$d had there been

 <                                                   N -’


                                -30-
with the C oron er their concern to know w h e th e r his life could have

been saved had he not been assum ed to be d e ad w hen tak e n to th e

tem porary m ortuary but instead taken to hospital a n d given th e

benefit o f resuscitation attem pts a t the hospital. T h e C o ro n e r d e alt

with this by saying a t (page 8D o f the tran scrip t) th a t in an ideal

world everybody would have gone to hospital b u t th a t this ignored

the practicalities.




P e te r T ootle                                                      •    ^




In the case of Peter Tootle there was very little evidence as to what

happened to him after he fell unconscious from his injuries in the

third enclosure. His friend and companion Colin Frodsham saw a

police officer attempting to resuscitate him for about ten to twenty

seconds when he (Colin Frodsham) recovered consciousness himself.

There is then evidence that at some time between 3.20 and 3.40pm

Poiice Constable Friend saw Mr. Tootle at the end o f the ground

opposite to the Leppings Lane end; he then examined him and

carried him into the temporary mortuary where he was certified dead

at 3.45pm. (Dr. Bull who certified him dead certified a total of 30

victims dead in the space of twenty minutes).              His family were

concerned to know whether his life might not have been saved by

more timely intervention by skilled medical help.           At the resumed
             inquest Mr. and Mrs. Tootle listened to all the evidence but only

             heard their son’s name mentioned once as a verdict was attached to

             it.



    A t the conclusion of the mini-inquest, when the Coroner adjourned to await

    the result of the Director of Public Prosecution’s decision, the position was

    as follows:



    (i)      Pathologists had given their view that in most cases unconsciousness

Q            had followed within seconds of the crush injuries which eventually 4

             proved fatal and that brain death occurred on average within four to

             six minutes thereafter.     But clearly, there were some cases (eg

             Michael Kelly) where the comparative mildness o f the crush injuries

             meant that, even if this general rule was correct, it was not

             applicable in the individual case.
t




4
.    f i )
              On the contrary, eye-witness accounts and those o f doctors actually

              present at the scene tended to suggest that lives could have been

              saved by more prompt medical attention. There were a number of

              examples of successful resuscitation when prompt medical attention

              had been made available. The report of Lord Justice Taylor had

              found that there had at least been delays in summoning the

              emergency services. The evidence was very strong that there had

              been shortcomings in the response of the emergency services. None



                                       -32-
o f this evidence had been heard because it was inevitably bound up

with the wider question o f "how" the deceased m et th e ir deaths and

with questions o f fault which the C oroner h a d excluded from the

mini-inquests.




Your Memorialists all had reason to believe that the delay in calling

the emergency services and the shortcomings in their response may

have played a part in the causation of their relative’s deaths. In four

cases, there was evidence of survival beyond the four to six minute

period given by the pathologist for death to ensue, and in two cases

(Michael Kelly and Kevin Williams) there was positive evidence that

resuscitation had proved temporarily successful.        This made it

necessary to investigate whether some failure in medical attention

contributed to the causation of deaths which were not in fact

inevitable.



Most important of all the deceased’s families had been lead to

believe that the question of "how" their relatives met their deaths

would be fully investigated at the resumed; in q u est      And they

considered that an inquiry into "how" they died that did not extend

to the time of their actual deaths and deal with the preventability of

their deaths by suitable emergency response could hardly be called

adequate.




                       -33-                                    4
    T h e R e s u m e d In q u est




    In September of 1990 a decision was reached by the Director of Public

    Prosecutions not to prosecute anybody in respect of the Hillsborough disaster.

    Thereafter, the Coroner decided that the adjourned inquests should be

    resumed and completed with a full inquiry into the question of "how".

    However he indicated that he would impose a cut-off point of 3.15pm on the

    inquest and would hear no evidence as to events after that point. He chose „

    this cut-off point because that was the time that the first ambulance arrived

4 0 on the pitch. The effect of the decision to impose a cut-off point at 3.15pm

    was as follows so far as it affected your Memorialists:



    (i)         It ruled out any inquiry into the adequacy of the response of the

                emergency services and effectively meant that there was no inquiry

                into the question of whether the deaths of the individual deceased
i


                might have been prevented by more prompt and adequate medical

                intervention.
•                             '




    (ii)        It proceeded on the basis that all the deaths of those involved in the

                disaster had become inevitable by the time they had sustained the

                crush injuries they suffered before or up to 3.04pm or thereabouts,

                 despite the fact that there was ample evidence to suggest otherwise

                which the jury should properly have been permitted to consider.
(iii)       M o reo v er it meant that there was no evidence o f th e wider

            cir c u m sta n c e s    surrounding the last minutes o f life since there was

            c o n sid e r a b le    evidence that these six deceased were or at least may

            have       been         still alive after 3.15pm.     Y et   the- surrounding

            circumstances of what was going on after 3.15pm and before they

            were certified dead were not inquired into.



    Submissions on 3.15pm Cut-off Point and Ruling



    At the outset of the resumed inquest-in Novemher 1991 the Coroner heard

    submissions from the representative of the families (Mr. King) that he should

    not restrict the evidence by reference to a 3.15pm cut-off point and that he

    should investigate the question of whether the failure to summon the

    emergency services swiftly enough and any failures in their response had

    caused or contributed to the causation of the deaths of the deceased. He
i

     rejected these submissions and ruled that the 3.15pm cut-off point would be

     observed. It is respectfully submitted that the said decision was unlawful for

     the reasons set out in paragraph (24) above and that the consequence was

     that the Coroner failed in his duty to inquire "how" the deceased came by

     their deaths in the fullest sense and wrongly excluded from the jury’s

     consideration what in many cases were the last minutes o f the deceaseds

      lives. Your Memorialists submit that in the light of all the circumstances set

      out above the Coroner thereby gave grounds for the High Court to quash the

      inquisition on the basis of "rejection of evidence” and "insufficiency of inquiiy"
Hj     w ithin th e m eaning o f Section 13(1) of the C o ron ers’ Act 1988.         Your

g     . M em orialists adopt the argum ents o f their Counsel in his submissions which

       a re ap p en d ed herew ith in th e transcript of the proceedings o f th at day and

HI    th e C oro ner’s ruling.




)     The Coroner then proceeded to hear the evidence of the events of . the

       Hillsborough Stadium disaster together with his jury. The evidence heard

9     disclosed that the deaths of the deceased were largely caused by the negligent

      failure of the police to control the influx of the crowd into pens 3 and 4, to

     p r e v e n t the dangerous build-up of pressure in the pens and thereafter, once

      the pressure was proving life-threatening, to remedy the situation by

      evacuating the crushed supporters onto the pitch and thereby saving their

      lives or limiting the number o f casualties. The evidence heard also showed

      that there had been delay in sending for the ambulances and calling for an

     ' emergency response. On the basis o f this evidence alone it is respectfully

|     submitted that a verdict o f "lack o f care" or "accidental death" "due to" or

|    ^ p S ravated by" lack o f care should have been left to the jury.



     On the 12th of February 1991 Mr. and Mrs. Jones, two o f your Memorialists,

     wrote to the Coroner asking him to reconsider his decision about the 3.15pm

     cut-off pom t In their letter they pointed out that there had been, a lengthy

     delay m removing the casualties from the pens and that the process was not

     complete until 3.35pm "a fairly lengthy delay which obviously did nothing to

     help their chances of survival". They pointed out that sSSie of the survivors
who had b e e n ad m itted to ho sp ital with severe injuries h ad b e e n h e lp ed to

recovery later in th e day. A n d they req u ested th a t Dr. Jo h n A s h to n a n d Dr.

Glyn Phillips should be called to give evidence at the inquest; the Coroner

had already seen these doctors’ statements.              The Coroner wrote back

declining to revise his decision on the 3.15pm cut-off point or to call Drs.

Ashton and Phillips to give evidence.             In this refusal it is respectfully

submitted that he was once more guilty of an unlawful "rejection of evidence".

The letter sent by the Jones’s and the Coroner’s reply are appended herewith.



At a later stage the Jones’s caused a report by Dr. James Bums, a Home

Office pathologist, to be sent to the Coroner. This report questioned whether

the approach of Professor Usher (and the other pathologists who gave

evidence of the cause of death) had been, correct insofar as they suggested

that the crush injuries sustained by the deceased would have proved fatal in

a number of m inutes. As Dr. Bums pointed out, the claim was based on the

supposition that the crush injuries were caused by a continuous restriction of

chest movement In fact it was possible that in many cases the restriction of

chest movement caused by the pressure of the crowd was not continuous but

in term itten t and in that case death would not inevitably have occurred before

3.15pm, and there might have been a possibility of recovery if they were

evacuated and given proper attention - if they were unconscious but not yet

brain dead. The Coroner did not admit this further evidence nor did he

review his decision as to the 3.15pm cut-off point in the light of it. In this

 decision, again, it is submitted that he erred in law and wrongly rejected

 evidence.
       i
                                      -37-
                                                                                  4
  r v f p r f s Of ( k r o n e r ’s.Sum m ing-up




  When at the conclusion of the inquest the Coroner summed up he failed to

  direct the jury as to the availability of a verdict of "lack of care" or of

  combining "lack of care" with "accidental death" in some such formulation as

  "accidental death due to lack of care" or "accidental death aggravated by lack

  of care".      It is respectfully submitted that this was a fatal and unlawful

  omission- He had a duty to so direct the jury wherever there was evidence

  that a culpable negligence short of the level necessary to justify a verdict of

^ ’unlawful killing" was present and caused or contributed to the death of the

  deceased. In the alternative, if this wider submission is not accepted, then it

  is respectfully submitted that he did at least have an undoubted duty to direct

  the jury as to the availability of a verdict incorporating reference to "lack of

  care" if they found that there had been some culpable omission as a result of

» which an "opportunity" to render essential medical care and thereby prevent

  fatalities had been "lost" (the test of a "lost opportunity to render care" was

         down in the case of R -v- Southwark Coroner ex parte Hicks (1987") 1

  WLR 1624 and is applicable here). On the evidence before the jury, despite

  the limitations due to the imposition o f the cut-off point, it was open to them

   to conclude that, but for the delays in the arrival of the emergency services,

   the deceased, or at least some of them, would have survived.



   Your Memorialists James and Anne Williams also draw attention to the

   further evidence that has come to light since the inqueskwhich is summarised
          i


                                               -38-                        4
   in their individual statements. This suggests that the inquest did not get a full

   and complete picture of the evidence of PC Bruder and Special Constable

   Martin and that the inquest into Kevin Williams’ death should be quashed on

   the basis not only of "rejection of evidence" and "irregularity of proceedings"

   but also      the basis of the "discovery of new evidence".



   Finally, all your Memorialists submit that there has been an "irregularity of

   proceedings" in that the Coroner wrongly dispensed with the requirements

    o f Rule 37 and introduced composite summaries into evidence without going

    through the proper formalities for the admission of such documentary

    evidence. Alternatively, he was wrong to dispense with oral evidence from

    important eye-witnesses who had actually seen some of the deceased in their

    last minutes before death and could throw light not only on the actual time

    of death but also on the causation of death and its preventability.



    Your Memorialists therefore humbly request that you grant leave to them

    under Section 13(l)(a) of the Coroners’ Act 1988 to apply to the High Court

    for an order that the inquisition be quashed and that a fresh inquisition be

    held.     Your Memorialists submit together with this Memorial a volume

    containing all their individual statements in support of this application and a

     second volume containing all the appendices referred to herein.




                                                       EDWARD FITZGERALD
  iD t h is ^ ^ iy of    April 1992 by Malcolm J. Gregg & Co, Second Floor,

Jury Buildings, 31 North Street, Liverpool, L2 6RG.
IN THE MATTER OF THE CORONERS’ ACT 1983

AND IN THE MATTER OF THE DEATHS OF:


             PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE
              IAN THOMAS GLOVER
                RICHARD JONES
                MICHAEL KELLY
                 PETER TOOTLE
             KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


TO HER MAJESTY’S ATTORNEY GENERAL:


          THE HUMBLE MEMORIAL OF

   SANDRA STRINGER AND DONNA CARLILE
        (the mother and sister of Paul Cariile)
           JOHN AND THERESA GLOVER
         (the father and mother of Ian Glover)
                    JOAN SINCLAIR
              (the sister of Michael Kelly)
            LESLIE AND DOREEN JONES
      (the father and mother of Richard Jones)
             PETER AND JOAN TOOTLE
        (the father and mother of Peter Tootle)
    JAMES STEPHEN AND ANNE WILLIAMS
     (the father and mother of Kevin Williams)




Malcolm J. Gregg & Co
Second Floor
Century Buildings
31 North Street
Liverpool
L2 6RG

.Sniiritnrs for the Memorialists
    FILE NOTE DATED 27.2.90,



    I had a telephone call from Dr. Knapman at about 1-0-clock or so.
    He wanted to know what was happening about Hillsborough.    I
    explained, I said that it was odd that he should be ringing
    as we were having an informal meeting with a view to having
    a pre-inquest review with the intention of resuming on a
    limited basis.   He said this was very interesting because he was
    meeting the D.P.P. himself that afternoon as he was very upset
    about the present arrangements.   He said as far as Clapham
*   was concerned, there had been a Public Inquiry and he had taken
    evidence of identification and location, but it was now 14
    months or so and the D.P.P. had still not made tip his mind
    and this wasn't very satisfactory, slidthe position was even worse
    with the Marchioness Disaster, because in that case there hadn't been
    a Public Inquiry and because the D.P.P. was considering manslaughter
    charges, he was precluded from going ahead entirely.    He had however
    decided that he would have a pre-inquest review shortly and to resume
    the inquest but he felt he wanted to talk to the D.P.P. and see whether
    there wasn't some way in which things could be improved.      I told him
    that we had already discussed it and sorted it out with the D.P.P.
    and he asked if I would telex the letter from     theD.P.P. giving this
    agreement.   I confirmed that I would send it.    Hesaid he would
    let me know in due course the outcome of his conversations.      He
    asked me when I was proposing to resume and I said after Easter.
    He said would I please not resume on the 23rdof April as      that
    was when he was starting. I laugh&d and said     thatsubject to it all
    being cleared with the appropriate solicitors etc., and the final
    decision being taken, I was aiming for the week immediately after Easter
    and hopefully the 18th ( I asked him not to disclose the date'for the
    time being).
 Inquest

Immediate   actions.

1 Agree subject for inclusion in
inquests:.
Who.
a. Identification (opening)

Where and when.
b. History from home to ground

c. factual data as to ingress ijito
ground eg through turnstyle/Gate C
and location in pen.

d. Visual indentification as
faras possible of deceased whether
alive or dead in the ground.

presentation : summaru and
annacappa


Confirmation by witnesses of visual
evidence above.

If possible by using precis but ?
whether at least some witnesses
should be called ? how many.

? whether possible to call senior
police officers or others even to
give non controversial evidence.
This may need to be discussed with
DPP.

How.

Pathologist evidence and alcohol
levels.

EXCLUDE FROM HEARING AT THIS STAGE.

anything that may be detrimental to
DPP inquiry. In particular exclude

Any attack or criticism of any
individual , individuals, body
corporation or group.

Dates.

Estimate time for each inquest

Number of inquests per day?


Location for inquest.
 Medico Legal centre

Circulation of evidence pre hearing
in particular :
precis
any statements to be used as
documentary
NB No SYP to be called at all.
Draft letter.

Consider desirability for press
release.

People to be contacted or notified,
see letter.

Hillsborough support group in
Sheffield .

?Local clergy
? via bishop

Representatives of other religions?

? WVS re coffee etc.

Shorthand writers


Witnesses:

warning by WMP
and solicitors


Press

number of seats required at
inquest?
No cameras or recorders in court
? policy on interviews.
? special meeting with
representative^ of the press
to discuss their needs and
to indicate need for sensitivity
particular in follow up of families
and in particular at or near the
court.

Need for :

loudspeaker equipment
Model from public enquiry
facility to display plan
Telephone connection or facilities
for: coroner and staff
     relatives
     legal representatives
     press                    •
fax machine
                 Page   2
photocopier

Decision as to whether any evidence
can be called for all cases
together eg Dr Forrest.
Prof Usher
Insp. Layton

Note explain view with regard to
use and copies of photographic
evidence.


PRE INQUEST REVIEW.

Obj ectives:
a. to make sure that
representatives understand the
scope and limitations of the
resumptions

b. To deal with options for
further resumptions on the basis
of:
1. DPP brings manslaughter charges
against anyone. Deal with
subsection 16. 1. a and b.
and effect on inquest.

2   .
? private prosecution if no action
taken by DPP.


3. If no action taken and no
private prosecution started Inquest
will have to be resumed but scope
and extent will be determined by
me.

4. Other possibility is minor
charges but not likely to influence
date of inquest.

c. to sort out any
questions of representations

d. deal with the question of Jury

e. to explain principle of order
of hearings.
This would be in order of
Pathologist subject to the
overiding requirement that members
of one family would be dealt with
on the same date
subj ect to this the order would
be governed by
i.overlap of witnesses to minimise
attendance                   *
                 Page   3
ii. complexity
iii.convenience

f. format of inquest

Documentary or precis where
possible
To assist will circulate
copy of summary to deceased
representative (ie steering
committee) for them to confirm
the use of this document

sort out whether this is acceptable
 whether all parties wish to see
documents beforehand.

It will not be possible to obtain
copies of video or ? photographs

WMP officers to give evidence in
terms as to location of deceased,
this will then form part of the
trancript.

One set of the video used in the
court will have to be available for
the coroner for filing with his
records.

Ditto for any photographs produced.

g.Viva voce evidence from
pathologist.

ascertain whether this is required
by representatives.

Dr Forrest and anyone else in same
class to be taken initially so that
he does not have to be present
throughout inquest.
Explain that in some cases where
parties felt that they wanted to
hear him again he could be called
again.

 h. Proceedings to be
transcribed and copy transcripts
available at the appropiate charge.

Not intented that transcripts will
be available on next day as for
practical purposes individual
inquests at this stage.


i.Explain that it is the intention
to have available at the locus.

                  Page   4
1. refreshment facilities

2. Hillsborough support team
members

we would notify if possible a
liason officer inthe the team of
the dates when the individual
inquest take place but up to
solicitors to maintain contact
and be line of communication/

6. Legal representatives must
consider that if they wish to see
family after their inquest they
must have other representative
available to deal with the next
inquest.

j.Family members not called as
witness will have to finance their
own journey and expenses

k. right of press to be present at
inquest.

1. to listen to any points
representives migh wish to put
re the running of the inquest

m. obtain confirmation that the
limitations and scope of the
resumption is understood and
agreed.


21st February 1990.
reviewed for meeting on 26/2/90 on
26/2/90.
FILE NOTE DICTATED 5- 3-90v._EEJJm)ING ON 27.2.90.
PRESENT: MERVYN JOKES.EEHHESpsMR. TPRAZER AND DR. POPPER.



This meeting was recorded but the tapes have not as yet been typed.
The main points which were discussed were as follows :-

   1.   It was explained that the Inquest if resumed would be of
        a limited nature designed to give the medical cause of death
        and if possible to trace the whereabouts of the deceased.
        The evidence would be presented by means of a summary by
        a West Midlands Police Officer and we would probably also
   '■ use the Anna Cappas which were in effect summaries with
      time srcales on them.
        It was made clear that no South Yorkshire Police Officers
        would be called and that there would be no opportunity for
        a cross-examination. The object of the exercise was that this
        would be a very non-adversarial hearing designed in the main
        to give as much information as possible to the relatives of
        a nature, but the information to be limited to matters which
        were not contraversial or under investigation by the D.P.P.
        It was made clear that in the interests of the bereaved, that
        nothing should be done to harm or hinder the Inquiry by the D.P.P.
        quite apart from any other considerations.


        Some disquiet was expressed about the summaries but it was made
        clear that I would see all the summaries sdhd all the statements
        before the Inquests (i intended to read all the 95 case files)
        and the solicitors were somewhat re-assured by that.
        We also said that we would send out, certainly to the bereaveds
        solicitors a copy of the summary before the hearing so that they
        could be acquainted of the circumstances.       I will probably also
        send a copy to Hammond Suddards though I would be reluctant to
        circulate everybody else.
        The questions of photographs and videos were discussed. I explained
        that we would not be using a video and that on the whole I was
        very reluctant to use photographs or blow-ups. We would have them
        available, but in many cases families had already seen than, and
        in any case I preferred to rely on the plans rather than the
        photographs which were difficult to identify in some cases.
        I accepted that there might be some cases where we would have to
        look at the odd photograph.
        We discussed the presence of the pathologists. I said that nay initial
        intention had been to call the pathologist to all the Inquest
        but that upon reflection it might be possible to have one pathologist
        give an overall view of the general pathology of Traumatic Asphyxia
        and then merely to call pathologists to those cases where there
        were some complexity or where there was a particular reason why
        he   should   attend.   This seemed to be acceptable.   I also   said   that
we intended to prove Dr. Forrest’s evidence in one go
so as to avoid him having to be present at the Inquests for
weeks on end. This also appeared to be acceptable, but again
I said if there were the odd case where his presence migjrt be
required then I would certainly consider calling him.
I also said that it might be that I would take some statements
by way of documentary evidence or viva versa. This was the
■main reason for sending out the summary so that solicitors
could indicate whether they we as satisfied with the contents
or if not if they could indicate where they needed further
elaboration, so that I could consider what to do.
We explained that we hoped to commence shortly after Easter
if all went well at the pre-inquest review on the 6th of March.
I explained that we would have to sit with a Jury. I was not
very happy about this but I felt on balance it was the only
sensible thing to   do in the circumstances.
We indicated that   we hoped to deal with 8 cases a      day.
We indicated that   we would like the Hillsborough SupportGroup
involved but that we felt that it would be better       if apart
from communications from us with regard to the date of any
individual Inquest, that contact was done through the Steering
Committee or Solicitors as appropriate. Mr. Frazer pointed
out that there was a technical difficulty in that agreement
had not yet been reached for the funding of representation
at the Inquests.    If this were not forthcoming, problems
could arise.
We also discussed the various options which were open to me
 some depending upon the decision of the D.P.P. e.g., no action
 Inquest resumed and prosecution by D.P.P. Inquest adjourned under
 Section 16. No prosecution but private prosecution, Inquest
 probably adjourned under Section 16.
 We spent a little time discussing the order in which people would
 be called. I said that we had started out with the premise that
 it should be in pathologists order but this could create difficulties.
 We were looking at it and it was quite a difficult matter. Mr.
 Frazer thought that it might be the most difficult thing.
 Both solicitors felt that in view of the nature of the proceedings
 they did not anticipate that many questions would have to be asked
 at this hearing.
 We discussed the transcripts.   I explained that I intended to have
 shorthand writers, like the Public Inquiry but that we would try
 and bind each individual Inquest separately. I did not intend-
 that the transcript would be avilable on the day following but
 within a reasonable time and copies would be available at the
 usual charge which was now 80p per photocopied sheet.
 We discussed the accommodation.   I pointed out what we had
          e and that we were thinking of possibly getting some Portacabins.
      Press were mentioned and it was acknowledged that perhaps they
  would be present but it was assummed that after the initial rush interest
  would be lost.
  We confirmed that we were intending to arrange for tea, biscuit^s and
  possibly sandwiches to be available.
  I explained that if in view of the rate at which we wanted to go, it
  would be essential that solicitors were ready to proceed without fail
  and if they wanted to see their clients after the Inquests they would
  have to have somebody there in order to do that. Mr. Jones pointed out
  that it was intended that the Summarising Officer would only present
  one case per day so that they would be available for liaison work
  and shelterding families about.
  Mr. Jones made it clear towards the end of the meeting that there would
  be no opportunity for cross-examination and that nothing that was said
  or done at this Inquest would be permitted to impede the D.P.P’s
^ inquiries.
  It was made absolutely clear to the solicitors that no decision had
  yet been taken by the D.P.P. regarding the possibility of prosecution or
  and indeed that he was not in a position to take such a decision as the
  paperwork had not yet been delivered to him.
  It was not anticipated that the paperwork would be h|nd|^ to him prior
   to the commencement of the Inquest though, it would/be done shortly
   thereafter and possibly before we concluded.
                                  HI LLSB O R O U G H FOOTBALL DISAS TER - 15TH A P R I L 1989



Informal    M e et ing of H M Coroner,     Legal    Repr esentatives and the Bereaved,             Held    on Tuesday,

6th M a r c h 1990________________________________________________ _____________________________________



Legal Rep resentatives



M r Fraser - m e m b e r of the Steering Co mmittee w h i c h w as          formed by the firms of solicitors

     in Liv erp ool w h o we re    instructed by families             shortly after the disaster.           My

     Committee     represents approxim atel y 150 practises w i t h i n that Group,                 about 50

     practises have      received instructions          from bere ave d families.          Those 50 practises,        I

     understand,     represent 92 of the deceased,             there b e ing three b e r eave d families who

have either not con tac ted us as a group or c ont acted solicitors                      themselves.      We have had

     general contact and it w o u l d be our intentions subject to your approval,                          to be

     present to assist the ber eave d and the Co urt throughout any hearin g you may

     reconvene.



M r Gregory - represents Sheffield City Council.



M r Peter   Doyle - Davies       A r n o l d C oop er Solicitors,     for S heffield W e d n e s d a y Football    Club.



Mr A n d r e w C a l l a g h a n - Dibb L u pton Broomhead,   represents Trent R egional H e alt h Au thority

     and S heffield M e t r o p o l i t a n A m b u lan ce Service.



Ms Katherine Thorpe - Reynolds Porter Chamberlain,                      represent Ea stw o o d & Partners.



Ms Norcliffe -       H a m mond Suddards,      represents SY Police.



I want to introduce M r M e r v y n Jones, A s s i s t a n t Chief Constable,            West Midl and s Police and

he is acting as m y C o r o n e r ’s Off ice r for the purposes of this m e e t i n g and also for the

purposes of the Inquests.
The purpose     of this m e e t i n g is to try and tell you some of the thinking w h i c h I have                   been

engaged in,     the proposals w h i c h I have w i t h regard to resuming the Inquests and toobtain

from the legal representatives,            co nfirmation that w h a t I am p r o p o sin g w o u l d appear to be

an acceptable w a y     forward.     I ought to,maks$ it clear,         that I have h ad a preliminary

di scu s s i o n w i t h Mr Fraser and M ^ K e n n e d y X f a s t week, w i t h a v i e w to ex plo ring the very

subject w h i c h we are discussi ng todajf.          These are the 2 solicitors          I have had most

correspondence with.                        ^



,The second thing I w a n t to say,        the fact that w e are m e e t i n g today and I a m thinking of

resuming the Inquests        rather sooner that I h a d original ly intended,              does not mea n that

the Direc tor of Public Prosecutions has either informed me of any decisions or taken any

decisions w i t h regard to this matter.



M y C o r o n e r ’s O f fice r wh o is also head ing up the Team w h i c h is pre par ing the paper wo rk

for the DPP informs me that the Direct or at the momen t is not able to take a decision

because all     the p aper w o r k has not been d elivered to him.



As you wi ll    note    from the letter I sent to you,            it is m y intention subject to this

meeti ng to try and resume shortly after Easter.                  The timing      for   that has got nothing

w h a t e v e r to do w i t h any a ction or inaction by the DPP.



The present time schedule for submission of papers to the DPP is such that if we do

resume these Inquests        shortly after Easter,           the papers wil l     not   yet have         been submitted

to the DPP in full.         The p o s iti on will be exactly as it is today.            It may be that w h i lst

we are p r oce edi ng w i t h the Inquests,        the papers will go to the DPP and indeed the

submission may w e l l be completed.            We h a d considered something of this          sort some time

ago and w e    rejected it because we wer e concerned that people m i g h t feel that there is

something going on w h i c h I ’m not letting on about.               That is not the case.



The reason w h y I revised my o p i nion as to the p o ss ibi lity of resuming these Inquests, was

because w e    received a letter from Miss Steel, w h o is a m e mbe r of the H i llsb oro ugh

Steering Committee,        in w h i c h she had enclosed a letter w h i c h she a ctually w r o t e to the

DPP,   and by chance we also had a letter from H am mon d Suddards, who d i d n ’t actually make

the same point but it was also raising points                  relating to timing and disclosure.             I

realised that w h a t Miss Steel was            saying was    similar to my original thoughts and felt it

was appropriate to reconsider my earlier d ecision w h i c h was to do n o t h i n g until after the

DPP has answered.
                                                    -   3   -



I want to indicate three possible              scenarios before the Inquests.             Please listen to these

bearing in mi nd w h a t I have said as to my know led ge as to w h a t the DPP is going to do.

The first one is, h avi ng conside red all the paper w o r k and the evidence,                    he decides to

bring a p r o s e c u t i o n against somebody or bodies,            corporate or otherwise,     but he decides to

bring a p ros ec u t i o n for a m a j o r offence w h i c h falls w i t h i n Secti on 16,     and the only one

w h i c h is likely to apply is manslaughter.                   If he w e r e to bring such a charge,    then the

procedure under Section 16 of the C o r o n e r ’s A c t is that I w o u l d adjou rn the Inquest.                  At

the end of the^Town H a l l / p r o c e e d i n g s , it w o u l d be m y option w h e t h e r I resumed the

Inquests or not.             I t ’s only fair to say that I ’ve been C o r o n e r n o w for about 4% years and

I ’ve n e v e r yet resumed an Inquest w h i c h was adj ourned und er Section 16.



Scenario          two is the DPP says no p r o sec uti on but that one or more or some other person

decides that they w i s h to bring a private p rose c u t i o n against somebody corporate or

otherwise.          If that were     to occur and if a charge we re          laid,   then Section 16 w o u l d apply

a gain w i t h exactly the same consequences.



The third scenario is that the DPP says no prosecution,                       and n ob ody else wants to proceed.

In those cases, we w o u l d in a normal           run of events,         resume the Inquests and complete it

w i t h i n the    .......   that I consider appropriate to the circumstances.



I d o n ’t k n o w wh i c h of these    scenarios will apply but if w e w e r e to resume b efore the DPP

makes a decision,            and if a Section 16 situation w e r e then to arise,            I w o u l d immediately

after resume the Inquests pu rely and simply for the purposes of adjourn ing under the

provisions         of Sect ion 16 in order to comply w i t h the Act.            That w o u l d be a formality but

w o u l d n ’t take ve ry long but in a sense,          getting the infor mat ion now, w o u l d have the

advantage that we w o u l d be able to deal w i t h it fairly quickly.                   One of the reasons you

adjourn u n d e r Sectio n 16 is that families can get their d eath certificates w h i c h they

c a n ’t n o r m all y do until the Inquest is complete.
                                                 - 4 -


   Following receipt of Miss S t e e l ’s letter and my reconsideration,            I got in touch w i t h the

   DPP or one of his     representatives,     to see w h e t h e r he w o u l d agree that I should resume the

   Inquests on a limited basis.         What I prop ose d to h i m was that we w o u l d resume        for the

   purposes of taking the m e di cal evidence,       and we w o u l d deal w i t h the alcohol     levels of the

   individuals at that time.        We w o u l d ende avour to put before m y Court of w h e r e the

   deceased w e r e w i t h i n the Stad ium and if possible,    evidence of where      they w e r e   seen either

   alive or dead at various points w i t h i n the S t adi um and probably,         some evidence as to h ow

   they got to the Stadium.        We w o u l d not deal w i t h h o w or w h y they died or w h o is to blame.

   The reason for this is:



   a) the DPP w o u l d not agree to me resuming the Inquests if w e w e r e to deal w i t h

   controversial matters.       He w o u l d not agree if w e dealt w i t h matter s w h i c h w o u l d impair

   his   investigations or the scope for action w h i c h he m igh t w i s h to take.         It is in the

   interests of justice that n o t h i n g I do should m udd y the w a ter s and perhaps hinder other

   proceedings w h i c h mak e take place in a different Court.



   If I resume these Inquests,       they w i l l be of a limited nature.        They wi ll be designed to

   be non adverserial,      to p r e sen t the factual evidence.      The w a y I w a n t the evidence

   pr esented to meet the legitimate requirements of everyone involved is as follows.



   We will deal w i t h post mortems.      Some Inquests w i l l   require the Patho log ist to be present

t o o t h e r s w i l l only require d ocumentary evidence.   We wi ll discuss this w i t h the

   Hi lls b o r o u g h S teering Committee and other relevant parties      to det ermine w h e t h e r the

   Pa thologist is required.



   We will deal w i t h the alcohol levels of the deceased.            They wer e all done apart from one,

   and we w i l l tell y ou at the Inquests w h a t the individual levels were.           Dr Forrest will

   attend some of the Inquests to formally prove his e vidence and if there is any individual

   case w h e r e the alcohol level m ight be controversial, w e w i l l ask Dr Forrest to attend.

   My i nte ntion is to ho ld a short Inquest for each individual dec eas ed and complete the

   evidence as far as w e are going.
                                                       - 5   -



  W M idlands Police are prep arin g the remainder of the evidence following Lord Justice

  T a y l o r ’s report and the publi cati on of the inter im report and submissi on to the DPP.                           The

  Inquest cannot be held until the DPP has completed his work,                         so I said get the paper work

  done for the DPP, m y documents can come later.                    A file of each individual deceased will

  be pre sent ed to me contai ning copy statements               together w i t h a summary by one of the W

  M i d l a n d s ’ Police Officers w h i c h will    summarise,     factually and n o n a d v e r s e r i a l l y , the

  evidence of the witnesses.           We intend to present that summary to Court.

                                                             9   I
^^In   order to help the legal representatives and the b e r eave d families, we intend to

  circulate the summaries before the par ticu lar Inquest to enable comments regarding

  inaccuracies or unclea r statements,               to be made to me via legal           representatives.           If it

  is possible, we w i l l eithe r get the Summary Officer, w h o will be here and wi l l be giving

  evidence,    to elaborate on the p arti cul ar point,              or I mi ght decide it is p ossible to get a

  witness   to deal w i t h that point,       or w e will read a w i t n e s s ’ statement by w a y of

  do cumentary evidence on that point.               U n d e r no circumstances are w e going to call any S

  Yorkshire Police O f f ice r to the hearing.
                                              - 6 -


  The Officers wil l either themselves or possibly other W M i d l a n d s ’ Officers,      wi ll explain

  to me the identif icat ion procedures and I am expecting to mak e use of plans w h e r e they

  will indicate on the plan wh ere a d eceased was        seen.    I do not intend to use the video in

  the Court and I am going to be very reluctant to look at either video stills or

  photographs.     Partly becau se it is logistically very difficult and part ly because I d o n ’t

  think it is p a rt icu larl y helpful and because in many cases the photographs           or video

  stills have already be en seen by members      of the family because they h e l ped in locating

  and identifying some of the deceased.



  In summary, w e w a n t to have a limited Inquest, w e wa nt       to prese nt the evidence in a

  particul ar form and w e d o n ’t wa nt to do anything w h i c h could poss ibly be construed as

  impeding the DPP or could constitute an attack or cri ticism of any p erson or persons or

  corp orat e/i ncor por ate body.



  Are there any questions?



  M r Fraser - the only que sti on w h i c h you m ay come to     ............   is the question of timing

  of the issuing of the summaries.        The logistics    from our end w o u l d be,   as I anticipate

  it,    the solicitors will want to go through those summaries           in some detail w i t h families,

  for those families who wa nt to see them,      and they will then have to report to yourself

  and to us and explain w he t h e r or not they want to be here, what questions           if any they

^^have   to put.   Those questions will have to be no tified to Mr J o n e s ’ Officers and answers

  found if they are available.        So the logistics of that may occupy some time.           Is it

  possible when the summaries are complete to give an indication of w h e n they might be

  issued?



  I am well aware that the more time I give you,          the easier it is.       A ll I can say is that I

  have got to read them first,       but we will try and let you have them as soon as possible.

  Please bear in m i n d the limitations,    the summaries will be designed to give the factual

  evidence,    so you will k n o w the names of the witnesses and y ou will k n o w what they are

  saying w i t h regard to that particular factual bit of evidence.
                                                   -7   -




M r F raser - h o w far in terms of time do you anticipate the summaries w i l l go,                 to the

    point of identifi cat ion or beyond,        or not as far as that?



    I woul d expect that they w o u l d go at least up to the temporary m o r tu ary and possibly up

    to the point of identification.           The i den tification in a sense w i l l be dealt w i t h at the

    opening so we may w e l l stop at that point.           The objective is to trace each individual

    from the m om ent he left home to the point in time w h e n he was              in the temporary mortuary.

    We may not succeed but that is the intention.             We feel that is w h a t you w a n t to know.



    We wil l pr obab ly have available but I d o n ’t think we will circulate,             documents called

    anna-cappas,    these are rather nice summary charts w h i c h have clocks on th em and it is

    easier from that to see w h e r e certain events occurred.           There wil l be a copy in Court on

    the relevant day.



    It w o u l d be unreas ona ble    for people like Dr Forrest w h o did the b loo d alcohols,        to sit

    here for every Inquest,          so what I intend to do is to ask Dr Forrest to come along on Day

    1 and to prove formally to the Court,          his evidence and to explain as far as is necessary,

    the m e t h o d use d for the test.     We also w ant to have I nspector Leight on and may be one or

    two others, w h o w i l l explain the anna-cappas,        the codings,   etc.      I am also considering

    asking pro babl y Prof ess or Ush er to give an o v e r v i e w of the pa tho log y of the type of



•
    injury w h i c h occurred.



    We are ai ming to h o l d eight Inquests per day.          We w a n t to have    e n o ugh time so that each

    individual family can feel that            their pa rti cul ar loved one has been given full

    consideration.      This means      the duration is likely to be 2% to 3 we eks of sittings.

    Clearly for each Inquest,          i t ’s a relatively short period of time but for me and the legal

    representatives and for the Jury,          i t ’s weeks of stress and i t ’s not fair to them to make

    this longer than it has to be.             But I d o n ’t intend to rush it, they have to be as

    thorough and sympathetic w i t h i n       the limits I have indicated to you.         I wa nt people to     be

    able to leave at the end of the day and be able to say, we ll we k n o w w e h a v e n ’t heard all

    the answers,    but we k n o w mor e than we did w h e n w e started.
                                                -   8   -




  The Inquests wi ll not be h e l d in n ume rical or al pha betical order.                      The    listing of the

  cases    is a very difficult p r o b l e m and I d o n ’t think we have          solved        it.I had m ad e up           my

  m i n d that we we re going to do them in P athologist order,                in a sense that is still the

  order.     But in a few cases, mo re than one person died in a family,                         and bec ause of the way

  their identifications were done and the w a y the post m o r t e m w as done,                      it w a s n ’t always

  the same Patho logi st w h o dealt w i t h family units.            For that reason alone, we will have to

  break the general order because I d o n ’t want to deal w i t h the same family on different

  days.     There are other factors that come           into play.



  I appreciate that it m a y be important to            you, but   the de cision           as to w h i c h    order w e are

  going to take the cases       is g o ing to be mine and m y Officers.               We will cer tainly not want

  to inconvenience anybody deliberately,            I think it will be an impossible task to try and

  take individual pr eferences       into account,      or if we do take them into account,                       they w ould

  come at the b o t t o m of the list.     We are conscious          of w h e r e people      live      and that they      have

  to come a long w a y    in many cases.



  My initial intention was to h old the limited Inquests,                   assum ing that we proceed, without

  a Jury b ein g present.      I have reflected on this and despite the fact that the Jury at

  this stage wil l not have very m u c h to do other than to listen,                   I feel that w e will have

  to have a Jury present       for each Inquest.        I think you should assume that w e will be

  dealing w i t h a Jury.    Even if this we re an Inquest             from start to finish,                 an Inquest   is

^Pnot   an a dverserial procedure.       The job of the Ju ry          is to reach a verdict                 on the evidence

  w h i c h they he ar in the Court.



  I intend,    as sum ing that we proceed,    h o ld ing the Inquests here at the M e d ico- Leg al Centre.

  I intend to arrange for the pro ceedings to be tr anscribed so that transcripts will be

  available in a reasonable time.          I d o n ’t think there is any need for them to be available

  on a next- day basis.       Of course,   they w i l l have to        be paid for.



  Do any of the lawyers       think this is a non-starter?



  Mr Fraser - in v i e w of your opening remarks, w e have h a d an oppor tun ity to discuss these

  proposals at some leng th and there is a general                 ......    towards the idea and you are to

  be com mended for p u t ting forward the suggestions you have.
                                                         -1    -




      Are there any other legal r epre sentatives w h o have any other comments as to w h e t h e r we

      should p r o c e e d on this basis?



      I am wel l aware that there is a H i l l s b o r o u g h Support Gr oup and I w a n t y o u to feel that I

      w o u l d n ’t do a n y thi ng to h a r m or h i nd er your endeavours.      On the other hand,        I think we

      have got to have correct lines of communication.                    Probably the right w a y of looking at

      this is to say the support groups are really family orientated.                         I k n o w that y o u have

      thought of other groups,          for example the Jury, w h o m ay n e e d some support at some point in

^ b f e t h e future,   but I am talking about the families now.               Wha t I intend to do is, w e will be

      listing h o p e ful ly w h e n we a nticipate the Inquests will be h e l d and w h a t w e wi ll probably

      do is give y o u a p ro vis ion al date and try and c o n f irm as soon as possible.                   If somebody

      could be n o m i n a t e d from the H i l l s b o r o u g h Support Group,   I or my Officers w o u l d endeavour

      to inform y ou of the dates w h e n a p arti c u l a r family w i l l be involved.              Once w e have done

      that, we w o u l d expect the solicitors          to liaise w i t h the Support Group.            The lines of

      c o m m uni cati on should be throu gh the solicitor rather than thro ugh the C o r o n e r to relieve

      me of a certai n amount of work.             It m a y we ll be if time allows that w e wil l arrange for

      an informal m e e t i n g w i t h the H i l l s b o r o u g h Support Group and m y s e l f and m a y b e the

      Officers.         If a family is informed of the Inquest and they do not arrive, w e will proceed

      w i t h the Inquest.



      We will    try to hav e refreshments av ailable in the building.

  #
      The press wi ll be ent itl ed to be present at these Inquests.                     It is public C ourt and they

      are entitled.
                              OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                                  MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                  WATERY STREET,
                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                           (West District)        SHEFFIELD
                                                                  S3 7ET
STEFAN   L   POPPER.   LL.B., B.MED. Sci., B.M., B.S..M R.C G P
                                                  CORONER

                       Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                6.th...Nov....19 ..9.0
Ref: SLP/Review/3




Dear Sirs,

                       Resumed Hillsborough inquests on 19th Nov. 1990

Arising out of the meeting on 30th October 1990 at the Medico Legal
Centre I have been thinking about the point which was made by some of
the representatives that it would be a lot easier for you to suggest
possible witnesses as to facts if you were aware of the names of the
witnesses whom I was thinking about.

As you know I was inclined not to disclose these but to let you come
up with names which I would then consider. However in the light of
your representations on this point I do see that my decision makes
life very difficult for you and may unneccesarily increase work for
you without any real advantage.

The selection of suitable witnesses is not an easy task and I am still
working on it but I have decided subject to terms and conditions of
this letter to modify my view and to release to you at this stage
a reasonably comprehensive list of possible witnesses as to facts.

This list is released on the following terms and conditions.

1. The list must be treated as provisional. Inclusion of a name
does not mean that I have definitively decided to call a particular
person.

3. Conversely I retain the right to select others not on the list.

4. It must be clearly understood that we are dealing with a coronal
enquiry and that this is of an inquistorial and not adversarial
nature. It follows that the decision of who to call is matter entirely
for me and that the circulation of names does not in any way alter
my powers in this regard nor is it intended to give you rights or
powers which you would otherwise not have.

5. If upon examination of the list there are persons who you are
particular keen that I should call please specify these so that
I can consider your wishes (without prejudice to my rights) in any
reassessment of the list.
6. If upon perusal of the list you feel that there is some one or more
persons who should be included as a possible witness as to facts
please let me know as soon as possible.

7. I reserve the right to make amendments or modifications to the
terms and conditions set out.

I hope that my decision will be of help to you. Please note that the
list is in alphabetical order and not in the order in which witnesses
will be considered or called.

Whilst writing to you there are a few additional matters I might as
well deal with.

A. If you have not already done so please let me have the namo of
Counsel or solicitor who is likely to be representing your firm.

B. As proposed and agreed I enclose a list of the names of the
various firms who were present at the meeting on 30th Oct. 1990
showing their references, telephone and fax numbers which I hope are
correct and hopefully will be of assistance to you.

C. Please let me know your wishes regarding transcripts of the
resumed inquests comencing on 19th Nov.1990. The current charge is 80p
per page. Cheques should be made payable to Sheffield City Council.

D. For your assistance I enclose a copy of the transcript of the
meeting on 30th October.




Yours faithfully.
                INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS Of THE

           VICTIMS OP THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                              STADIUM DISASTER

                       0 1   T H E       I 5    t t i    A P R I L ,      1 9 8 9




                                   .                                                            _     _   _   _




                              b u s i n e s s             m e e t i n g


                                   Jtmmemsti




                                               B e f o r e



DR.   S.   L.    POPPER,          LL„B.j S B „MED * S e i                     ,     , BM, BS,   >WC
                        (Her       M a j e s t y 1s C o r o n e r )



                                                        At

                       The Medico-Legal C e n t r e *
                            W atery S t r e e t ,
                              Sheffield,
                                                        on

                    Tnesdaf3 30tin October f 1990


                              .    _________
                                                                   '

                                                                            •ISGS



           From      th e   N o t e s o f J . L, H a c p h a t f ! L td .,
                   O f f i c i a l Shorthand W r ite rs ,
                55 Queen                  Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                 APPEARANCES

M e - T . K i n g - counsel.        I n s t r u c t e d b y t h e H illsborough G r o u p
 o f S o lic ito r s , rep resen tin g t h e b e r e a v e d a n d i n j u r e d ,
M e , C* R u s s e l l - c o u n s e l .         Instructed by Barlow,                       Lyde    and
G i l b e r t r e p r e s e n t i n g S u p erin ten d en t G r e e n w o o d .
Mr. S.          G atchpole - c o u n s e l *              I n s t r u c t e d by D a v i e s , A r n o l d ,
C o o p e r ,    r e p r e s e n t i n g S h e f f i e l d W ed n es d ay F o o t b a l l C l u b .

Mr* V.        Hale - solicitor*                     Representing           S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Koger
M a r s h a l l ,
Mr. R. Man ning - solicitor*                             Representing           S up erin ten d en t
Murray.
Hr*  P. I s a a c s         - counsel.          Instructed by Hepi#orth and Chadwick
rep resen tin g           C h i e f S u p erin ten d en t D u c k e n f i e l d .
Hr. Gregory - solicitor.   Representing the Insurers of
Sheffield City Council and Sheffield City Council.
Miss B* Nor cliff e - solicitor. Representing the Chief
Constable of the South Yorkshire Police,
Hr* P*        J ac kson - solicitor,                     Representing the               F ootball
S u p p o r t e r s 1Association*
Mrs* J ,          M c B sria n.’     R epresenting her fam ily.

Mr.     H olroyd.             R epresenting           the    P o lice F ederation.
                                                      BUSINESS MEETING

                                                                  H e ld        on


                                         TUESDAY, 3 0 tn O C T O B E R , 1990
     . ,        THE ^ R u iiH R ;                W e lco m e ,              Can I sav               f i r s t o f a l l             that
    tm s        is n o t a p a rt              o f  th e in q u e s ts                  proper,          because th -
    in q u e s ts ^      p ro p e r     ace      a c tu a lly          re s u m in g ,’ a s 'y o u                 know,       on     tine
    i V t n O l I'iovetitaer.                    The purpose or this meeting as I said to
rny l e t t e r _ t o   th e le g a l  re p re s e                         n ta tiv e s , is    f o r “ a e t o h a v e an
o p p o rtu n ity     to m e e t m em bers o t                              th e  le g a l p ro fe s s io n and
re p re s e n ta tiv e s    in  o rd e r  to s o                           rt out p ro c e d u ra l m a tte rs        so
tiid .t as    ta r as p o s s io le ws can                                  ran   th e   in q u e s t s when we
a c tu a lly             g e t^ aown         to^ tiie m ,         in       as     sm o o th       and     as        e f f ic ie n t       a ’
way                   p o s s ib le     in     th e      in te re s ts           o f     e verybody               who     has       an
in te r e s t            in     th e    m a tte r,        in c lu d in g             m y s e lf.


                I m    o rd tti. to a v o in  any p o s s ib le m is u n d e rs ta n d in g , we w i l l
n o t       -     i    re p e a t n o t - d e a l w itit any q u e s tio n s o f e v id e n c e
th is    a fte rn o o n , o r q u e s tio n s    o f fa c t.   We a r e d e a l i n                                           g w ith
s ira p ie   p ro c e d u ra l m a tte rs .      I  tr ie d  to make t h a t c l                                              e a r~ in
th e    in v it a t io n ,  and I    h o p e t h a t was u n d e r s t o o d , b u t'                                          I ju s t
w ant to       re p e a t i t  so th e r e c a n ’ t be a n v d o u b t a b o u t                                              i f h r
a 11.


                S e c o n d ly ,       th is     m e e tin g        is      -     i t    is     d i f f i c u l t       to     know
w iia t   to c a i I i t     because in      C o ro n e r's p ro c e e d in g s    you don *t
n o ru ia liy   have o p p o rtu n itie s      fo r th is      s o rt o f g a th e rin s , "h u t
you c o u ld      n ay b e , by way o f a n a lo g y ,       tr e a t i t  is   i f  it % e r a 'a
s e s s io n b e to re     th e Judge in      c h a m b e rs o r an i n t e r l o c u t o r y
p ro c e d u re .      th e p o in t a b o u t i t    is   th a t a lth o u g h n o th in g
w i l l   be s a id , w h i c n i s lik e ly    to c a u s e any p ro b le m s       because
we   w i n    be s t ic k in g  to                       p ro ce d u re ,   i t   s h o u ld bo t r e a te d   as a
d u sin e s s m e e tin g , as a                         p riv a te   g a t h e r in g b e tw e e n rn v s e lf and
tn a   la w y e rs * ^ P erhaps                          I ought to         sa y t h a t I d id make i t
d e a r    in   tn e le t t e r th a                     t  i w o u ld n o t r a i s e      anv o b je c tio n   to
in te re s te d               p a rtie s       c o m in g .            I    meant         th a t      because             1    d id n 't
want            anybody          to     fe e l     th a t     I     m s         m e e tin g      w ith           la w y e rs ,      o r
anyoody                e ls e    to r     th a t      m a tte r,           w here        th e    p e o p le         who       had     a
d ir e c t            in t e r e s t w ere s p e c if ic a l ly e x c lu d e d »    I re c o g n is e
one o r               tw o fa c e s ,   b u t I d o n 1t re c o g n is e e v e ry b o d y , m a in ly
oecause 1                  am    so     poor       a t    re c o g n itio n             o f     fa c e s ,        b u t ' t h a t ; * r ” mv
p ro b le m .                                                                                                '     ‘J


         w o u ld   i t be               b e s t i f        you ju s t     in tro d u c e d                      v o u rs e lv e s , th e
la w y e rs    th a t is ,               and th e           re p re s e n ta tiv e s ,   so                      1 know who i s
h e re and so t h a t th e sh o rth a n d , w r i t e r can ta k e a n o te *         I
ap ta k in g a p ro p e r n o te o f w hat is       g o in g on b e c a u s e " !’
Lhougnt i t   was w is e    t n a t we kn e w p r e c i s e l y w h a t was s a i d .


                iiu.. K l U i j *        S i r , my name i s  T ic n o tn y                        tC ing o t C o u n s e l .
i      am       in s tru c te d         on b e h a lf o f a num ber o f                            th e ^ d e c fia s e d

                                                          - 1 -
throu            gh      tn eir   personal rep                resentatives,                I c a n n o t todav
read             out      a      d
                             efinitive list                      o f everyone w h o a I r e p r e s e n t 1
in at            is      oe     ca
                             u s e t h e r e was               i n i t i a l l y a p r e lim in a r y l i s t of
about               fo   rt   y
                              to forty-two*                      A t ths-moment i t i s a b o u t t w e n t y -
six d            efi     ni   tes e t s of i n s t r          uctions.            It is likely that that
will             be      addad t o a n d i f i t                 is of help, sir, within a week 1
ara t o l d              i can provide you,                      sir, with a definitive list of
t n o a e who w i l l                     be_ r e p r e s e n t e d t h r o u g h m y s e l f #       I am
ii*s t r u e t e d t n r
                     o                    u g n i i r , i*it a s ©r , s o l i c i t o r f who i s o n e o f s i x
s    o     l    icitors
                 who                       form t h e flills b o ro u f c h s ; r o i j p o f s o l i c i t o r s w h o
w    e    r    e known
                 as t                     h e S t e e r i n g C o m m i t t e e a t t h e t i m e o f the
T    a    y    lor Inq
               uiry,                        a c t i n g o n ' b e h a l f o f t h e b e r e a v e d a n d in fared
 a   n    d      they i
               n tur                     n h a v e b e e n i n s t r u c t e d by a g r o u p w h i c h h a v e
 f    o    r   med the
                mselv                    es through the families called The
    H illsborough f a                     mily Support Group.
     tioweve                     r. w    e      d o n ’t cla      im to represent each and every set
of personal                        rep    r    esentative        s o f each d e c e a s e d , o n l y t h o s e
watch I hav                      e in     d    icated num         b e r n o w tw e n ty -s ix a n d i s l i k e l y
to go up po                       ssib   l    y to forty             to forty-tvjol
      T H E CORONER:                T h a n k y o u , w a l l , w h e n Hr. F r a s e r o r h i s
in stru c tin g s o l i c i     tors are in a position to let me have a
d efin itiv e l i s t i t         w o u ld b e h e l p f u l b e c a u s e t h e n 1 w i l l know
who you aren't representing.                          T h a t i s w h a t I a .ui r e a l l y
i n t e r e s t e d m.        I t i s t h e o n e s who a c e o u t s i d e y o u r »*.
           HR. ■ iCIl-TG:     S i r , I o u g h t t o s a y t h e r e may w e l l b e
i n d i v i d u a l s h e r e t o d a y w ho~represent p e r s o n a l ”
rep resen tativ es o f d e c e a s e d w h o h a v e n ' t g i v e n i n s t r u c t i o c s
 t o o u r s e l v e s who w o u l d w a n t t o b e h e a r d t o d a y a s b e i n g
    rep resen tativ es.

        THE C O R O N E R *      Indeed.          Perhaps it is only fair to say
this invitation w a s n ’t extended to every single*
rep resen tativ e.            It was a limited invitation to people who
1 t h o u g h t h a d m o s t   t o g a i n f r o m t h e meeting*
           MR* RUSSELL:              Sir, I am next in line.                   My name is
C    hristopher Russell and I am a barrister,                                I am instructed
b    y B a r l o w , Lyde a n d G i l b e r t , s o l i c i t o r s i n L o n d o n , t o whom
y    o u e x t e n d e d such a n i n v i t a t i o n , t o r e p r e s e n t t h e i n t e r e s t s
o    f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Greenwood.
           HR* CATCHPQLE:            by                    n     a   me is      Stuart Catchpole.               I an a
 barrister instructed by M                                  e    s   srs.    D a v i e s , A rnold, Cooper,
u i t h me t o d a y i s I - i r , D o y l                 a         from     t h a t firm o f s o l i c i t o r s a n d
we a p p e a r o n b e h a l f o f S h                      e    f   field      Wednesday F o o t b a l l C l u b .

           THE COEOdER:           Yes,                       I       do re   member you from the interim
h e a r i n g s , d r . C atchpole.
     M R * HALE: 1 am V i n c e n t H a l e ,                                           I represent
Superintendent Roger Marshall.             I                                     am a     solicitor.
                                                          - 2 -
         H R , H AN N IN G : My name is Richard Manning*                                                              I an a
    solicitor and I represent Superintendent Hurray.
         illl. I S                             A ACS:        Paul Isaacs, sir. Counsel,                        with, m* is
    Hr, Copland                                   o t m y i n s t r u c t i n g s o l i c i t o r s , Flep worth a n d
    Chadwick,                                    U a r e p r e s e n t C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D uckenfield.
         THE CO                                RONER;           Yes.
           MR. GREGORY;               [ 1y n a m e i s G r e g o r y o f K e e b l e , H a w s o n .
 I r e p r e s e n t * t n e i n s u r e r s o f S h e f f i e l d C ity C o u n c i l a n d t h e
C o u n c i l itse lf.           M r . H epworth i s a l s o a s o l i c i t o r from t h e
 C i t y C o u n c i l . - l i e i s w ith m e t o d a y ,
                      T d h COliObiEui                           I
                                    u n d e r s t a n d y o u a r e a . member o f t h e
p r e s s , is t n a t rig h t? w e ll, w i t h the               greatest o f r e s p e c t ,
I would _like y o u t o leave. 'This i s                      n o t p a r t o f the
proceedings*            i t i s n o t a r e p o r t a b l e o c c a s i o n a n d I w o u ld
b e grateful if y o u w o u l d l e a v e because I t h i n k t h a t i s t h e
n a s i s upon w h i c h L c a l l e d t h i s m e e t i n g ,
                    _As                 ex p la in e d to                 you, this is       n o t because t h e r e i s
a    n
    thingy                             Deing said h                  e r e which I s s o        s e c r e t t h a t nobodv c a n
h    e
   r it, a                             but I d o n ’t                 want - bearing           in mind the matter'is
g    o
   ng to i                             be dealtwith                     before a jury         - I think it is Only
r    i
   ht thag                            t we remembe                   r a n d we j u s t d    e a l w i t h t h e procedure.
      HISS                              HOilCLIFS'li;                     Sir, I am Bel      inda Norcllffa,             I as a
solicitor                               and I repre                   sent the Chief          C o n s ta b le o f   the South
Yorkshire                               Polios.
                     T H r C O R O N E R : Y es, I                      remember       you too from the
p re v io u s              sessions.
                                                        :           S i r , I a m P e t e r Jackson*             I am a
pa       r     t    ner           in h i l l ,              D ickenson,             h rh s , > >             and I
re        p    r     ese   n    t         th    e                    *            '       ‘       '         Sir, I
£e       s    l       I
                      to p  o    u    ght                    o i n t o u t . a t t h i s s t a ^ e t h a . l •«•= a r e h e r e    in
re       s    p     ons
                   your    e           to                    i n v i t a t i o n , f o r which w y c l i e n t s t h a n k        you.
It              i   s u
                    l y , d n     l   i k e                 u e t o t h e f u n d i n g o f my" c l i e n t s *
o rg an isatio n , w e                                      w i l l be a b l e t o a p p e a r b e f o r e y o u
thro u g h o u t t h e I n                                  quiry.
            THli            :     Perhaps I should explain that remark to
                                      C O R U f- lE R

  tae^ cast ot toe law yers.                  I had been' in touch with Hill
D ickenson i n t h e p a s t a n d they v e r y p r o p e r l y p o i n t e d o u t t o
a e t n a t t h e y w e r e n *t r e p r e s e n t i n g a n y b o d y I n p a r t i c u l a r , b u t
 i t o c c u r r e d t o me when 1 w a s t h i n k i n g a b o u t t h e p r e p a r a t i o n
 for these Inquests that supporters In general aight" well
 f e a t u r e t o a g r e a t e r o r l e s s e r e x t e a t In t h e e v i d e n c e ,        I
  t h o u g h t it^ rig h t t o d r a w t h a t t o t h e a t t e n t i o n o f H i l l
D i c k e n s o n i n c a s e th e y w ished t o t a k e a v i e w o n i t .                 That
 I s w h y y o u a r e h a r e a n d o b v i o u s l y i t i s a - m atter e n t i r e l y "
    f o r y o u t o decide                      w hat,        it anything,                    you do,               1        appreciate
    your difficulty,
              [ ■ I k , JACKSON ;     S i r , _ra y c l i e n t s                           do   ta k e  th e v ie w t h a t - -
     fchere       w o u ld be a v o id    b e fco re y o u i n                              re p re s e n ta tio n  i f
    supporters w e r e n ’t                      h e re ,          but      we    are       i n * d if f i c u lt ie s ,
    w i l l speak           to th e s o l i c i t o r s   fo r   th e                         o th e r     p a rtie s .               rc-may
    be t h a t ^ i f        I can o b ta in      u n d e rta k in g s                         about        th e e x te n t           and
    swOpe       o l     c r itic is m            o f       L iv e rp o o l        to o tb a ii        C lu b      s u p p o rte rs ,
    th a t     a_ lo c      °?         th e     n r ed      for       re p re s e n ta tio n b e fo re "y o u                      w il l
    go.             w ill obviously
              • T n a t                                             d e p e n d on w h a t s o r t o f
    u n d ertak in g s-I can o b t a in .

              ifliL C u R i J i ' i h K j          ttsvg.          i got all the iawyers now?                                         I did
    write t o Mrs . ficbrian - y e s , there y o u a r e - because I k n e                                                                w
     s h e was n o t represented specifically and I thought it was
    r i g n t that you c o m e along a s well.
              bR is. iic B R l A f l :                 x    ai a    M rs.        Joan       M c B rie n      and         1    re p re s e n t
    o u r    fa m ily  in    th is .


            i f i a G G tlO tlE K i                fe s ,          th a t    is    a i l      you     can      re p re s e n t«           ju s t
    y o u rs e lf.


              W h ile I am o n n a m e s , I a p p r e c i a t e t h a t s o m e o f y o u s a y
    n o t   w a n t t o b e p r e s e n t t h r o u g h o u t t h e i n q u e s t s w h e n we
    resum e.           Some o r y o u w i l l be h e re a l l          th e  tia ia ,   some o f von
    may c h a n g e *        I t  w o u ld   b e h e l p f u l t o me i f    on ce'y o u k n o w who
.   is    g o in g   to b e c o s i n g o n a m o r e o r l e s s r e g u l a r b a s i s , i f
    you c o u ld       l e t u s k n o w b e c a u s e we a r e g o i n g    t o be g o in g t o
    t r y a n d make name p l a t e s t o r y o u s o t h a t I c a n r e c o g n i s e y o u
    wnen we s i t i n c o u r t .              I t makes i t      a l o t e a s i e r f o r roe t o
    a d d r e s s y o u c o r r e c t l y b y name, s o i f y o u w o u l d l e t me k n o w
    we w i l l g e t t h a t d o n e .        T hat is      an a id   f o r me*        Of co u rse ,
    y o u a r e tr e e t o c h a n g e ,      i f  soia eb ody i s new o r d o e s n ' t w a n t
    to be t h e r e , o r s o m e t h i n g l i k e c h a t*.

              hR.  K IN G :      S ir ,   in  th e case o f     th e                                 de    ceased,       I   am h e r e
    as    ju n io r c o u n s e l.      A t th e tim e o t    to e I                                 n q   u iry   le a d in g :
    c o u n s e l was a ls o     in s tru c te d .     I t is   th e                                  in   te n tio n ,    I  know,
    o t   tn o s e wno i n s t r u c t m e,     th a t on o c c a s io                               n     t h e y Biav w i s h t o
    have      le a d in g        co u n se l           tie rs ,       le a d in g       m y s e lf,        and     p o s s ib ly
■le a d in g          c o u n s e l o n ly             on h is   own.                   I     assum et         s i r ,       you     w o u ld
 have no              o b je c tio n    to             th a t co u rse ?


              THE      COSOWER:                   No       o b je c tio n         a t       a ll ,


              MR* KlilG;                      I am o b l i g e d .

             ^ T i l e CORONER:            P r o v i d e d som ebody h a s g o t l o c u s s t a n d i ,
    in_the           s e n s e t h a t t h e y r e p r e s e n t a n i n t e r e s t e d " p a r ty * ' I a m '
    q u i t e p r e p a r e d t o b e a s r e a s o n a b le a n d a s accommodating a s I
    can be.            A ll        I     am      a s k in g         you     is     th a t      you    h a lo       me        by    k e e p in g ;
    in a i n f o r m e d .
      Ca                       n I go                          th    r o u g h one                         Or         two things                           which I
might w                         ant to                         kn   ow and the                             n I          will eithe                         r pause _ _                   .
time to                          give y                        ou      a chance                             to        chip i n , o r                          at t h e e n d i f t h e i
is  anyt                        hing 1                         ha    ve not dea                            lt         w i t h which                          you feel I ought to
be  thin                        king ab                        ou   t th en I w                            ill          g i v e you a                       n opportunity to
draw i t                         t o my                        at    tention*
      The                            v         e   n ue of the res                                    u    m    e    d inquests                         is go         i   n g t v be t h e
Council                            Ch         a    m ber.     t'or t h                                 o    s    e    of you .who                        were              at Lord Jasl *
Taylor *s                             I        n    quiry, it is e                                    x    a    c    tly the sam                       e loc          a   tion. Whs
wa will                            st         a    y   there the wh                                   o    l    e      t i m e w ill                    depen        d       upon the
numbers                            of               people w h o a r e                                     p resen t.
                     Ci r?
                     \J Jm 3m. *



                                                                          Good afternoon.        I ani M r . l i o l r o y d
rep resen tin g                                               C h e P o l i t e Federation, s i r *    My apologies
being                     1

           HE C O R O H E R j                                             ■ Thank                  you*    W hether w e t r a n s l o c a t e
          point or not         n   r~k   +-        j~ \ Y*-    n    ■§*   T
                                                                           I dA
                                                                                   o    n
                                                                                   jTi. t*>
                                                                                             't know.
                                                                                              *
                                                                                                            it will depend upon the
                                                                                                           I - ^      i.r                 T 4-    f    1 1     _J2        ^         JI       .„   ..           4_1


number of people w                                                        ho      Ca   tt U tend. C   U  It is obvious, looking around
                                                                                                           U    .               A.   Lr   A . a   U U V J L U U t o ,         l U    U       M    U    g     f i L       o   u   n   a

t f i i s aftern o o n , t h                                              at       w   e      w o u l d have t h e d ic k e n s o f a j o b
getting in here as                                                        sum     i    n    g we have tnis sort of turn-out and
that was the reaso                                                        n w     h    y      we chose that venue.
             he are doing our best to .make it a                                                                                                       s convenient f o r
  legal representatives and others as pos                                                                                                              sible* but, of
 c o u r s e , X am L i m i t e d w i t h w h a t i s p r o v i                                                                                        ded for m e .
             I have b e e n a s k e d w hether t h e r e w i                                                                                            l l b e space to
 p a p e r s a n d w e believe t h e r e i s a r o o m .                                                                                                     They call it a
 safe, b u t i t i s a c t u a l l y q u i t e a l a r g i s                                                                                            h room w h i c h we would
 he able to make available for anybody w                                                                                                               ho wanted to put
  t h i n g s in .     Y o u w o u l d have t o h e r e s p o                                                                                           nsible for your own
 security.            i could n o t p o s s i b l y t a k e a                                                                                          ny responsibility for
 security.           They key to the room is in                                                                                                          the custody of the
C i t y C o u n c i l a n d w e ' w o u l d make a r r a n g e m                                                                                       ents for it to be
opened and shut at convenient hours, sa                                                                                                                y, between nine and
  t e n a n d f i v e a n d s i x , o r som ething l i k e                                                                                                 that in the
 aftern o o n , s o t h a t y o u c a n h a v e a c c e s s ,                                                                                               (a) to put things ;
a n d ' ( b ) t o g e t t h i n g s o u t * W hether y o u                                                                                                 u s e i t o r not i s o i ■
c o u r s e a m a t t e r en tirely t o r y o u .
                                                                                                 *
          The tiaes of the                                                              sittin g s;                         at the                         moment                I have it
m i n o t o s i t t r o t s 10.00 u n t i l                                                                            about 12*4                      5 or th                 ereabouts.
O bviously t h e h o u r s have g o t                                                                                  to be flex                      ible be                cause of
evidence.          T h e n m a y b e from q                                                                           uarter to                         two or                 two o ’c l o c                            k
until around four.                  Y o u may                                                                         feel t h a t                      that is                 not very                                  Ions,
and that Lord Justice Taylor                                                                                           sat for a                        lot lon               ger,          I~ k                           now”
h e _d i d , b u t t h e n lie d i d n o t s
      ^   ---------------- ,       -                                                                                  i t w ith a
                                                                                                                            ~                          Jjury,                  “i t i s n o t
                                                                                                                                                                                         ^                 - i s - —™-

 f a i r , i n m y v i e w , t o expect o                                                                             rdinary pe                        ople wh               o are riot                                  used
 to legal proceedings, even al                                                                                        beit this                         is just                 c o r o n a l _
procez-,lings            , to expect              them     to s i t      for        very                    much l o n g e r t h a n
th at.

          I f we find                   that we
                                     want t o            make a
                                                         few a djustments to
these           times,
                    we                  will do so as
                                            ws -go a l o n g . be       pause                                           will
p r o b a b l y in the m o r n i n g and             afternoon
                                                        for a short b r e a k t o
a l l o w peo p l e to s t r e t c h their legs and have a cup of coffee
and so on*
        1 h a v e   to             tell      you th      at     the presen           t p         os          i     tio   n is that
 the C i t y C o u n c i          l is        a no s     ock   i n g zone.                I         a        m      so    rry about
 tiiat f o r t h o s e             of y    ou  who       are      smokers f           but           a        p     art     from t h e
f a c t t h a t tnat               is t    he ir st      and   ard policy           , w          e            a    lso     think, the
 fire service si                  ght      no t be       too      happy if            we          al         l     owe   d it*
Therefore, for                     the     tirae b e     ing      you have            to           as         s    ume     it is no
sm oking.

            I s t h a t reasonably c l e a r w i t h r e g a r d t o v e n u e a n d t i m e ?
O n e fin al t h i n g .          It may be that you may have points of law
  to p u t t o m e f r o m t i m e to tim e.            Obviously if it is
som ething t h a t h a s t o b e d a a l t w i t h t h e r e a n d th e n , t h e n w e
ivi 1 1 d o s o a n d w e s i l l s e n d t h e j u r y o u t .          However, if it
 i s s o m e t h i n g w hich y o u f e e l y o u w a n t t o p u t , a n d w h i c h w o u l d
h a v e t o b e put i n t h e a b s e n c e o f t h e j u r y , X w o u l d suggest
w e t r y a n d d o i t a r o u n d t h e f o u r o 1c l o c k m a r k s o t h a t w e u s e
  t h e tim e w h e n tfts j u r y h a v e g o n e h o m e *     That is not an
  invitation that you address me on each and every day on
p o i n t s o f l a w , b u t i t i s j u s t a c o n v e n i e n t way b e c a u s e on
  p r i n c i p l e ue sh o u ld b e a b le to cope w i t h j u s t a l i t t l e b i t
  l o n g e r tf ia n t h e j u r y .     However, a s I s a y , i f s o m e th in g
  occurs during the day that you feel has to be dealt with
   then, then so be it.
            M o w t h e n e x t t h i n s i w a n t t o t. It,     lll llli f f lf l
   t h e sc                                                     mi SMB
                                                                  ’mmismm
                m                                                     ■ i l l i l l lB M   l t Ii fi i i t i i l f !

                    StMSiSi!                                                                                           i~nr. r^tr.-r
                                                                             wsm/mm                                                 A. hi-
                                                         SSi
        liras       mmmm                                                       .sons                              f e l t it "was

     what is             l e f t o f t h e f o u r t h i n g s w h i c h C o r o n e r s by a n d
larg e deal w         i t h , i s t h e q u e s t i o n o f how a n d t h a t i s w h a t
are going to             b e c o n c e n t r a t i n g o n i n t h e s e resumed i n q u e s t s .
For practica          l p u r p o s e s t h e " h o t /1 w i l l a p p l y t o a i l t h e
n in ety -fiv a d e c e a s e d *            Technically, as you will appreciate,
I a m n o t d o i n g o n e i n q u e s t , w e a r e d o i n g n in ety -fiv e
s e p a r a t e a n d i n d i v i d u a l i n q u e s t s , w h i c h i s why w e t o o k
e v i d e n c e i n d i v i d u a l l y t o r n in ety -fiv e p e o p l e i n A p r il a n d
May.          Ilovsver, b e c a u s e ' i t w o u l d b e a p r a c t i c a l
i m p o s s i b i l i t y to
           wsmm                                                            3i88fgi|8||^i0t
                 i l S i f l l 8§ t §
                                                    WS                  mmmim
  WKmm                         mm                                                                      Jgiits
                                                                                                                                W Hj£u
do that yo u w i l l f o r g i v e ma s n d r e a d i t a s m e a n i n g t h e
 inquests.            W e w i l l fay a n d     he d e a l i n g w i t h ' a l l                                        the
e v i d e n c e f o r everybody to d ay .
                     1    aa, o f      course, a ware t h          at there are               s    ome          differences.
Just                  to take a simple example,                        there were,        t    w   o e     n    closures -
encl           o     sure         3 and e n c l o s u r e -  4     b u t I dcm 1i        t    h    ink           th at affects
the              v    alidity of the principle                      o f how I w a n    t            to      d   e a l w i t h the
evid           e     nce.           If evidence is spe             cific to enc         l     o    sur    e        4, then of
cour           s     e we will take cognisance                         of t h a t *       I   f      ev    i     dence is
spec            i    fic to something else we                      will take co        g      n    isa    n     ce of that
as w           e     ll, but we will be dealin                     g with the e          v    i     den   c     e in respect
of e             v    e r y b o d y ■t o g e t h e r .
           I have to remind                            you that an inquest is not a public
inquiry*             In another                        case which t happened to have* read
r e c e n t l y , i-Ir. J u s t i c e                 W o e I f , a ; h e t r e e ,-es. jCcCt-J ::ef
llrCuet.^ a““
inquest          s .3 — -
             . .       I thought                      that was a rather neat way of putting
it.

        I                 d   o n
                     ot expect, particularly as there has already been
a publi                  c       in
                     q u i r y , to re p e a t e v e r y t h i n g t h a t L o r d J u s t i c e
Taylor                    h   ad
                     done, b u t i t i s . I ' m a f r a i d , a s I s e e i t *
 inevita                 b    le
                      t n a t w e w i l l h e d u p l i c a t i n g a c e r t a i n amount o f
 the w o r               k
                        did,    he this is because it falls within, as I
 perceiv                 e
                  i 1 5 t n e p u r v i e w o f ray j u r i s d i c t i o n a n d a l s o ? o f
course, b e c a u s e a s I a m s i t t i n g w i t h a j u r y a n d a s t h e y h a v e
  t o r e a c h a v e r d i c t o n t h e e v i d e n c e , i t i s no u s e r e l y i n g
u p o n w h a t was s a i d f i f t e e n , s i x t e e n , e i g h t e e n m o n t h s a g o
  before somebody else.                     Regrettably, or maybe not, it
d e p e n d s w hich p o i n t o f view y o u t a k e , t h e r e w i l l h a v e t o b e
 s o m e r e p l i c a t i o n of e v i d e n c e o f L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r ’ s
 investigation.                  Indeed, I f y o u l o o k a t t h e T e r r s o f
Reference ana coopare those with what the Coroner's Act
s a y s , y o u w i l l s e e -there i s a q u i t e rem ark ab le s i m i l a r i t y ' i n
places,
                     I have            t o r e m i n d y o u t h a t i n c o n t r a s t to a p u b l i c
  i    n   qui       ry, wit          nesses in a Cor o n e r ’s Court have got certain
 p    r    ivi       leges,            particularly witnesses whose conduct is liable
  t   o       be       called             i n q u e s t i o n , a n d i n p a r t i c u l a r t h e y h a v e the
  e    i   ght         not t o           a n s w e r in crim in atin g q u e stio n s.               I w i l l be
d     e    ali       ng with              t h i s a g a i n w h e n 1 o p e n w i t h the j u r y a n d
 e    x    pla       in this              to them in detail, but 1 want to"take this
 o     p   por       tunity            now because it is an important point to
  u    n   der       stand a          n d i f one d o e s n ' t g r a s p i t t h e n o n e t e n d s , n o t
j     u    st        in the            H i l l s b o r o u g h I n q u e s t s b u t in a l l in q u e sts, t o
w     a    lk        away di          sappointed*
           T h e r e f o r e t w o t i l i n g s p ro ced u relly :
                                                               w i t n e s s e s h a v e got
 p r i v i l e g e s which 1 w i l l e n s u r e t h a t th e y a r e cognisant of
and if they wish to exercise their rights then they are
e n t i t l e d t o do s o . S e c o n d l y * a c o r o n a l in q u iry has got
lim ited            objectives                             id again within                           the best of my abilit
we  w ill           try to s                                to those*

               My present I                                 a                               s .tar as p o s s i b l e , to                            case
   t h - e r e v i d e n cI en wo t h e r w o r d s . I a m
 g o i n g t o try a n d g a t t h e w i t n e s                                            s e s to c o m e arid g i v e
 e v i d e n c e . W e know a l r e a d y . t h a t                                             t h a t i s n o t s u i n 0g t ou                      be
  p o s s i b l e i n some c a s e s . A t l e a
                           c    _                                  -,          i    _   _   _
                                                                                             s t o n e w i t n e s s v m o m i iI
                                                                                                ,         .   . .        ^        .       _       ,

                                                                                                                                                       hn aaad
  t n o u g h t about, t h o u g h n o t n e c e s                                           sarily decided on, has                                       died,
 o i e a r r y w e c a n n o t t a k e h is e v i d                                          ence viva voce. 'Ther                                    e mxv
  o e some o t h e r s w h o , t o r m e d i c a l                                             o r o th er reasons, a r e                                 sn '
r e l1 u 1 c t a n t t o c o m e t h a t I w o u l d                                         t h i n k i t only f a i r n o t                              to
call them,
.■« n      *
                               However, w e have a
                               r r ___________________________   ? _ _________...       _
                                                                                               huge 'pool, if I can u
                                                                                                -     .             -»
                                                                                                                                                      se that
e x p r e s s i o n , o f w itnesses a n d I                                                 t h i n k i t w ill b e o o a s i                        b l e to
 have the bulk of the evidence v                                                            iva voce.            I think th                           at i T
preferab le t h o u g h m a y b e a l i t t l                                               e bit more time consum                                    ing and
c e r t a i n l y m ore e x p e n s i v e , b u t a                                         t least people will ba                                    v«''
h e a r d i t ' b y word o f m o u t h .
        Shall I pause for a moment here and ask whet:                                                                                                 1 h a r ee
m a d e m yself c l e a r , w h e t h e r y o u h a v e a n y q u e r i e s
 aspect?
        HR. KING*      S i r , I d o n ' t k n o w w h e t h e r t h i s i s t h e ima
t o r a i s e subm issions a s t o t h e               . of the evidence von
a r a going to c a l l or t                                                                               ..« « « « ,                    T f          :
m a k e rn y selt c l e a r , o n t.is n - r u r e o f t h e e v i d e n c e I h a v e a
 n u m b e r o f s u b m i s s i o n s t o m a k e to y o u a s t o t h e u s e o f t h e
T aylor R e p o r t i t s e l f .

            THE CORONER;               I w i l l c o m e t o t h a t i n a moment,                                                                          1
a p p r e i c c ii a t e t h a t y o u d i d n ' t k n o w t h a t , b e c a u s e I h a v e                                                          not
dealt with it.

    tnis is                                                                                                                                   -           lay b e
                    no                                                                                s to say, the
po i n t                                                                                            d to investiaat
I
           HI   E       CORONER:       Y e s f I a n * coming t o t h a t a s m
perha      ps       1 h a d b e t t e r c a r r y o n f o r a l i t t l e b i t I o e , ^ , _ ana                                                               ,



then       tu   r n t o y o u b e c a u s e i t may b e t h a t I a a v c o v e r sods o f
the p      oi   n t s w h i c h y o u h a v e i n m ind o r , i n d e e d , o t h e r
have       in      mind.
           In       f ac t y o u b r i n g me on to w h a t I have*                                                          c a l l e * 4 '*■                      =   «*




       „. .                _             _             T h a t d o e s n o t m e a n t« s a y                                                                                .    1
wi      n e c e s s a r i l y d e a l w i t h e v e r y event u p t o t h a t c '                                                                                            ;
i t i s a i f * - * - - " - 1 - - 1—         1. .           ■ * ’ '               “ **“ *                                                                                        »*
                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                         -*
           how the beginning is a little bit aore diffi                                 cu   lt to
d e t e r m i n e because o n ® h a s t o co n sid er t h e events                      of     the day
on t h e o n e h a n d , a n d t o a c e r t a i n e x t e n t o n e a l s o             h   as to
c o n s id e r p o s s ib ly the p re v io u s o c c u r r e n c e s , b a c a u        se       they
h a v e a. r e l e v a n c e i n e v a l u a t i n g a n d a s s e s s i n g the        ev   idence
w hich i s p u t b e f o r e t h e ju ry *

            However, g e n e r a l l y i n p r i n c i p l e th e w a y I lo o k a t i t i s
we are going to start, as far as the day is concerned, from
 t n e o u t s i d e arid w o r k o u r w a y i n w a r d .      T he e v i d e n c e w i l l ■
 b e c o m e m o r e d e t a i l e d o r , i f y o u l i k e , I w i l l b e c a l l i n g mote
w itn e s s e s a s w e g e t c l o s e r t o the e v e n t s .             To t a k e  111
exam ple, I m a y j u s t c a l l v e r y b r i e f l y s o m e b o d y ' s ev id en ce a s
 t o t r a f f i c con d itio n s, b u t I c e r t a i n l y w o u l d n ’ t g o i n t o a n y
great detail.                 I t i s r e a l l y , a s my c o l l e a g u e i n e a s t K e n t
s a i d when h e was d e a l i n g w i t h t h e 7 - i e b r u ^ - e I*- - - . e - r s » i t i s
   like a theatre*                '           : -• -
 some subsidiary actors end you have                                    m a i n p lo t? bat
  i t i s d i f f i c u l t t o u n d e r s t a n d tb                    i f you h a v e n o t
g o t t h e s t a g i n g , s o y o u n e e d to              o certain amount of
infori                                                                             -Hit rdl*^s


                                          JP       W    O    T     W    ^    .      '        1          ■
                                                                                             ora


           I a n t i c i p a t e c a l l i n g e v i d e n c e from s u p p o r t e r s „ i f I c a n
 use that term.                 T h a t w i l l in c lu d e r e l a t i v e s , bu t w ith
 r e g a r d t o r e l a t i v e s I a s g o i n g t o be v e r y - r e l a t i v e s who
qualify in my view as witnesses and whom I consider to be
 appropriate to call. Certainly even if I felt a relative
c o u l d g i v e u s e f u l evidence, i f h e/sh e r e a l l y f e l t t h e y c o u l d
 n o t g o t h r o u g h t h e t r a u m a I w o u ld b e v e r y s y m p a t h e t i c t o
 th at p o i n t o f v i e w .

         S o supporters i n -                          'what I h a v e
 j u s t s a i d f o r r e l a t i v e 5* a    p p l l - ? t o t h e m a s w e l l , a l t h o u g h to
a slightly lessee degree,                            Other contacts with the deceased
a n d ’" O t h e r s " - p e o p l e w h o       w e r e t h e r e w h o d i d n ' t necessarily
have s o m e t h i n g t o d o w i t h            the deceased but who can tell us
 something about what happ                    e n e d which 1 c o n s i d e r t o b e
 relevant to the purpose o                    f my i n q u i r y .
         That is the
         The    second      group      w ill     be
         The third group             w ill     he people '                   .nd                        so
on
                                    g r o u p w i l l b e w h a t I call 1
  :----.’C I . d n r l r . e ” ' - ' I d o n ' t m e a n t s u p p o r t e r s
independents but I mean people who were either
professionally present or who may not even have been at the
scene.    I w i l l g i v e you' a n e x a m p l e , m e d i a p e o p l e , f o r
instance.
          T h e n w e a r e g o i n g 'to t a k e e v i d e n c e f
P e o p l e ^ who   w e r e e n g a g e d w ith the c l u b ,        - e         . e~.
t u r n s t i l e o p erato rs, s t e w a r d s a n d p e o p l e o f t h a t n a t u r e .
                                                    course,
                                                       i a r a o a t u c subi se t o f
                                                              w m le
the      police* tn e re a r e i n t h e                      e
                                              ase of a few police officers
and,       indeed, a t l e a s t ’        oth                 e
                                             r person, statements which
w ere^taken u n d e r                  b- ,t                  i
                                             s under the Police and
C r i m i n a l E v i d e n c e Act* * I t i                  s
                                                my normal practice.at the
m o m e n t i f i was d e a l i n g , s a y , w i t h a . road * t r a f f i c i n c i d e n t ,
 t h a t i f there w a s s u c h a s t a t  ement from, say, the driver,
 tnat I would have that either read or played on the audio
 taps,     I h a v e d e c i d e d t h a t I am g o i n g t o ' d o t h a t i n t h i s
c a s e as w e l l , so w e w i l l h e a r w h atev er i s s a i d i n th e s e
sta te m en ts.      X i n t e n d at                   ' :t s u se the a u d i o tape
rather than to have them                         , than we h ave it as it
was recorded,
        I ha        ve      deci   ded            that    '                      , list of
witnesses             w   ho 1     int          end to             rrre,                " S :r-: £ -
several r           ea    sons     for            this.
                                                 The                first one - I d o n ’t hav e to
g i v e you         al    l the       re        asons
                                           but I w                 ill give you a few iust so
                     -1     is n   ot           an ent
                                           irely a                 rbitrary decision, " The
                 n < i siaybe      the            r.ost
                                            importa               n t poir t , ? r r.ir. t h i s is
                                                   it                is an
  ^ - o c e d u r e s o d n o t adversarial.                         i t i s tot
                                                                             r c f -allv
                                                                                     l l y difzit
                                                                                             d i f f e r e n t , in
  fact, to every other legal proce                                eding in England anyway.
T h e r e i s ip f a c t I t h i n k - c e r t a                  inly the books tend'to”
 i n d i c a t e t h a t i t i s q u i t e proper not                          to d i s c l o s e o r
 c i r c u l a t e n a m e s , a n d 1 n e v e r do* w h e                n       I sa   y    "ne   vet",       that's
a big word. There may be the odd exc                                      e     ption        when    1 ha     ve had
  to let somebody see a statement for v                                    e    ry sp    e   cial    reas     ons,
however, in principle, I don't and I                                       d    on*t~    i   nten   d to      do it
 in this case.
                                        : h    a
                                          ven't got the
to      d    o it, to        dea   l       w    i
                                           t h the                                                      s.    we
na   ve       go
               t our         wor   k       c    u
                                          t o u t i rt c o s i n g v i - - . - ; . s e d s .                I ara
ve   ry        lu
                cky.           I    h    av    e
                                             g o t w h a t I suppose f o r a C o r o n                  er is
qu   it     e a   good       siz   e     d
                                         team , b u t w e h a v e t o remember t h                      a t I am
ju   st      a C o r o n   e r ,   an i n f e r i o r c o u r t ot r e c o r d ? , l e t m e                 rem ind
yo   u,      and not         any   thing else.             There a r e l i m i t s t o w                hat 1 can
mu   st     er, so i         can   n o t d o i t f r o m a p r a c t i c a l p oint o f                  view.
        I know t h i s m a y c o m e a s                                        -- - - -               _              - rQU
b u t t h a t i s t , ! s p o sitio n ,
witnesses nor                                                                              in
           t/hat 1        w x l l do,           if I am       able,        is to give you or to put
ou     a notice           boarct the p r o posed w i t n e s s e s for the next d a v or
  two days and-may                be e
                                     ven three days, to give you some idea of
W h a t i s coming.                  I
                                     a m n o t t r y i n g t o b e difficult.                   I want
  co make life as                 easy  a s I can f o r a l l o f us, but that
 i n d u c e s me a s w           ell.           W e will al m o s t c e r t a i n l y a l l o w t h e
 witnesses to ref                 resh   t h e i r me m o r y f r o m t h e s t a t e m e n t s on’~ t h e
d a y*.       Do you fo           llow what I mean'by that?                   i t i s eighteen
mo n t h s ag o t h a t           this  event h a p p e n e d ? approximately.                   Some
or the witnesses                   rnsyh a v e g i v e n statements o r w r i t t e n d o w n
 r e c o l l e c t i o n s w hicn a r e e i g h t e e n pa g e s l o n g ,      or even longer,
 t a e y way n o t r e c o l l e c t i n d e t a i l what t h e y s a i d and, i n d e e d ,
 t h e y m a y not r e c o l l e c t t h e events.                  It is likely that we
t f i l l a l l o w them t o h a v e a s i g h t ot t h e i r s t a t e m e n t , a ]
 1 d o n ’ t e x p e c t     t h e m t o h a v e t h a m i n t h e w i t n e s s b o x , L„.
w o u l d n o t norm ally d o t h a t .
     uith regard to Lord Justice T a y l o r 1s Report, it 1 can '
daal witn^that next.    I d o n o t in te n d t o a d m i t t h a t R eport
Bb-    pii-t-1 o f t h e ^ v i u e n c e &t t n e i n q u e s t s %                            Th^ o n l y w&v o n e
c o u l d der tnat wou ld be to read it'in t o t o , and                                           1 don’I t h i n k
 t n a t would s e r v e a n y u s e f u l p u r p o s e .

        s e c o n d l y i p e r c e i v e i t i s g o i n g t o c a u s e m ore t>robleias
t h a n i t i s w o r t h i f i d i d ' t h a t , s o I don’t i n t e n d t o a d ^ i t
tiiat.
             b i m i i a r l y , I d o n o t i n t e n d t o use t h e t r a n s c r i p t s o f
   t h e e v i d e n c e a t b o c c i J u s t i c e T a y l o r ' s In quiry .                   O f course,
  i a m t u i l y aw are t h a t you w i l l have a c c e s s to th e
   t r a n s c r i p t s _ a s i n d e e d I h a v e , a n d I w o u l d n o t be a t a l l
 s u r p r i s e d i t y o u l o o k e d t h r o u g h them w i t h a v i e w t o s e e i n g ,
wnat people have said, ^ I would expect you to do that,- and
 1 d o n       t m i n d t h a t pro v id ed your questioning, i s r e l e v a n t t o
 t h e ^ i n q u e s t s . hWhat h a t Ii w o u l d nr i o o t t pne>rmir
                                                                   e r m i t is
                                                                             i s Ti ff , tf,o^ r-r. Ii nr«sct Va cn «c r*e Ok,
a w i t n e s s w e r e t o e x e r c i s e h i s r i g h t n o t t o a n s w e r an
 i n c r i m i n a t i n g q u e s t i o n s , I w o u l d n o t p e r m i t y o u t o p u t to-
y t i a t w i t n e s s q u o t a t i o n s f r o m th e t r a n s c r i p t s s o t h a t in f a c t
h e c o u l d then e x e r c i s e h i s r i a n t s n o t t o a n s w e r t h a t
q u e s t io n , h a t in f a c t y o u                           - •                 I
                                                 fMmm                                                         mmws
                                                          mSS!m&
<5                                      i00M.                             (*%   1® ^    f- i    \ 'r

po s                                     m$sMi
                 Aitnoug     h I          d      o   n ’t In   t    e nd to allo            w Lord Justice T a y l o r 1*
                        be      in    t    r    o    duced      a   s   evidence,              it is going to be very
d     x   i   tieult no      t t     o          r    etec t     o     it from ti             me to t i m e . C o m t n o n s e n s a
w     -   i   U aictats         wh   e    r    e       we dr   a    w   the line.                I think it is also
r     i   g   ht to say         th   e    r    e       may b   e      the odd. oc           casion where I viliThave
  t   o        Dceach wh     at       I         h    ave ju    s    t said that               we will hare to u^e
s     o   m   e O l tne       tra    n    s    c     ripts,          but I think              it will be a rarity.
      ,           D ocum ents."                         By that 1 mean                      bundles     of     d o c u m e n t s * or
 Platts or pho t                ographs                   or anything of                     that s    ort     - exhibits if
y o u w ish. ^ B                earing                 i n a i i r t d (a) w e             are dea    lin   g with
               (b)               with a                   jury and (c) t                    hat we    are      going; to have
our u o f t ; cut               out as                  i t is with the                    number      of    wit nesse sf I
want to restr                  i c t as                t a r a s I am a b l                e to t h   e n   u m b e r of
doc uments^whi                 c h ara
                            put in as exhibits.                                                       T h e r e is v e r v
little point                    in h a v i             ng
                               hundreds and h u n d r e d s of oatas of
d o c u m e n t s if the jury        ab s o r b             cannot                          them.
           I^am^prepared to listen to you on this point because it
 i s a d i f f i c u l t o n e , b u t w h a t 1 h a v e i n m i n d ,1 a n d I w i l l
 PdUse after this to enable you to come back on what 1 have
 siisid, i s ^ t h a t i f } t o r i n s t a n c e , w e w e r e t o i n t r o d u c e t h e
ureen Guide, which is a document which we won't be able to
 avoid referring to, we can introduce it as an exhibit,
 avwSvec, 1 would not expect the jury to read the whole thing
 1cma r c o ? e c   to cover .because a lot of it we don't need for
 ^UK iriMtiests. ^ i£ you Hav e a p a r t i c u l a r poi nt on it w h i ch
y v » u w i s h t o m a t t e t o a w i t n e s s ft h e n 1 w o u l d e x p e c t y o u t o
either pick that paragraph out and read it, o r ” I will read
 it,^ o r s o m e u o a y wil l ^read it, or i£ we hav e alr eady dea lt
w i t h it tiien w e c a n j u s t r e f e r to it.               so that at the end
wuc it tiie^ j u r y w i l l n a v e i n m i n d w i l l b e , s a y , t e n p a r a g r a o h s
out or the Green Guide.                    Also with other documents.                    ~There
may be other doc ument s which we may need to refer to,
yitcetofc, at tne end of tne day they will have only to
think about those bits of the exhibits which are relevant to
us^and not mayoe fitty or sixty pages which ara there but
which are totally unnecessary for our purposes,
     ^Is that reasonably clear what I am trying to say?       1
tniufc it will be easier to do than tor sue to explain it,
Sh«li i pause here:    t"ir. kingt have I oealfc with soma of
the points you had in mind?
              iii\.                  ^ _ S i e ‘ s, y o u               h a v e }    and     it I might deal with one
or          tv,o*   S i r }           it i deal w                       ith ma      tter   s which vou feel otieht
to          be reserved              f o r form al                      legal       argu   m e n t , p l e a s e s t o p t£-
i         am not m any                 way trying                         to tr     espa   s s o n tim e s when*I
sh        ouldn't.
3       14; 21                                                        MEDICO LGL OTTER




                 can I deal . t         i r s. t w            ith     m- -a t t e . r      -s a r i s i n g o u t                of what have
      o e e n k n o w n a s t -h i e©     tm i i l nl n i i   Inq   u ee s s t t s s , s     a i n . d „ ^y o_ u h, a. v_ ew   „a l r e a d y
     x - e ^ e r r e a t o the t        act tn                at    on the
                                                                         1    t~ r
                                                                                 ~5*3
                                                                                             individuals v
                                                                                            I nrH             J?!?-, f *
                                                                                                                               ou have been
                                                                                                                                      7
                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                      _....._
                                                                                                                                            ___
                                                                                                                                              _


     int0 celMMLJiM!y|tM^                                                                  ■                         ...                                        ;




                                                              - -                          to go into
    a                   ^       . .                a t " t *w o u l d w i s h t o nave l i b e--r t y                                 to d o             IS     to
    c o m m u n i c a t e wi t n you undfiir fctis nawe 3 f e a c h i n d i                                                      vidual
    d . e c J e , a s e d , - h - o - "p c e - f u l l -j
                                                       y i -t - will'not    a s "bel o n g a s                                     am perhaps
    i n d i c a t i n g - b u t t n e r s a r e s p e c i f i c i s s u e3s
                                        w   ~ - « r — -w       ^                                   ,S* O   S? U .S
                                                                                                                               tact where I
               those who h a v e lost their loverf ones                                                                        ven        - - - - =-
                                         51
                             roria             may take
    in w r i t t e n f o r m " y o u m a y ' t a k e t h e            view, and I w o u l d h o p «            that
                  t?li^ ? ttuc*
                            h a t l in fiios^ Oi
                                              - - thoss vossss
                                                         —                        y o u w„uid be prepared
             those          natters         t o b e r e c t i f i e d p e r h a p s s t r a i g h t awav*a t
                  mmm                                            ,^n n „     - I - _S r f . f_ -    o r , :' '
                                                                                                                                                        0Wp§|jj

            O b v i o u s l y u n t i l y o u h e a r t h e Questions V? c a n n o t n i a k e                             J
    your^ inind up, b u t I w o u l d w i s h to g i v e n o t i c e , if I c a n p u t
    i t t h a t way, t n a t t h a t i s w h a t I a m instructed ;o l a y b e f o r e
    you.
              ^ i H t CORONER; ' C a n I t e l l y o u r a y v i e w                                                   on th        at?         1 w        as
     aware^you might well be raising this'point,                                                                             I      have      a k e         a ^
    m a a a i t c l e a r t h a t i d o n ' t i n t e n d to r e - o p e                                              n all           the     nine         ty-
      tive cases.              Indeed, I h a v e t i a d c o r r e s p o n d                                          ence          frorp      t-*          otH
     p e r s o n w h e r e ^ t h e y hava raised m a t t e r s .          If                                             the        matte     rs a         re
    p t i L t o rats a n d i f w h e n 1 n a v e s e e n t i i e m . i f                                               vm»r*        t ri                1-5t } o -
    solicitors^ would comom-nic -                       ’           ''
    point, whi ca you make is -
     t h a t i s n o t inter
                                                                                                   - r n v e r , there may
    w1                                                                                      which I faal have either
    been adequately dealt                                                         w h i c h c a s e I will s a y s o , o r
    alters                                                                                                   tec scope of the'
    iilBHHMHHHHSHHM                                                                T f T ".3/ *,'"I

       . f a r a n o £ t u r n i n g y o u uovm, T am just reserving;
    position, depending upon what you actually say.
              i - j R . K i N G : indeed• R e a                            lly,               the purpose                      of     mv r    i    s    ing
    O n t n a t f l a t t e r no w w a s t o g i v                         e yo             u torsard not                      ic   e of       i    t     and
      to tempnasise, because I know                                         ther            e are those, h                     ar   e hea    r     i    ng
    *in&t ^ - i a . i i s a y i n g , t h e y a r e m a                    tter            s wnxcti m e v i                    ta    bly a   r     e      dear
     t o t n e hearts o f m a n y p e o p l e ,
                 THE COROiSER:                 ■I u n d e r s t a n d t h a t .
         "
             J i \ -S5 k l1r It*u ih^ic? KfiAn
                                         b i t , m i g h t I n o w •a*d d r e s s y o u o n t r i e c u t - E
         , 1 s,           i                 5 c a f~e d * ot. the scope. As l understand
 ^ y o u n a v e xnaicateu, s i r , y o u h a v e i n m i n d t h e a r r i v a l o t
 L l 1 ! E l r s t a^pulance} which I s p r o b a b l y g o i n g to be s o f f l e h i n i e
 -    i am g u e s s i n g now..                                               '   ~

               C0j\0t\Ert:                      About        fifteen       m inutes o a   st,                              ot
 like     th at.                                                                ”   1

        Ml, KING;           i h a v e a s u b m i s s i o n t o mak p to
v e r y h e a r t felt h e l d b y t h o s e I r e p r e s e n t - I a n d
i t i s a m a t t e r t h a t i s v a r y di- -
extended, t h a t tim in e, t o                                            . explain
wriy.       A n u m b er o f t h o s e w h o I ;                                that




             5 i r } I^know In selecting your cut-off point - and I
 u . ^ e r s s fcand t r o j n n a v i t i g r e a d some co e x p s ^ o n r ! f e n c e
m a t t e r r e l a t i n g t o i t - t h a t t h o s e a s r a s r t p-r ■- ? •. -i                 r t ,

     wineQiate     :
                                                                                       llP ilS S > iP # lil
                             ‘wwv.
                                                                                                              NNNNI
                                                n e e ,,.a,sa.d»J
                                                                                                                mSk.rtll

                                                  Can I sto         p you there
are getting                 in to           a legal subm            ission*
  . _ i nave n               ea     ra       what you sa            y.       I don't think it would he
rxgrit tor me                to       g    ive a ruling                o n t h a t hec .au*. ® ! W n,iirt
b reaching, i f                 y   ou       l i k e , tia*                   rz~r:z,_
m eeting, e x c e            pt        t   o say' t
          jo int

reasons
would       not    wa   n   t    to            encc
acce    d e to.    th   a   t,     b       u t i f you c o u l d l u s t re m in d m e
end      that y    ou        ha  ve           m a d e t h i s point b e c a u s e i t a a v
what      we sh    ou   l   d    do            is have another mea t!
the     19th,      bu   t       a f         o r m a l m e e t i n g o f the....i-
spea    k, but

         Can we move on                        to    your next point?
                      I’ l R , K I i ' I G ;              Sir, I would welcome that because                                                                 say.
        in       m a n y way 3 1                        s>monly really giving notice,
                          THE      CORONER:                          Yes,        I understand.

                                   &imt       Equally, when d e a l i n                                   g with matters which,
        S 3* i * ^ Y u                    3-0 « s e n s e , b e e a u . s e v o                             n have verv
        pruper^y            xnaicated_hov y o u p r o p o s e d t                                          o p r o c e e d anrf j k n o u
                                               i,.®®. t r e s p a s s i n g i n                              asking'         h e h e a r d "on
                                                                                                                              t o

                 . . h w . v " U f c L e t a e a e e i s i o n i s niaoe a                                n d t t i a t v o n are
        I 't              ^^ I ;                                             ~                      T

        statements.                  I fully                             u
                                                                         nderstand 'that, Th                         e ere           at^        advaotase
             • ‘■ n o s e I ^ r e p r e s e n t o                      r   knowing in advance                          the           nam        es of
        w itn e s se s ^ie^tftis:               I                       w
                                                                        o u l d hope, s i r , y o u                   woul          d b         e willing
        a " r L n e e n a o r ttl& d Q y                                 t
                                                                        o hear representati                          on as            to          vonr
        L a a i a S witnesses who                                      haven* t b e e n c a l l e d .
                      THE         CORONER;                          %$mmm
                                                         mssM&M1A                       'W&mm
                                                                                                                                      w-m
                                                                                                        wmmm
             @1                                   P|f                                                                       d*'S3-’
    missad                            '
                                      v.-dd^.:            >!»*•«                                                 en to evary                       1.11B 1<-
    fir                                                                                                          #*££*#»
                                                                                            WiIU L ~r~~                    —-i “v- tO
„                _ ^,»r ,_„,_............                      ^                 1    made it clear that the final
    aetision «?ouia be mine, but i did invite them to draw mu
    a tteatnon to anybody they wanted ii»e to think about, Y^,
    ■               -■'     -n te re s te d                   to     know that I think I -                                                  '
    _        {               ■     T nree                 of^       them said they did not hav
    m m            ttia       o tn a r tw o                   d id     p u t         fo rw a rd   a     fa i^   nam es.             T here            nav
    oe isiXj                   Dot a n y w a y , a v ery small nuraher.

         it                    i ca          n     jus   t com         e back            to your point.  That
opportun                       ity           n   as a     lread        y been           given and the mere fact I dondt
Circulat                      e na          m    es d    oes n         ot sto          p you from
o l y e o p x                 e Hf          w      you     want          me to          consider,
T        MH‘ ™    Gr      S i r > 1 a p p r e c i a t e that, and ever so g e n t l y . .
\ aff‘ not Wi-Sriing^ to occupy your time, put the counter'"'
argument.          In the nature of this inquiry where there have
ueen a vast nunioet of witnesses - when f sa.v witu*»s « * ? ’.’
f r r r r o ® tfie laqusxy i n v e s t i g a t i o n that a vast Ruiabec'of"
f t a ^ e D ts iiave^ b e e n t a k e n from many, 0 a ny people and b e f o r e
     .*i*3-" “ i J-iiHu-xry jegan tney were c i r c u l a t e d and a dded to
ft                        1                                    know a technique which has been a d0pted.
i t iii<AV oe c n e t e c h n i q u e o f c o c t v a n i e n c e wbic'n w i ld                                                                              hD
u n a a o p t e d , 0 1 many ot those i n s t r u c t i n g s olicitors who
i n s . r u c t ^ m y s e l f , h a s b e e n , " L e t u s w a i t a n d s e e whom 'the
y O t O a e r xnuencls to rail to yes w h e t h e r we can see a^v
odvious ^o m i s s i o n s ,,f rather than aoine it the o t h * r 7/*v - ^ 1
01           s it t in g              down              and        m a k in g        up   th e ir       5wn     l i s t ,     as      i f        th e y ’



                                                                             - 15 -
01/11 ’90     14:25                                       'MEDICO LGL CNTER                                        fi0g




             *ei_e t h e L o r o n e r , o f t h e c o m p l e t e w h o l e . O bviously i t
             would be a d u p l i c a t i o n    of effort on a major scale.

      <      .___ S i r , a,1 ^I could urge upon you in the n a t u r e of an
             laqaest ot tiiis sort, would be the extreme h e l n f n l ^ s«"rtf *
             list, not a iist_wittt any statements at all.         ‘sir, I leave
             ttiet w i tn you ana pernaps you might consider it. again.

                  iHE v0 h.0«LRj    I will rec.orisid.t5r t.iha_+ unit 53
             not sure I w i l l be able to oblige you, '' ~


                     ? ‘‘m                   x a“ obj-igea,             sir, a^ain,       1. r e p e a t e v e r
              s - gently b e c a u s e I k n o w I a m t r e s p a s s i n g ? o n v / a u ^
              j u r i s d i c t i o i a a n d a u t h o r i t y t o make'whatever d e c i s i o n s v o „
             v i b u , _ a s t o t r i e u s e ^ t o b e m a d e o f L o r d J u s t i c e T a y lo r ’s
             ^ ■ w p o r c , ^ ariu. r e a l l y m s u p p o r t o t t h e submission t h a t i r
              o 11o u 1 c l D e p u t o e i o r e t h e j u r y , n o t i n i t s e n t i r e t y - a n d
               i-tiis a g a i n m i g h t b e r e s e r v e d t o r a n a r g u m e n t b e f o r e v m . w h f
            ^           o t ‘l: r f a t t e r p r e s e r v e d - b u t o f c e r t a i
            W f ^ - w t i <_a.n u e i d e n t i t i e s .       T h e y r r-         . - ;

       f    Ja c ‘s ) -ot opinion, and they      :-r would
                                                     ,t,^ ,1 .*3 curtail
                                                                   -_i_  a lor ot argiiuieat
            as to certain e v e n t s b e c a u s e they are there laid out u-e -rv
            clearly and s u c c i n c t l y .

                   r“'^r ! ^      ^     draw an analogy.         I know this i <; sn
            in q u isitio n .     It is not s c i v i l trial,
            trial, buu in u i e c i v i l litigation whic
                             aevise which everybody agreed to was that it was
                       that m e core tacts, subject to a n y b o d y ’s right to
            say, ^I dispute a particular tact," would be as set no?* In
            certain numbered paragraphs which were given a.ud handed In.
            ^Bi.yoa& agreed it at toe e -*-1 j i **r-, 1 i         . . ;
            r nat way a m it proved to be a j>reat boon as a'sprritw' a “
            o a s e ? upon w m c h everyone could operate from, h e c a n s ^ ’nf
            course, or tne difficulty of not wishiri* to fc* a puv»!~
            inquiry.                                           ^

                    , ^ i r » I c a n o r i l y u r g e aga in, t h a t o e r h a o s    sly^ s
            c o n s i d e r a t i o n o s given t o t h a t .

                    THE C0E011                                                      mmmm
            use the Report xs*-,ei*Clusi”’Tf                             t- iif          —   _       _

            teat i t i s accepted, or                                  p a r a g r a p h is accepted, by
            every single party t                                       would be iiiiproper to use"
              » or it I did       - c u l d teen nai

                      It it were possible tor tin*2* sorties to reach aa
            a g r e e m e n t and say, ”We accept tr         - -          r-   XY '
            and 2 ," t h e n * ot course, I would •^IlllJ^PWfy objection to
            tnat b e c a u s e it would b e an
                                                                                be
            quite happy w i t h that,       liliptjfllf’P'r t w a n t to do is


                                                    - 16 -
         l u u e o d u c e s“c t i°n s j m a y b e , of the R e p o r t , , which rightly nr
         w r o n g i y soitiaoody may take o b j e c t i o n to.
                           KInG i              Yes, sir,

         if y o u like, in t o t o ,
                                                            is y'ay 1 w a n 't to call
                                                         in o r d e r t o fcr*
                                                                                                                 t h e evidence;
         as far as I art able.
                                                                               .nd be f a                        ir to people

                i!R. k i K G :    it way be that between now - it vou do fi ■*-
                             trial rsvi«w » if I can call it that, that'thit'
         *s a letter v,nica could be a matter of communication between
         trie p a r t i e s . •                                       .......

                THE        C O R O N E R   :      Yes,

                           tvING:          f Irs if 1 co«ld just clarify the transcript
         w.iueuwK, y uu wouiu nave no objection, as 1 understand it,
     wiuiixn wne rules you have laid down as to privilege, to a'
     transcript being used in c r o s s - e x a m i n a t i o n of
                                                                   i w i t n e s s as
     putting to him, if it be the ease, a previous . n e o n s 1 s t e n t
(    statem ent?



\    ,
                xht, vJUtiOi’

                HR.
                  -ORONER:
                            *EK:

                           KING:           ¥e
                                                  Y e s , within certain limits.

                                                 s,     of       course.

                                 T h e difficulty i s t h a t t h e P u b l i c ;
     inquiry w - a s d o n e o n ,    i f you l i k e , slightly d i f f e r e n t
     premises r r o r a iHy p o w e r s ,  i f y o u like,~and‘also t h e w a v I
     n n ^ e n a to cun t n e s e inquests and ay main o b i e c t i v * I s " to t-
     end ma.<e sure we do things fairlv, which T 5- --r- — >
     want also,                           '            ,„  -      ....


                           KI«G:          Of course, sir.                              Sir, y0u will be pleased
    ,t o p ; u a w     ipiav^e          no observations oa
    u n c.u i.sta n Q         ± t   we     a re       g o in g        to     t e e l   o u r    wav      th ro u g h     I t .     i f       I
    c a n p u t i t c h a t way.                I e m e n d t h a t a n d ' o n e ' c a n mak4 “                                             *
    u u i » e r v a t i o n s , p e c n a p s , as i t a r i s e s .

                S ir ,    n ig h t      i ju s t  ra is e   one p ie c e                        o f    e v id e n c e    w h ic h        ha^
    b ut,    ( ..e e r i m e n t i o n e d s o t a r *    I  ui -
    wnxcn xs m                  your pos sessi on, sir, of the events!" ^ l ' d ^ b
                                 extent h°u were intending to use that video' to

    ^                                          I mo g l a d you ha ve r e m i n d e d me                                 a^ouf
    w na t.           In       ta c t      you     have          re a in d a d         me                                        r t     ^
                                           rm      j ^                                                                           ;iii:
    ,"      wt e f i ^ o i a j o t ^ i v l o o k , a s i f n r * ^ i n g                       Hus     not sols ri*>h             ts
    :- e r e ? _ o u t      l _ w i l l c o n s b ac k ' t o e v e r y b o d y ,                      blit i f 1 d e a l ' d i r h
    n i m it          may      dealwith           s o m e of               the p o i n t s w h i c h         are        fn   v o i t     *’
    minds.                                                                                                              -■         ■


                                                             -   1/    -




                                                        :
                i-neos is wrist is kno wn as a coropilation video, w h i c h
                         L 9 r d , J u s t T a y l o r ' s Inquiry. It is about a two
                         ■ - / L 13 iny t>rf s e t l t
 it        wu Lae j u i y ,        because it is a useirui suram*rv.                                       it
 a c t a a i i y v i v i d l y demonstrates, i f I c a a u s e t h a t w o r d ,
  i r i s t f r e a r e o n e o r t w o otUer v i d e o s a l s o a v a i l a b l e of 1 9 8 8
  events, i n d c s a d , I t f l i n k there i s a bit of a . v i d e o o f a 1981
 e v e n t , w h i c h 1 m i g h t a l s o s h o w them.However.                   T h a v e
 caveats about the videos.                      F i r s t o f a l l , X do'not
 &UOW iiMy-sev's^nouirs, or however many hours there are* hut
 tnera is an awtul lot ot vi
 benefit to my jury or to my inquiry a r . d 1 don't intend to do
 1t ?


 tH ^           vi 5 «”Clly,-3:          00 facilities for providing copies of
       *   i         _
                            iSOi.raai±y
                                      ~l  speatcing, ot course.     4- - ~ -                .L i.    j

 eviaence             i p r » p « r . _» t r a n s c r i p t    and I f          y o u ' w s n t o n e vou-
  d U Ulie* as llldeeo som e or you have                                       done,
y o u j s n o w ^ t n e video that is exactly the same                                      thing.' ' ft'is'
<ah e x n i D i t and therefore I          produce   must                         c o n - i e * . " T bv--
                    e a ?not “ in fact * will not - piroduea oopies > c c
K.J.&„r*outxou to people on request.               if that is nor
a c c e p t a b l e then 1^ would rather not use the video at all.        T
^rtiiiK uiat woUid be u n f o t t u n a t e beca u s e I thir»t i «-
neip trie jury and ^it would help sv
 i             . i-ov?c V e r > - c?° not r
a u p K c a c i f l g o r g a nisation,             so this             would        have      to be*
understi: d by everybody,

               u o e & uiat raise           terrible       prohiaE!$ as far as you arc::
concerned?
        m      ■ „ KING;     Sir, from my point of view I an oontfvif
w i u n now          you have indicated.   ion w i l l
lui,            toe moment that is all i have to say,
                     ^Of^OrtEci*        how" if      1   work my way down                           the line.
                                                                                 ‘
               r11'* CAiUitJuLb:           J A j , } 1X only
                                            5 ir,       o n i y rise
                                                                r i s e toallv
                                                                        t o a i i y to     t o echoe c h o hr.
                                                                                                           hr.
k i d R or, o n e p o i n t a n d          tnat i s i n
 tepoct which certainly                                                    mosriay's point of
h                                                                          1 saving t i m e a n d
O gl l i,n“ge w i tinl c o u l c a abe
                       some             t MBenef
                                             r * t h a t a r e n o t d i-Spy;s p u tlie<
                                                                                       e d2,   :        It VCU
are int en d i n g . sir, to issue a general                               c  i t a  t   i   o   n   for t h e
parties to a t t e m p t _to agree                                         ;rapfis vcniCil oav in
h u e e “ a 'L h ? ? , a U S f c i t w l o a s x s
be v « y w i l l i n g           to ’                                                        ' U" ’ “ *

T , / lICj                              I
                                     have        got           noo b j e c t i o n to that at a ! h
h “dl1 a s s u raeo t n a t that was               going to present the o&rtip.s
w »i t h some c o n s i d e r a b l e dif
                                       ---i -f i/ c•*u  L t iLei s biit if in f a c f c ' xL' a i r T
                                                     » Jl                X

mistaken on that,              then of course if ws can                                                  hfd , f
vra _car, _ n a v e s o e s t h m g •
oojectxon whatsoever.
    of w i t S i s S f y o u ^ u f b e  K i d d d 6
    you will not be pMVldlng a i £ r of p - p d d K d d d d d .
     L U . a s S u ! |e t h a t y o u w i l l b e
     t^®g0;l
     tnat youf        r tSp riens e cne  i n t e n t i that
                                     n t ?ra&r          o n ? y°«
     ^         COrtUiMER: yihen you s a y i S t h e                                                   order",               d o v 0 „ e p fln
      wi«„ I will Suart witn supp
                  MR      k   D^SELL:                   To     re s id e n ts              and       th a n     shopkeeoers?

                  iitE   c OEOk l R j                   .No , not necessarily-                                       That was                        »
    g ro u p in g .           w h a t l w o u ld        in te n d                     to    do       is    to
    outside in.                     i f *    fo r    example,
    s u r r o u n a m g s of             L a p p in g s            Lane, -
    we ^wouia call other                                g ro u p s,       w
    ‘ ‘f °   ! f ! e ; h in g     s p e c ific    t -                                                                -       -   :
             way       tnrougn tae          e v e n ts ,                  so to speak,                                   I dc    re c o a m 's * '
    tn a t     m       many      cases i t      is    n o t                   a c tu a lly            o o s s ib lc          t-n           —
 c a te g o ris e .                 You          c a o f fc s a y ,           "[Js         w il l     o n lv         lis te n          ^


 “ e .                    t o a?d
                                w a n UOt
                                       t t o t0t e the
                                                    l l u rest•,
                                                          s ■- ,                                 «        we c a u ' a " Su ^ Do rU r
 ; U 1 ^ W. ^ i g n t x y ,           because th e re is                               no     wnv         we    c o u lh         sat*      >, 4 ^.
 corae b a c k w a r d s              and fo rw a rd s «
 tn e        c o n v e n ie n c e          o f    a      scheme


              H ow ever, th e re a re        some w i t n e s s e s                                       wbn        w- n        n ,.,,
ve ry         r e s tr ic te d e v id e n c e beca
else,             but we         will            tr y        and      dea         .
o ra e r          m      w n ic ngave I                      th e w
                                                               was                n o t       S Q s c ific .
uie way 1                 Happened t o                    write i t               down.'                  In fact
, ^ £ty tna^ tor legist Leal                                                         ~                                                     _ -
io c a i p e o p l e in tne raornim
“       ??    a    d is ta n c e       la t e r           on in           th e        day.
wxij. oe g m d e d                   n o t by             th e ir        category,
ana  timings o f                     w here              th e y       li„-e and s o                  00.        *'

              Doss that help you at all?
              i'iR. R U i i b h X L ;              Thank you for that c l a r i »
o th e r          m a tte rs        a re         perhaps              a        • -
s u o s s q u e n t m e e tin              g i f     th e re      is to
m e e tin g a t w h ic h                   m a tte r s o f la w
1 ray d e a i w i t a tw                   o m a t t e r s ray l e
rax sea.       ^ One o t                    tn e u i r e l a t i n g t

t d : ?! ■“ *,tsr,[,ed the «*»*                                               •
     lies wisn.es to nave put.
reactionj is whether and to
going to t>s circulated to
  _????* t 0 m e , a p p r c p r
 specific questions for you to ask                                                         the       *itn.<
« n a c 1 u w i a r s t a n d h e w i s h e s to d o ,                                       w hether r h o ^
= u o u i a u» made                                       ;




                                                                                                                                   .
     might^have an                     opportunity to eomssru on i                                                 tha $   e
     questions were                     or were n o t p r o p e r emanat:                                  ‘ rom               Uni
i
             1H E COiiONErl; ,                     1 t h £reat tesoaefc* o«                                                    cuns
     i n t o l e g a l a r g n r . s e n c , O u t I t e l l y o u nou t h i                                        ion
     whether the question                                                                                                      Know
     wna t                                           M It                   Hjl^i                                   WiMWgi
                                                            t|o'SjCe|
        '■Mmm                                                               iSSiid                                  ven
    understand the point you have made,                                                                  hlnk
    c o n c e r n which m a y b e y o u d o n ’ t h a v e * !
               S''A» KtibStLL;              Thank you.                         Insofar                         learoed
    i.1,l e n d s m i g h t seek t o d i s s u a d e d                        von f ro=u           the        iurss vh-
    von h    • a v e ^ -i*n d-*
                              i c a t•e d’ w i t h r e l a t i o n             t  Loi
     r e p o r t } I      d o n ' t know w h e t h       er you ara                                           -nvita
    u s to add            o u r two p s a n e t h         to t h a t  vi            s
     01 t n e d e b      a t e . S ir, o n m y              part may                                 ist      inoi pu : t i
     selective            p a r t s o f th e R e p       o r t befor                     t h e '             i•
    greater ev           i    l          toon putting' the whole                                             is p e r i l
    going to h            a   v      e a dispute as to which
    pacts sele           c    t     e d and b e a r i n g i n m i n d                   ia t t h e                   v
     prepared,            a   n     d the Report written, £                              a time          oef c
     tacts were                 k     n o w n ...
            T   H   E C O R O        N E R ;        (Jr. Atissai;                    t I wa; t “yins. t o
    indica      t   e was             that     i f there w a s              a n greed           ttemant as
    wiiat w     e     would            put     m a n i woulo                b e p r e p a r e d .o c o n s i d e r I t ,
    I t vi&     c   an't a           gree      t h e n I s t i r ’-         '•         " - • 7e s a i d w i t
    regard           to the            use     of the report            .
               iiti. - K U S S L ' L L : Thank you.                          Pinallv. s i r ,
    r e c e n t l y m entioned t h e c o m p i l a t                    ion videol
    s a i , y y o u will n o t b e in a p o s i t                       i o n t o o r o v i ' f ^" t o
    you Da in a position to afford                                       facilities f o r L                          i.
    representatives to v i e w * i t b e f o                            re ths iriouasts"                           rt?
    com e to you or .they all j
          p a r t ic u la r     time which has bee                      n      s e t'a s id e        for
    video to legal representatives*
            _         ^CAioHrOthi                      Sir, pernaps I                   could hsiu
    Sheffield viednasday                         'for their part ha                     ve coc o p ^ d
    c Ojii p i I d L i o n .v i d e o a         nd i an instructed                        tost:      -
                                                                                                     w:                   os
    n « p p y , as tar as we                       are adla. to
    d o e s n "t th” a" v” e' " c o p y            in pi .
               if d o L u R O h o R i             T n a t w o u l d bs v o r             v h.
    S u s s e L l I a;rt s u r e y              ou will accept tha                      t sr.                   :tOUS
             11f?* RUSSELL:                       i t h a n k rav .00 3                                         »t cIn
          Tilt COROtiEfi * That oilI ;                                      IS 1:
    very-raucn indeed, Mr. Catchpot-
            MR, HALE:                          My friend                             from            the Football                    Sus           e r r
                                                                                                                                                             ,


 Ass ociation very properly r                                                        a    i    sed the oueation                        ■/          r
  undertakings might be givsn.         0       “                           -*■ •
                                                                               »<«
                                                                                 »*.*
                                                                                    .     w   hich d e n t save
                                                                                          s s iiiv u    i.iijL&iii,.   C
                                                                                                                       Jcr V ‘~:z    e
                                                                                                                                     <&     1WV     f ti
                                                                                                                                                  Mi-    L   i liM ^       ■

   save a lot of money and als                                                      o            save a
  searching.                   For my client                                          1        i
   such a n u Hn u d c e j r. t a a t k v i s n i g ^ , but
                                                         u u t Ii                   s     a   y oe m n ) oit-o r                     v
   t h a t oo tt hh es rr pn*»nn1
                            e o p l ee m*w         m a y tK=!-a
                                                              ake,                               'I
  p o s s i b l e e i t h e r b y our g e t
                                 j                                                  t     i   n g to geth er                                                     K,,
  your office perhaps sending                                                                                                                           vcur
   list as a representative, a                                                        com plete* l i s t c f a U th*
  re p re se n ta tiv e s s o th a t w e                                            m a y g e t in touch w ith « s c                               b other
 and see whether we can in f                                                        act agree on anv s p e c i f y                                      catsrrs
 wnich, without impinging on                                                          your                                                              h e lp to
 a v o i d a r e a s o t conten tio n .
       If that could
 very h         " ~ *

            ±Hi£ CORONER :         C a n you s e e
 c i r c u l a t i n g a l i s t to a l l o f you. of y o u r r e s p e c t i v e
 cincy a d d r e s s e s a n d r e f e r e n c e s t i c i o n ’ t s i n o o s a #o v , i f                                                                  u
w o u l d o b j e c t to t h a t , s o w e can c i o t h a t *
                     I hear                     what              von say,                T think the                  cua,s,tIon «                th;            .


                                                                                                                                                         It
n o t ^ f o r me t o ^ i a y y h . i t tr>;- r~ tv -;l -.y _ _                                                         „         sn                       !I
O D v i o u a l y I wi l l c o n d u c t t n $ :
e v i d e n c e I t h i n k i s a p p r o p r i a t e s‘                                            w                                                                  .

 so to speak*             M y j o b i s t o make                                                                                                                       p
o r t h e s e u nfo rtu nate p e o p l e ,
                   ^R.    ISAACS!                             Sir, may I                      ask      you to              clarify           two prints!
Trie       f     i      r
                      st relate                           s t o trie
unde      r     s      t
                      ood what                                yr» « , i 5
was                     to be us                          ed a        t
trie      n    d      s and m y s e                       lf a        nd o
cert     a     i      n tacts.                              xaa      t way
can      b     e      aone.        A                      ssum       i n g t h a t that
you      b     e     lieve you                            will          a l l o w the. 'use
ail!
               A     s           I say,                  as     i. u n d e r s t o o d i t a t                the                             *. . .     ■
g o ing^to                       be              us     ed,       but                                                      fhV
Mr.     K      i     n      g    wa    s            a   ddr    essing ;
cer   ta       i     n      ly     g       o    t       was       th at
tra   ns       c     r      ip   ts               to     be     used for cross-axatai nr d m                                        r .,;
was     c      e     r      ta   in    l       y        not     something I und*r
wou   ld              b     e    so     m      et       hin   g which        "r 1 . . . — —

               T h a t i s the                                |                t j sir.  The secorid is this, =
it    is          a. r e la tiv                                           “•flatter arc rrlatsi*
                                                                           - 21
      evidence.      , t h e video w i l l i m d c i i b t ^ d l >/ h *
                                     Y es                                                                                                           ti          the
                   are right, and that I
     cixc.um stanc.es
     present position,      Would you                    titles             c       l a    r i f v
                                                                                                                                                iferf
     it you would not intend that th
     course of the ’
     ei_               _ .............                   _

               THE CORONER:                          W i t h r e g a r d t o t h e secon,-! .-»0 j n
     p r i n c i p l e the a n s w
                       er to that is ves.                                                                   'in
     vxdeo and that would be it.   However,                                                           I have to -
      o i t c a r e f u l w ^th r e g a r d to t h i s
     c o n c e i v e or s s i t u a t i o n where a                                        uoi
     w o u l d b e i n f i n i t e l y quic      -                                                                                      . , .
     looking at                the video.     I                   *
     we would n             ot look at the                      vl
     seetc to av           oia^ it. ^ JThe p                    urpose ot
     jury an ov             erview, if that                        is
     happened a             nd in order for                        then to
     Better wha            t the witnesses
     than^anyth            i n g e l s e l~ ”                           .
     can tell'y            o u now,
     tlie v id e o          i s referred t o
     to , a n d i t
                                                                                                                                                           vc   u


                          ISAACS;                   We                          .



          , ™ E f?5 0 N E R '     However, t h e l a s t                                             thing,       I want 1? to
                            hours re-rimnina v
      s p e n d ftoiti.s and.
     m i n u t i a e o n it.  ffe w a n t t o hea.J t
     conventional,                * *           —
                 .Sow the o t h e r p o i n t wh
J us tice Tayl                   or s Repor              t a n d in p                articular
inuot eotitess                     1 d o f i n d             tills e m i t          s a. x
  I was trying                     to say is                 this: ' i                     t
assume that                      you d o n ft             have.                       t                                                     i v n r;
you are goin                     g to look                at                                                                                ■   T-
going to do                       that,                       ... : t
  some or the                     witnesses                           •- ,                                                        t in c>.
 tue™ because                      they are               Kfu -          -.r              , -h~       I -         - 1?' r         u tr l:v
matter*      ^ I                 n th at s                                                                       ■a«                 :'■*       H   r 8'

 t h a t people                  w ill use                                                                  ±.   > s r s    t:
examination.
                  Wha t   1 am n o t                 v e r y k e e n on co in s I s                         ■*       L l.ftr
w     i    l   l not a    ll     o    w      the transcript                                                 o     p iit     th in g s                      to
p     e    o   ple so     th    a    t      or-f p i t -          _                                         on w n ir a             th e y   sa,
 t     h   e   y will     no   t           an s w e r the question,. ‘ if                                   r>*vs y i i t          i t    to
 t     h   e   n th-st    it          i   s an Inc                                                          Snci       they        have
exerc.. ad                th   e     i    r priv                                                            hen        1   * i l l              not
allow -h o ev e r i t                          is   t o p u r s u e them or: th ;                               point            oy quoting
        to them f                                     an scrip t               because                          Hid COO                                      ,,   CC
                                                                                                                                       ..

                     ir     weU
    matter b_wftj.cn are not r«
                                                                                    that in certs in other
                                                                                                •    -
                                                                                                                                           c o --s e s *
    and pp?operX?rSi?14
          r o p e n > ? i t m i g ”n t.V
                                     ^ . no e "C'’
                            thatd e said »
                                 "e °*** may **'       •                                                        •■                    >'            ■
    t                     .^ Hay iii®v“ to ®!\'.i'. o_ ^ i -
     because it is only right t „_                                                         o>. , -
    n e v e r e v e r conducted a n ,
    ana I h*v« to learn,                                                           ,        ‘
                                                                                                                      Wv      oove         to,          os
    “ p w to d o it c o r r e c t l y . In td o t ^-r«o                                                              t havo to                 iOOOO;
    the right that I too may have                                                                                    iat I do.
                    Have i helped you in any way!
                   1 P A ^ S *        Certainly you have,                                                     sir,            G o g c ,a n
     n u e r f e t a n u , x i I c a n p u t i t „ „ ,-
    transcript to perhaps remind
    “" d i S eL Rar t ^ h^ - ■.
    U J t h a f e w a s t h e s o r t o f mx&mpl                                                          v e r e o i v l l . o j u s t a.
    m o m e n t o r two a g o .

           What I thin                         k my le           arned, ft:                                           i*.-            S s y 1;ig o
    this:      that if a                           witnes        s X savs                                             nd dr ,
    copy o f t h e t r a n                     script             w h e r e tie                                      said dB
    M r * K in g s h o u l d                   be perm            i t t e d to
    moments y o u a r e                       saying             XY arH 7                                                                ,.                           ...
     said AB and G,                                                                                                    n oootris a.oo ooo.J
                                             Wr " h a t ■ i' s     the position
    3 ,
                     IB1BBI1I1|11|


    ^       ,
            " wT h« aE t d °f e 8e 0 Na Er Re : c r y Wi yn g f te oe I e” s ’St a d™l i     th*t            Poia!:
                                                                                                                 .       ■   ,s                         -V


s       v   s   \    e     * »                                             ■           -
                                                                                                                                   ths do                         o

            Can           we     leave this                       point:              y® ar»                                       to toe
 legal, s u b             mission point.                              It           is obvsTo                  to -5,
 t o what y               ou may sey, r                               ..       „                      :
w l i a t e we            d e a l with l e g a                   l
deal with                    these matters                         and I        will            n o                                        ro:in5o
as far as                   I am able, at                          the t       in sI              ^                               too
                                                                                                                                  3           1.0   to
y o u , pir.              Isaacs!
                          ISA ACS:                  It      c e r t s . i t ? I.y            » sir.
idea,               it    1 may say s o .

     Sir, there is one fuotdso- n                                                                                                     t s e o 4 ? Of:.a d
to raise and that is the ousotjc                                                                                                   :
witnesses.   C e r t a i n l y o n e o;»n «                                                                                            sold be
                                                                    23
o p pressive                                f o r a w i t n e s s f r o m o v e r th«-                                                                        or,           irch^sah*
 from down s                               o u t h t o b e c o m i n g u p e r a a n u ■7>b%r o f                                                           regular
.o ccasio n s,                            but, sir, that same poin                                      t,      : i u S t              a    l t a           i ' p p l y       t l S t i j S c
  t h e g iv in g                          o f e v id e n c e i n a n y way,               by n                                                     i t i a l -

 professiona                              l w ito ess, i s g o i n g t o I n r
 p o in t m o s t                          a p p l y , i n m y subm ission, t f . I P . „                               a

 w o u l d be w r                         o n g i n m y s u b m i s s i o n i « t fur-                  ,                                                             a
 p articu lar                                p o l i c e o f f i c e r t o b « as'-/                                  t o              i                      C V         a a~ t

  w ith h a l f a                          n h o u r o f w h a t took r > l a r                 .    .s         O il          L   it       , I.

   three days                                 later to come ha                     n eal -.-■li;: an                                                        ha;a"                      ■‘‘ an
  hour and so                                  on.       I n my siibKnisalcni t h a t ^ 0 ; j !

                         T H E         CORONER:               I      t a k e     y o u r     p o i n t ,                          T          t M - , 1            P                -          *



 w i t n e s s w ill e v e r b e                 I ' a * ! ’^ b e n a n a i f a a a                                                                                         raa:a:*
 o f y o u w h o w e r e h e r e a t t h e i n t e r i o i n p ^ a . i , :„a r h                                                                                           1 -a a h 1
 w i t n e s s e s e v e n in t h a t ir                        - a x a n ) o.-;a ;                                                                                                           'y
 co m e u p w h i c h w e had f o r g o t t e n o r a                             a'a:.ie v                                                                               h i b h -..a:
  r e f l e c t i o n w e o u g h t to havfe csxyi»>r«p,                        i t -.a-p; P e                                                                              ihai I
  w i l l h a v e t o r e c a l l w i t n e s s e s from, t a a a s ? o f a a * . c a                                                                                     t I
   accept your point.                 I t h i n s i t 1.5 5 a r ^ » h i v a n a                                                                                              a at i.a
  p r i n c i p l e I a g r e e w i t h you,,                T antaraiy n a e p 7b«                                                                                       f n»'«fi
   i n q u e s t s a r e g o i n g t o b e p r a t t v '.a-a-:“ a n a v 5 r / n ^ p t                                                                                             ; -n;:a t
   the witnesses#
                 MR*                    ISA AC   St          The                        a
  m    a     ke, on                   e cart     und     ersta-V               »> ••
  e     l    u                           some     po     int that                 h a d n o t P r « n i 0 - 7 ^ 0- &i h a - ' • ! ; > >
 w     h     e n he                   or she      g a    v e ■e v i d e         n c e , b a t t h a t is pn.i.ta n u f c a a H :
   f    r     om ask                  ing a      wit     ness to               stop at
 b     a     ck.
                         T H E         CORONER:               h o ,         t h a t   a r r a h     n         a v           i n i a r a . i a               n *             i-h         I     7

 w a s               c r y i n g           t o   s a y    w a s       t h a t     i f ,     f o r         a x a a i / I a , », v n a n , , - v I n
                                                                                                                    - ■ •      ■ *

  r esid                 e nt who can oaly give avi                                       aerc      a n r t o ~ i . - r. " v y y r : = a
  o utsi                 d  e the ground, d i d n ’t go                                    in,        f c a a a t c . h v i; a. .... ■ •.• • * a a i, P ■
  s top                   a t t h a t p o i n t w i t h hina h a                          caas      a nPara 7                                       aar# 7 1
  c an s                  ay.           However, i f w e h a v ^                             a r     n p n o r t t a *:a:                           . a - ana
   then,                  h  e went into the gates a a                                    h «a           a a j a a - 'hi ■                             : VI i
   of i t                     a n d d itto w i t h o ff l e e r i                          as 5       vr a & tha_,                                                                          „ o h



                         M I S S NOfiCLlFFEi            Sir,                                          na aaa polv-                             av ai:; .
  p     r    e    vi     o u s l y s e n d to y o u o r dn                                            /our a t t a a a , =                   h a;i;a;: ..
  i     t    e    ms          of docum entation w h i c h                                               i l a f C v ' - a , a : ;. a n h a i 1
  t     o         be         b e f o r e t h e jury a n d w =                                         nr aa bran 7 / n :                         77 r
  p      e    r   mi      ssion that that be nha                                                             That a , :at.» n^ raa an ,, ;hn           ,hny
   o     n          th    e basis that the jury .                                                   n                    ;
                                                                                                                    I fit;         t. :■    V;                  t. a k >•>         lP .~ a

   a     w    a   y       a n d r e a p the® f t o - a c o * n                                       '■ V - ■           ,     0,                        7np7.pp7:!:,
                                                                                                                                                    : 7 -
   h     e        us     e d to d i p i n t o a s a v a ,                                           :a         : ■ • - • ’a.

                          T H E        C O R O N E R :            Y e s .                                                                               "v-i.. vtiv -W'1*
   m e             L          t h i n k  volume                                                              i.n a r                  fan n             v n l u a s s 1 a aid
   2          a t             t h e    moment s c                                                            f r.                          '.-..)     s a % a -      al» i fi ,
.but it s e a m s to m e if w e c o u l d agr ^a, i£_ y o u iiie, a ounctie
 o_ f p a p e r s , o r 4-t hU r ea ea Kb iut tni rdi ll aecs , wwhh' 5i ci 'hh Ji **A t d - : - .V'iA™,
       £
                                                                                                   v..v-,
                                                                                               f h , - '  A r»                \J


 l i k e l y t o w a n t t o d i p i n , and t h a t
  th a t i s w h a t I w a n t *                  I dona* t -
  p e r u s e t h o u s a n d s of p a g e s , o r                                                           V ' 4 V! £ S »
 b u t i f w e h a v e a c o n v e n i e n t w a v ; : b ‘ l a w ' s ;- . r - , » «
  documents which are agreed in
  riot                          agreed
              n e c e s s a r i l y                   w   i t h regard                 *:o   i b   i       c     :   -    t        s     ,    t r ie r ;             x t

 m a y        b e   p o s s i b l e   f o r   y o u       c r     w h o e v e r        ; s   s , 5,y-1                                                     :c*-

 d r a w p a rtic u la r atten tio n
 w h a t e v e r i t m i g h t be*  I                       s     tb** v bs.t ycv.                     sc*           *r
                                                                                                                                                       ,
         MISS NORCLXFFE:                              S ir,
 t h i s stag e w e h a v e                     '                 ’ —                                            . . . . . .
                 THE
                                    | I wa.
                t e r b e c a u s e my o r i g i n a l i nt                                  was >:o                                          C .



 way          a n d t o make y o u p r o d u c e                                      O'      t "v                                           p£ve, , 3
 and          when, you wan ted to use it.                                            vr:. .jv 'j                     -.■a*'!;                cs-..;12
 me I         s to allow you t o produce i                                            s s-' v?.: : « .-™;i th< n                                     ;e dXV>
 It m          a y b e - I a m i n c l i n e d t o '■ r                                *.*   t ' ‘-e        - O ' . . . - ; ::         r n ,;i r             -
                                                                                                                                                                 x
 be a             better way but I want tc *                                          i a'ouf                  rt    "i j i t t i t ;
  fu rth er.

       H a s a n y b o d y g o t a n y t h o u g h t s va bia^t?
        Ml* ISAACS:             I t w o u l d be ; r      ! * * VftQ ,;                                          »


  documents my friend is referring                        h:  ;k 1 thv-n pstina'

        THE CORONERs               I u n d s m c s d V.?: ■'•'•'■■i * l i !" : i ' :
  because that is w h a t y o u s a i d *.;<                                      V           ' E.         I .



                 MISSHQECLXfPEs                S i r * i f i C'I;"t ft'X!b,ei. ‘V-.K
  V        olumes 1  a n d 2, a n d t h e r e ^ r v : • . . h v - e e " O i ! r C e r :* .- ‘ C
   y       o u , were in f a c t t h e S o u t h i b - i ;                                         " ' 'i'l'V   V;.- :                                                     ft-1
   1          and 2, su b m i t t e d b e f o r e t b ? ?i\' » I h c
   Y        orkshire Police submitted                             l i ■'! i
  m a t e r i a l ” f a n d t h e n v o l u m e s ! a n 1 i X ' h i C T -S-"-:
  documents.                T h e y w e r e . S t a c ' b . n y r h i i ^ f , y.r**f:
  V o l u m e 3 t h a t h a s b e e n r « s f e t r r : i , r< b v t h * r' i :
  c o r e b u n d l e , i f I c a n , e a i 1 i t i i i t i " 1V i V 1' ' : ' .                                ;                                       .


   Chief Constable considers                                        #:,'v:        wy. i  " t - -   -i                                               ; •: u


   have had access to, either                                     :ri€ p y * I i : i '"c..                   c.*                        ,■

   t h e recent c i v i l c o n t r I b : . ; t i n n y r          >c  »  a n i |   s  ,
             THE GOSONEls                 S o w h a t v v . t . ■fV»                            ■•*            i'
   not hing n e w in those d*cu^rr'.‘ - ,                              Th- d v ' " ' '-‘t t«
                                                                                                       ’
   a b o u t them.
hav ing their own separate bundles
c o r e   b u n d l e s          w e r e    p r o d o e . e d u



     THE         C     ORONER:          we d o n ’t want to - ^ no^t.                          r.w.no- op
start wi        th        single sheets or agr e o f .
      MR.          K    INGi        That was tay o p a o w ; ;, - w w                  > w o o o t o t o o
suggesti        on         to you that if bv the tooe                              w t ,4 ' - : > h s ! t ' o * y
not be a        gr      e e a b l e a s p e r f e c t , h o c i f s : . c » v t o o w , o t t -.or
two bund        le     s perhaps,            w e r e b o o i w o l t o w - w o ^ r o t o ;. h r o - w - o
comment         on         it, makes u g g e s t i o n about w o w                   - ’w t 00
introduc        ed         or arguments as to wool                               b o t ■ ■;              ~ ‘
we cou ld          j    u s t h a v e t h o s e i n o o »m t - W W - ; . ,
          THE CORONER s                          Yes, Mis* w — .jWWo:
      MISS N                ORGLIFFE:                     If E' O O j j - -h ~ - o                           tt o t^-,,
has been no                  attempt a             t not lo-tiute o p -                       c ■- too--- o — .
these were*                     It was               d e c i d e d t o w t t o * -t- ; w : ^ w ^ v . ^
those docum                 ents would                 b e p u t w ? w - o >■                      : < i.-b,: w - W
if you ther                 eatter at               t h i s n : w e i * . o . v o , w o t o . 00,0 -■■■*><1?
whatsoevar,                  then circ             u l a t i n g : - o ' " ' W ■ : ■- < - - ■            w .-vo-          t .
would not h                 ave been a              p p r o p r i a t e 00 . c - : W ,                   , < • ■; <•■•> . b - : -
treason why                 this parti              c u l a r t b ;> . . o - o . v ■* - ^ o t b o - ::,,
     THE          C    O    R    ORER:           C      a   n w e i e o v o i f . • s t i e t . f ) ‘! t v‘ b : ' o - o , <
for the          ti     m   e     bein     g?                1 b o o * o u t t : o > , :. -                    ib 1
decision          a    n    d     to a       certa      i   n                 I 0 - 0 . « : o : i . • > ; : . o o o c- too
of those           d    e    c   ision     s unti       l      a t t e c t o l * o . , , m , o , : c b - ^ o : 0 »j , » 1 .„<• 0 t o o
to hear          wh    a    t     you       though      t      01? o o f !          ^                   - , . 0 - o w ".
thought.
            Trie o n l y t h i             ng
                                 I v o u l d a 00/ w t r                > ■•;• ■ . • •         tt
 that we are going          t o w i s d , o t ; : - o t i - 00. > o - • ■ .0, - ' .                                                ,o:o;
 put , t h e r e lias to    oe                o" W'o .^w,                           ; L } > *•
                            to
                            be at ’              : : : 0/0 o o p I " t - ■             ■'   o :                                c
 t i : h i k ) t. -      T '■                 ,■          , :'                       Ci.n't
 proliferate docum       e n t s b e c a u s e . F t h i . - o o - $,./ i : w ; w                                           vy
w±]                   Zy c o p i e s    i f O t -00 v - - t - 0 ro- r ; o • -                                              o-~OWv
               ds of these inquests.
          Yes, anyth                 ing else?
          HR* JACKSOl                i j J u s t t o O v t ' - s o . t ot                        o..     .    , •             . ..
po   int.      Perhap                s ©y use cw tt- o                         r             .           •   • o
un   fortunate*                       W h a t I h o o w t o o .: w :- - , p                ro:;         .      ' - - - w t ' - 0,0
we      can d o 5 and                     a g t e o c e r t b : .o. to-^o .o                   -,■■'■   =      • • ’b v - h r
Re   port froo my                      c l i e n t s 1 o , l . o h w * .,• ;                   •                     ■ : o„,
to     the criticis                   ms of L H ^ o ; :                  .-,.o- i
ce   rtainly happy                         t o liai^o            ■ i - o ? , -             o
          My second                     a n d r,               -      - ' ro                      -     '         t
 o   t *• ♦
    01/11   '90        14:40 :                       ©1609                                                             '41 T-rr 1 ; M




                                           THE CORONER: •                                       May I J u s t s a v t ’n c c :
                   I s               t h a t           i f    I   a n         g o i n g                 t o      c a       l l     o r . #         N -

                  very difficult for solicitors,,                                                                                                            *
                   u n d e r t a k i n g s                        a s         t o           w h a t           t h e y            w i l l           ? • - / .

                  problem,         I                              wou         ldnot be very h a i ; •' e
                  w itn e s s e s up                               in         th e m id d le          o f" a      - ■■
                   saying is rel                                  eva        n t to m y i n q u i r y .               r y e
                   problem when                                    1 w       as         l o o k i n g ? t v o ;.. ?•        >                                         :; ,
                   It is a very                                   maj        or        p r o b l e m t e r v e t * :c.i
                  supporters*                                        It         i s e a s i e r t e r h:t, o i r * -
                  a very major                                    dif        f i c u l t y w b i c e v^;.
                  quite sure h o                                  w w        e c a n resolv:-? e ; fb*'
                          MR. J A C K S O N :       We will                                                                                  ‘ v :v-'.
                  w h a t p e o p l e a r e p r e p a r e d i d ,y.                                                                        v ; ? -e~-~
                  comment.
                        Sec                           ondly,        s i r , f r o m t h e e y : „ p , . ? . : *■
                  be looki                            ng at        these inquest &' e>:
                  right in                               t h i nking the re wi 1 1 e ^               * ■         . ,
                  three, da                           y s in a d v a n c e of vltr-M--— •
                                           T   H     E CO     RONER:            That is                     ' - •- •.
                  c    o    u    r      se             if I      a m p e r s u a c j a d lee lee.                 <
                  y    o    u           ma     y        get     a n e v e n f u l l e r ! : ’ >■'*                 -■
                  w    o    u    l      d       w    ant      t o t r y arid givis s                                  ■■■><
                   l    i   s   t     ,          s    o to       Speak,          s o f h a r y o > ~e. ,;i
                  w    a    s            co    m     ing*            W o t t h e i r Ss t ^ t - 3 - . • - y * . • e ;
                  y    o    u             li   k     e, c     ategory - supporter, n : j :
                   be*

                        HR * J A C K S O N ; My fieal                                                                                                e .
                   there will baa daily tran*i.'-y •                                                                                                   - y*y.
                                          THE CORONER;                                             1 am c c r a ^ - - i c                                        ?*
4                 moment.
                          Before I moveon, we are tib                                                                                  lor             y;
                  anticipated.             I a m so r r y ece-e-                                                                         ;• b v t ; ■*,.
                  w e l l p r e s s o n a n d d e a l w i t h -e.-.’ ,                                                                   ■: ;             ;
                  Hcliriarij yes.             Y o u ir.usf                                                                             -        :
                  hear you*
                                           MRS. MCBRIAN:    I a m o v e - . - e >■-, y ?
                  point,                     the cut -off point,,           - ,
                  take                         •, v
                                                                        Ac-»*♦

                                          T H E          C O R O N E R ;                        b o .         t h 'v   .                   -   ;   ■; -• ,

                  you,          I know it sounds
                  o t h e r s , b u t y o u a r e e;oe
                  e v i d e n c e ,                                     .....................

                  raco^-':•<-
                M R S ,     M C B R I A N :                  i       w o u l d ,                          l i k e                                   i     -■                \       !          '   >



         THE CORONER:           Yes t OK,   d d - - ' .> : -
sub missi ons then von tan argti",*-' :
of law.            forgive we, X realise :                 .
Mrs* McBriaiij because you                 V !' : . ' - ■
hand, if you represent you                K .••. .. ■
you ware one and so 1 have                 •hd' ;
l i k e , r u l e s t o you, even          ’ i ■' '          •
 the next meetiug when we a
all means if there is a Ia
t h a t I a m w r o n g a b o u t tha
argued*            If* having
persuaded, then                                                                                           ■i   :               .       -                  '         i

not persuaded I                                                                                                            •       ;. ■            , -                  ,                              ■
il                                                                                                                                                                                        ■^ •

                M R S . MGBRIAN:                               Yes,
                THE CORONER:                                W a s td*A":: ■ ;                                                          d . . . d
                 Mas. MCBRIAN i                              No .

     THE                  CO     R O N E R         j        I arn            h •, i            = d       •
because I                   k    now i           t is verv . . - •                         ; ■ ' r -
this meet                 in    g and                a n y w a y I - - . . d . • ■ ; ■ ■ ■ ■ . -■••••■■ ■ = ■*
and be fa                 ir        to t          h e o t h e . - i - i . . - d . I. ,
        What I was go                                i n g t S,:.Y                                                                                                              • - , -t • ™
o n t h e procedural                                   a spec,      dd                                                 .                       '              '
not talking about                                      l e g a l o - r- t                                                                  •            •■ " :                            r-
procedure a s f a r a                                 s I am ad;~
 succeeded*

to           hav
           e ' ' t f f f t ’d i a y . ' ’ t r & n s c r                                                                            :                          ■"r       •           • ■


sh          ould
              be available firs                                         t                                              :• v            1

tw          o th
            i n g s a b o u t it.                       I     ' 1 •                                                                            :"■■■■ .
ne          ed t
           o know this ciinuta                                                                                         -       :       '       :                    '           '

as          soon as you possid 1
             as                                                             ......................... *            :                                                .


an          tici
           p a t e w a n t i n g t r a r‘! ^ • v - ' p r
we            going to procure :
             are                                                   -                                                                                    : ■' -
te          rms
            how many vs went,                             :    ■;
 jo lly e x p e n s i v e e x e r r d * ■ '                 • ;: ; =                                                                                      ■ :
know, y o u g e t a b i l l d - - ,
 that is how it is so you                                                    >          V /          ,,


a s k i n g you t o w a s t e y o i . -                                                                                ’




                   If you           k     n   o w voi                 "i                  •                    ”,V
  t    h    en obvious            l     y         tell
 y    o     u don.*t w a           n     t        a da;                 : ;• .                                     ;;
o     c     casion whe             r     e       y o u r.        ■ v                   •                       -
  i    n     dicate tha            t           t o rae           ;
  o     b    l i g e ,    Ho       w     e    ver,
   ?K? r t 0 f ill? U Stty wh®re °n vary                                                                     ......                                     w, ;                    *

   T                l C - - n Up* transcript*                                  " •. _ r .                                     .           s
    x           c a n on c r u s , x w a n t y o u t o                U     :. .   .:                                             v ,_, o .                             ;
    i n t e n d i n g ^ to hav e^ t h e m av^ai                                 , ■ ■• •
                                                           y°U
   thit cic.^rr                                                                                                                                                                 :.

             M R , MANNING;           Sir, •
  a t r a n s c r i p t t h u j r e I s a *c                                               :
   t h a t i s s p l i t b e t w e e n thr,                                          :                       :
  i n d i v i d u a l copy.                                                                                      .




                  THE CORONER i  What
  it.             We will write to you.
            M R . MANNING:           Sir* i
 c o p y , i t m a y b e t h a t a l l •*                        : ■                                ..           .                    :           ...

 p h o t o c o p y i n g c h a r g e -vnicr, .
  palatable.
          # T H E CORONER:      B u t «y
 y o u know w h o h a v e h a d t r - v
 p r o c e e d i n g s bec ause it is
 Docum ents R e g u l a t i o n s V t Z Y
 when you get hone.
              S o m e b o d y a s k e d r? l ■                    ^:      :                      : ^                                    ‘                                   : -v,'e
   i n q u e s t s w i l l take. We,                             -- > U ■■■                    .■.. .                                 :.
                                                                                                                                       :
  r a i n a , b u t w e a r e p lan ai .
   intend to rise                                                                                                                                       v                           :
 not think we will have !
 we a r e g o i n g t o f i n i s h %                                      :■   '■

                                                                                -
                                                                                         • •

                                                                                                ••                   ..
                                                                                                                          .                        .

                                                                                                                                                                            •
 another day or two3 but
   t h e n p r o b a b l y r e s u m e ar,
 u n t i l w& f i n i s h *                  do,* i        ,•
                                                                  .   ••        . . . . . . .                        •

 because i f w e h a v e i l l , a :                                                                     .
w e m a y have t o a d j o u r n ,
 out I can't, of course,
fall ill*                   H o p e f u l l y , 1c                                                                                            •         •       •               ;
unpredictable,~                        Second!                    ■■■■-■                       - -                        ■               .
you ladies arc
examination or,                                 s                          ;
                                                                                               ■■        ■


                                                                                                                                                                                ••
t h e d a r k t o a c f i r t a i ►- .
           I as going to t r y „
w i t n e s s e s s o t h a t p e o , : d : >■                                                                                                          .   ,       .



com ing a t t h e s a a t t l x , * :                            •     :             ^                                                                                          ,, n
little              b it.                                                                                                                                                               '



              I     c a n n o t           tel 1
h a v e       e   i t h   e   r ,     b u t     I     •'

w e r e   called                    a t    L o r d
                                                                  C                                                               .                                     i
t h i n k .               I t       w o u l d       tv;
                                                                                                                                  ■                                     in*!:
            d o e s n ’t m e a n to s a y the y krill a
             there will be quite a few vitne
                                          Any c                      om         m    e     n
                                                                                        ts on length?
           o         n          e       can sa                      y,                i    s
                                                                                           t h e r e ? ”~ j ^
            t         h         a     t it is                          d        i    f     f
                                                                                        icult for alb
          g         o          i      ng to h                       e           v    e  y  r
          c         a          n        do abo                      ut                it,         I bav-,-
           i        t                 and I c                        a n            ’ t s e e a n y y . - . v . - ;■
            t         a          c     kling i                      t.
                 P e r h a p s I should j : - : . -
        timing. On the 28th of                       •
       Cha mber because there is ;
       agree not to be there*                    : *.■
       6 t h D e c e m b e r w e w i l l n o t . >-r
       t h e 9 t h o f J a n u a r y i s ant* : •
      d e f i n i t e l y n o t b e a b l e tj •
      i n t e n t i o n i s t o s t a r t on *■
      nearer the -time we will                         ■
                                              I     am co                  n        si         d e r i n g , 3> : - , .

      o         n                      th     is     yet,                             th        a t o t T t h e !h : -•
     p          r          o          vi      de   d we                     c        an            a r r a n 2f > •
     s          i         t          e        vi   sit f                   o        r          a l i t t l e > :.r.. '
     s          u          r          ro      un   dings                             an        d every 1
     y          o         u             c     ou   ld ch                   e        ck            w i t h vc-e.' ■
     w          i          l          li      ng      to a                 l        lo          w us to
          MR. G A T C H P O L E 1     r , . .
 a l l o w i t a t y o u r conve-r-;.      -
                                        _    THE CORONER:                                               rh .n             ,

w          a         s           ti          n    g the              tim                       e and      ii          :
 s         e         e              t         h   e gro             und                        again     .; n r /      •
 t          h        i           ng         s      hare              cha                       nged a         hi      t -
d          i         s           ap         p     eared              and                        so- c    r ;           *
      ME. CATGHPOLE; Ce>h                                                                                                     ; •
ground is available at                                                                                                        :
     TOE CORONER:     7h<>. r-f *
very muc h indeed, w«       : ;
bit nea rer the time.
                                   I ha               v    e           dealt witv                              : :• ~ :
do                              the vi               s    i    t     , a n d I a-i;                              ■
6th                              of De               c    e    m     b e r , it i s                            -         - ••
we*                             defini               t    e     l     y will n^t                                - :• • •
wil                            l be a                n    o     t     her           ,                           . - . -
hop                            e not.
     I D o i n t e n d t;> : -.lb ■
have not yet f?r                 ■ ■
         r e a l l y t e l l y o u mote, t h a n t h e
         experts to deal with special”'
          that even the experts, their
         r e s t r i c t e d t o w h a t i s ' r e leva.:
       y o u a l l a p p r e c i a t e t h a t a?. >v..
       k n o w t h e c i v i l m a t t e r h a s S : -'
         lucky.            V e r y o f t e n w h a t >-r .
       a m m u n i t i o n f o r t h e c i v i l h ; i.,;
         ( . h a t i s g o i n g t o b e n e c ^ ’. v.
        t a k e i n t o a c c o u n t t h a t w.»
       such.
                          Li   sting. 1       think I h r ^
   exte            n    t.          It is       going to :
   to m             i    n i   mise inc     o n v e n i e n . : ::
   we c             a   n,       but I a     m afralh              :
   be p             r    ep    ared to       be shiftah              •
   bec a            u    se      it is s    o hard m
   Pers            o    n      is going         t o b e ?i-. *
   froia                 ex    perience        a s w e ■;-•> . '
             As I h a v e a l r e a d y       5 * [■                 .
   p     r     e
        ss will be there, he .
   Q     o    t
           h e r e t o d a y b e c s t i 5i ? -
  m     e     e
        ting for them to os                        •'
  g     o    i
       ng to report it anh
  b     e     c
        a u s e w h a t 1 an y&r-/
 c     o     m
       es together again I -                          h
  x    s
       n o t I.          it is cerr. * „ ■
 up t h e r e , i t i s t h e : i u r v          ,
 r s c t s a n d X w a n t s s t «sc -
 happens *
           That is about it,
 s t a r t a g a i n w i t h y o u , h . Jc .
 in case thece is s w e t h s r , .
          I’f R - i \ . 1 l \ G ; 1 nav& n<- ■
 h a p p y t o k n o w w e a r e soi.-. , •
 legal points.
              THE CORONER I             hr
    f o r gotte n it, the ora,::
. w i l l b e a s k i n g q u e & t : ;;
   off in an ■
   s p e a k i n g , i t ‘i s n ’ t ' a
   represents a p a r t i c u U
  E v e r y b o d y e l s e asks: in
  p r e f e r } I think it w?* ,
  that you agreed aso
  to bat.            I am quit*- - :
 N o o n l y as
 w i l l p r o b a b l y h a v s . ,:. : : : •
 t h e n I s t a r t a g a i n - , u •. ,
 to            dra
       w the line                                s o m e w h e r e I v s ; (r
 th          ey h
       a v e n ft bea                         n
 an         d so
       mething ha                            s occurred.                j , h
 oc          curs
         to y o u „ w                         i t n l n rsa..*,o-'* ;
 reasonable t o ' b e                           asked,
      MS. KINGI                 I have
           ■ T H E CORONER;          Anyi
              Now if we turn to
  s o u n d s t o m e a s i f trier,
  submissions which have :
   t h e 1 9 t h f b u t t h e n w e jU
  i s a g r e e a b l e t o y o u th<?r
 d e c i d e , t o commence t h « '
  16t h, a n d I t h i n k w e vj ,
 That w i l l b e a f o r m a l >
 w i l l commence o n t h e * c i .
 p r e s e n t , s i m p l y a n d s o <*
deal with those*                   I c..~t
about them over the
s t a r t w i t h t h e j u r y ■ v?
convenient?                            Mr. fssu:r;,..

                        ME,      ISAACSi        1 <         "
si     r    ,           but     p e r h a p s 1 si.-*
fr      i    e    n    ds w    h o , like n » v i c :
co     m     m    i    tmen    ts have be»r                 ~

st     a    r    t       on     th e 1 9 t i n      r
ma     k    i    n     g su    ch submission-
li      s    t    e    ning        to the s u o o
th     e           f    irst      morning,
th    e            l   oss     o f a j u r y o.~ >
ar    e          g     oing       t o l a s t so.-.
no t             g     oing       to make
                       THE C O R O N E R !
that?
       _               MR. RUSSELL:                     .


i.piend ficis jast $wiic                                                 , ..
those of us who na^R                                        .
accommodate the st-:-                                         . . . . . .
         THfc, C o f t U N E h :
 ttiat y o u h a v e booker; •' •
i s g o x n g t o raaica 1 . > „ • ,
saying?
      MR. kU S S                            :0                  ..............   '

che cking with                         yjc -■ - •
                  THE CORONER;            A H
        ° n t h e 1 9 t h i n t h e is
        r e - a r r a n g e the 'jury so               :'
         the 19th,            B e f o r e 1 s a y t*v.
        f o r you.          How l o
        going to take?                A^ver--/■
              an indication?
                MR. KINGi                                                      I voun, : ; .
        I n t h e m orning,
                              MS.             ISAACSs                                   I ft—
                  T H E CORONER:    Ot ;
          to come.*,        i will thir::
        w h a t e l s e w e need t o d o  V
         l e g a l subm issions.
               MR                   . C A T C H P O L E :
         possibl                     e for the list
        o n th e                      f i r s t or saco<^
         be sent                        t h r o u g h t o tn~:
                          THE CORONER:                                                       «>
                           M R *             R I N G ;                     S       i r

    d i d                s a y           y o u          w o u l d              c -::..,
                                                                                                  :v
    circulating the vttr,-,-: .

                          THE CORONER;                                                           : ^             .
    so m e th in g w hich I w i n .
    t n e n I  w i l l .  I f net. . •
    you can have another ,......
    you h a v e s a i d .

                          Perhaps I coi.ir                                                        .
    • - u a i d            nexp
    * . u ^               ~   k me.    t---:-
                                                    ^   «                      .    .    .   .

    ^                c    i r c     u     l a    t i o        n      o :                                    ..       .   . .

 aireaay toia you it
c o n s i d e r i n g                                   q u i t e



Q u              w h a t             i        r e a d             b e e . ; , :

p o s s i b l e                           t h a t             w h a n                                                                      .
i       _   f.   i   _
L e u                s        i m   a g i n e                  t h a t              ;            - ..                          ;   .   .

witnesses on my H - - . .
d i s c o v e r                           t i i e           e v x - i

 reall                    y no               need                 to h&--
 disad                    vanta              ges              or y
means                      i na              ve t             o           .
Wiixch                     you               Have               s e c .
I Ixk                    e bec               ause                i .
^ TQJ ° W ,1 W0lll°                                                                                                            •
S O !n e o o Q y                         s                                                   *          ■
         neither „


         names upwards.

                           M R .        K l N G s                 S       i r ,                    ry

        if I may say so one k                                                                           y
       c a «_all apply ou
      w e          d ow n' t h e
                     l o o k                                      l i s           t           \             •
      c o u l d i n < i ' i r?<‘ „
     entirely sensible*

                          THE CORONER*                                            n „ ,, .
     comment?                                 No.              Well,
     tor ma because I was',
     e x p e r i e n c e ,                      that             a n y t y                        ..

     I       w o u ld               n o t      w ant              th a t


          MR. CATCHPOLE:                                                                  -
     advantages that we r
     l i s       t        i s       t h a t         t h e r e             l"\
  seen a lot of the wit • •
 have had that bent/i-. v                                                                                       ■
 s u g g e s t i o n obvious,.:
 somebody else you r-                                                                 ;

 things progress we

                       THE CORONER:
 points of Hr. King,
 I        w an te d                  you.                          i
 c r e a t e                    a    p r o b l e c i            b y .

 to, speak,                             a n d X c.
 w       i l l        c    e    r t a   i n   l y           v*.--,-
made*


    .?F»* Mc!ria‘'• ;•
1 1 4,11 De
•?ay on toese proce,,-. .• •■

1Q*.'.    H l b k iAy i
!*tn ror y°'u                                   * .-0

is to De. hearc,                                             ar-i             .                             •

                     THE CORONER:
almost                 tert.,,, y                                ~v;;•:
on                                                      zr-,
in the nornicy*, WV ... • : •
afternoon 1"                                            i             :   •

jury and. arivlh ;'y-\     •.
jury and t h e n       :
the 20th.      Ty
                                                                              ••
 after-
 do       SO!

         I            I            b
 w h e n the. e a a a a a a - - w- ] 1 •
      THE CORbbba :                                                  "a -•
 been told.
              M    l    .               bi.a, : -
the         qu     e     stion,           I taa-.-
tha       t i      t        w o u l d carb.v       .
mad       e a      s         to tba aabtt -
tha       t t       h    at                                   » i.           .




      T HE CORONES:
mis under stand yoa.
          That is                           corrfic."
said and so                               1 aaalb -
b e t w e e n now                         ana rb~..
submissions                              o a f b < • *.
                              vhar               is
have done,                      a         a as        *   . . . .
lika that,                           tv                   .
t o d a y ..
           MRS » Hyyabya:
w i t n e s s e s aaaab: ;
       T HE                  CbKaa!b':
about inq                    uest- - '
probably                     e l . a y u . , :t :
be quite                      a bit           “
        i f i                    w a - a a i:
po'iat, if                        I a.,--
                  vaai:
a r   a    < t r        y jy g f




          b b , . b a b ' : •.
E o s t a i ‘3 t a * ; ,
of. u s e      a a *a b
                                             v\
just         ia a t-               ‘ -
    ® s I s m M^ “„ S n Ei r o ^ 2 6 ? H ^ ™ A^ r                                                         10 DISCUSS TBE                           ™o™»u.

    ttou££*i? ' t i l l Z " h e? «0,mer today- Mr Jones =“<• I have been discussing it, and we
    people with whom I .        p    lf ue had an informal discussion between ourselves as the
    have
    nave interests
         interests, butbut who
                            who ^'::hSPOn?ed
                                 at this stage,“ haven’
                                                  °PP°Sed t0 had
                                                       t yet °thet fl™ s °f
                                                                 occasion tosolicitors
                                                                             write in athat ma^
                                                                                        substantial



  » « i » i lc” i l ™ « e ^ i h S S ha ™ or„orconcemUoftmine“ in ““ “                                                             y°"          “     f°r


3      - f
( l e c a u s e one w o u l d ^ ^ a l ^ h o i r i 8^ 10?                                i n i t i a t e d * 1 c h a n g e d m y m i n d about that
'depending on that ^                 2    .      *    “ “                         after t h * DP P haS m a d e a d e c i s i o n ’ and * * «


 a ^ c t ^ f ^ t ^ ^ t t ^ t                   c o^ l d S! y T                1 She -    r   St00d th. d i f f i c u l t y w i t h the criminal
 w e r e and the m e d i c a l e v idence  *i r e f l e c t e d o ^ t ^ f            r e g a r d to w h e r e the deceased
 this m i g h t be a w a y for w a r d so that 1                 !                 W r ° te t0 t h ® DPP and thou8ht that
 w i t h fairly tight        ules      t w ^                       ^     3 r e s u m e d Inquest on a limited basis
 oresent it       nS i        ,e s .as to wh a t k l nd of e v i d e n c e w e w o u l d h e a r an d h o w w e w o u l d

Song way down the road        ^   ^    I™ ^     ^    a^   S      Want but “ ^      U a
died J i where he died'anf^ ™ uTd f * ?,alln« »ith *•           the deceased was, when he
why. That of course coSd I S        ‘        ?ot,be deaUng wlth the -lotion of how or
me not to. Certainly? yo^oo^ atit                  I      ? ’ DPP haS               asked
against their interests ass^ino^h!        T"        bereaved*s point of view it would be
prosecution and                                             ”h° ”iSh     ^
in your interests but certainly the hproavoH         “              remarks,soit may not be
an extent that any c r i m i n a l o r o s e m M n                                                u°  W a n t m e t0 m U d d y the W a t e r to such
                 y     lminal prosecution,                                        a s s u m in g that there w as one, fell to the ground.




oil, r e s u m p t i o n   because       that-       wi n    h            a         u        come    to   the    question   of   what   will   happen
n j § * l f c l e a r”                                            e p e n d °n the D P P to a c e r t a l n                       na ve I made



being'Su   «SsaykwStJer"i^oSdnL°f TJ*T °fnot ‘he
for Mr Justice Stain at which whaf i U U
                                                                                                                 ? P°UCe' 1“*0ne day awa>’fr0”
                                                                                                                 we have a hearing tomorrow
proceedings should continue S r t S t S r ^ f i ^ 1’                                                                    Pr6Sent ClVU
proceedings           started    when         a ii     m a 4-+.               •         hould       cease   to   be   restarted    or   new

the c o n cl u s i o n t o m o r r o w is that t h e ^ r e s e n t ^ 118 t h ® . I n q u ® sts ha v e b e e n completed.   N o w if
h e a r d in O c t o b e r or later       then I can               P r o c e e d i n g s ha ve to go ahead, w h e t h e r they be

inquests c o u l d proceed, t h a t ^                             £   %       £   ^ ^\ \ 8hS d e " t r U l ? f b :hee X t r e m e l J-helpf Ul if
discontinued, th e n it reallv                                                v    • 7 1 .a e £ e n d e n t s • If the p r o ceedings are

except with any information the sooner we haveV^the'bette'^ P°int °f Vi<”' °£ SY P°Uce

in their minds, is how^id^y^usbamror^o*1                                                     i                   °ne °f the             questions is
- u t him? 1 think



             INIAAF
/
                                                         -   2   -



n o n - a d v e r s e r i a l way, w o u l d be w a r m l y w e l c o m e d by them.       The p r o c e e d i n g s of w h i c h M r
stcalf speaks, d o n ’t d i r e c t l y involve the b e r e a ve d bec a u se they are, c o r r e c t m e if I                          m
rong, i t ’s the c o n t r i b u t i o n p r o c e e d i n g s b e t w e e n the v a r i o u s defendants, the insurers                 of
f Poli c e have agre e d that sub j e ct to proof, they w i l l deal w i t h all the civil claims                                       and
lere are issues a r i s i n g f r o m that.               Ce r t a i n l y in terms of the bereaved, those
roceedings are not a factor and I a m sure they w o u l d all w e l c o m e as m u c h info r m a t i o n                               as
3   p o s s i b l e to get.

r M e t c a l f - I think t h e r e ’s a further p oint w h i c h a g a i n I d o n ’t suppose affects us
i r e c t l y , w h i c h I perh a p s o u g h t to ma k e on that, n ob o d y is b e i n g k e p t w a i t i n g for
ampensations I N A UDIBLE so t h a t ’s no t a live issue, the q u e s t i o n of the amount of
o m p ensation is in issue and one of the p a r t i c u l a r aspects is s o m e t h in g k n o w n as pre
eath t e r r o r / p r e impact t e r r o r w h i c h we us e d to de s c r i b e as pa i n a nd s u f f e r in g before
eath.         If it be the case that there is e v idence of peop l e h a v i n g s u r v i v e d for a long
ime or r e c o vered c o n s c i o u s n e s s suf f i ci e n t l y to recognise w h a t state they w e r e in or
u f f e r e d pain, then the b e r e a v e d relatives are likely to be e n t i t l e d to h i g h e r
o m p e n s a t i o n on those grounds.          That m a y be a factor w h i c h is p r e v e n t i n g cases being
ettled at the moment.

r F r a s e r - C e r t a i n l y t h a t ’s a m a j o r factor but I d o n ’t t hink t h a t ’s a d v e r s e r i al in the
e n s e A b e t w e e n ourselves, t h a t ’s really a m a t t e r for fin d i n g out. information, t h a t ’s
hy y O T * v e b e e n b o m b a r d e d w i t h all these letters          from people.

M C - L o o k i n g from the b e r e a v e d p o in t of view, m y feeling is that they w o u l d w e l c o m e a
invited Inquest, p r o v i d e d that the limits are e x p l a i n e d to t h e m an that they u n d e r s t a n d
:he r e a so n for it.

Ir F r a s e r -There w i l l be one or two people w h o you w i l l be faced w i t h if y ou do proc e e d
rho find those r e s t r ictions d i f f i c u l t to accept and y ou w i l l h a v e to be as fi r m as I have
tot doubt y o u ca n be w i t h them, e v e n t h ough they have it e x p l a i n e d in advance, i t ’s an
ixtremely e m o t ional s i t u a t i o n p a r t i c u l a r l y for those w h o w e r e there w i t h p e ople w h o died,
tot perh a ps so m u c h for p e o p l e w h o are at arms length.               It m a y be seen as an o p p o r t un i t y
iot those w h o w e r e there, to get it off their chest a nd that c o u l d be a p r o b l e m I think.

1MC - W e have thought about this, it is d i f f icult a nd I al s o re c o g n i s e that it is
Impossible for m e to satisfy 95 families.         I h a v e thought a bo u t h o w w e shou l d pre s e n t the
svidence and I feel w e s h o u l d n o t ask any SY P o lice Off i c e rs to give oral e v idence at
this hearing.

4r M t ^ a l f e   - I c a n ’t think that any of them c ould give any i n f o r m a t i o n about this,                                they
;ould give general i n f o r m a t i o n about body positions a nd so on.

HMC - There are a lot w h o p a r t i c i p a t e d in the rescue and r e s u s c i t a t i o n a nd by n ot calling
them, i t ’s only fair to say that w e are h a r m i n g those that d id w e l l and t ried v e r y hard.
But w e d e c i d e d it w a s impr a c t i c a l to select.  It beco m e s v e r y m u c h h a r d e r to control all
the q u e s t i o n i n g a nd for that m a t t e r the answers.   The p r i n c i p a l w a y w e w a n t to present
the ev i de n c e is that there w i l l be be t e a m of Of f i c e r s from W M i d lands, they w i l l prepare
a summary of the evi d e n c e a nd w i l l present that summary of h o w the d e c e a s e d a r r i v e d at
the g r o u n d and the events w h i c h took p lace at Hillsborough, b a s i c a l l y statements.               As
soon as the summaries are available, they w i l l be c i r c u l a t e d to the s o l i ci t o r s of the
S t e e r i n g Committee.      If y o u felt that that w a s a c c e p t a b l e as it stands, then I w o u l d




             INIAAF
propose not to call any other evidence.    ™ e as
                                                1“^ at^  eW “ i.b% “                                     what'the “
the Officers can make them but they w o n t deal »*•                 £ th                           witneSses but you
statements contained factually and you will also k n o w the names
w o n ’t see the w i t n e s s e s    in person.

                               a«r.ac     T h e se are i n tended as aide m e m o i r e s and w e w i l l ha v e the          ^    ^    re-
W e w a n t to use anna-cappas.           These                      m a ;nr     events in this p a r t i c u l a r               persons
o f f i r e r oroduce this, it a c t u a l l y summarises        the m a j o r   events in c m         v
history.         On the o p e n i n g day, someone w i l l expl a in the       agrams.                                                 ^


M r Jones - R u n n i n g p a r a l l e l to this is the ^ 1 * ^ 1 ® ^ d® ^ e h a veC v i s u a l 0 e v idence and you



 times.                                                                      I

 ffllC - We      intend to ha v e this for every d e c e a s e d plus the summary.                                                     |j

 Mr Fraser - Plus any video or still photographs that are available as well!                                                           ||

 HMQQWe        d o n ’t want to use the videos at this stage because                                       r e s s ^ g to be
 of ttem have already seen the videos and stills       identifications have been confirmed
 presenting the summaries will be able to say that the identlficati              the


 I       f f l s           -   e                                                                                          -
  produce                                                                   »ant to see the photograph, we will
  have b l o w ups of the v i d e o still.              A n y thoughts on that?

  Mr Fraser - The only c o » e n t I have about t h e summaries is
  have a Liverpool background, but any summary is somebody s a p p r o a c n ^ ^                           P racticable to
  wonder whether in addition being given                      e                  extracted so that w he n the

   eolicito^has^ea^the^summary?                    if   ' ^ ^ t h i n g in                                            ^

" Evide n c e ^        n       ^       u    ^       "              b ^ y o u ]     hut any summary is bound to be

     subjective.

     m e - W e ’ve thought about this at considerable: L“ f i « ao f f i c e r r b e c I u Ss e1ItbL y ° “ ntain                        S.
     p A i c u l a r l y with regard to the evidence of the Police O f t i c e r s ^ ^        statemen t s . quite                      ■;*
     their statements,         there really        is   a tactical Pnsitive information.            W e have thought about
     apart from that, statements m a y c o n t ai n D P P sensiti                          scor i n g    out     all the bits
     g o i n g through the statements, w h i c h w o u l d be a                                                doing.  That




     possiblility.
                                                          -                                   1 ”°uld considet 11 as a

     It may be when I read through the files                      there   may be some - ^ • f ^ i i c T S H i S i l
     £     «       S ^ 5             ^ r : : f X t 1 ^ “ ^t“                  :he“          » d I would say that.




                INIAAF
 M r F r aser - T h e r e w i l l be some families w h o w a n t their, someone said, their 15 minu t e s of
 fame.      I suppose to some extent they are going to have to be given that oppo r t u n i t y
 a r e n ’t they.   I think the vast m a j o r i t y w i l l go t h r o u g h ve r y s m oothly but I think that
  there are g o i ng to be one or two w h o are g o i n g problems.

  HMC - We recognise that,          but w e wa n t the Inquests to be meaningful.

  M r Fraser - Yes,      i t ’s serving the two poin t s particularly,             gett i n g info r m a t i o n and also
  d e a l i n g w i t h o u r pro b l e m s on the civil front.

  M r Jones - The summary is not only one of m y Police O f f i c e r s ’s summary but                    that is
  reviewed by me and m y people, i t ’s a c t u a l l y going to go to D r P o p p e r so he              gets actually
  > he full file w i t h all the statements and i n c l u d i n g m a t t e r s w h i c h c o u l d be    c o n s i d e r ed
^prejudicial.    He c an a c t u a l l y read those m a tt e r s w h i c h relate to the d e a t h        and look at
   that in terms of h o w it c o mpares w i t h the summary.           The summaries come out             fr o m the
  C o r o n e r as o p p o s e d to come out from me.

  tfc^Fraser - No disre s p e c t to W M i d l a n d s ’ Officers, I think that if that point is made,
  a W clearly made, I think some of the "oh i t ’s a n o t h e r p o l i c e m a n a n d anot h e r p o l i c e m a n ’s
  statement" sort of comment, then if a statement comes from y o u r office, i t ’s g oing to be
  m u c h easier to swallow.

   HMC - W o u l d y o u wan t to see the summaries M r Kennedy?              I w o u l d p r e f e r not to send the
   summaries to dozens of parties.

   M r Fraser - One of the p o ints at issue is that at the m o m e n t a b r o a d swipe h as be e n taken
   at this p r e - d e a t h paym e n t and suffering, those summaries are almost b o u n d to contain
   information w h i c h       w i l l bene fi t us and I c e r t a i n l y w o u l d have no o b j e c t i o n to the o terh
   side seeing them,           I d o n ’t k n o w w h e t h e r they w o u l d w a n t to.

   M r M e t c a l f - I think the d i st i n c t i o n that can be d r a w n b e t w e e n us and the other
   defendents is that w e are d o i n g the p a y i n g out, so w e hav e a l egitimate interest.

   H MC - I ’m q uite h a p p y is you say it w o u l d be h e l p f u l to see the m b e fore w e begin.

   M r Jones - T h e r e ’s n o problem.       The first t hing w as       to clear w i t h M r Fras e r in terms of
   ^^t    side of things.

   M r Fraser - W e have to w o r k together, if the doc u m e n t b ec a m e a v a i l ab l e and the p l a intiff
   relied upon it, I w o u l d have to d i sclose it any way, so y o u m i g h t as w e l l see it at the
   be g i n n i n g rather than. It w i l l be a m a t t e r of p u blic r e cord after the h e a r i n g because ti
   w i l l be part of the deposition.

   M r Metc a l f - R e t u r n i n g to the b e g i n n i n g of this, there is I think a line to be d r a w n in
   m a k i n g clear w h a t these p r e l i m i n a r y h e a r i n g s are in tended to deal w i t h b e tw e e n saying,
   w e l l look w e ’re d o i n g this to prev e n t any p o s s i b l e risk of prosecution, but n ot actually
    giving the idea that a p r o s e c u t i o n is ce r t a i n l y g o i n g to follow.

   M r Fraser - That has o c c u r r e d to me and w i l l o c c u r to others.

    HMC - W e thought about d o i n g this a w h i l e ago but I t u rned it d o w n bec au s e I thought that




               INIAAF
                                                      - 5   -


  if I h e l d a lim i t e d Inquest as this stage, e v e r y b o d y w o u l d assume that I k n e w w h a t the
  D P P was g o i n g to do.         The reason w h y I feel w e can do it n o w is beca u s e of Mi ss S t e e l ’s
  letter.       She r e q u e s t e d the information, w h a t w e are d o i n g is trying to c o mply w i t h h er
  wish.     It w o u l d be m a d e clear, if n e c e s s a r y 95 times, that u n d e r no c i r c u m s t a nc e s can it
  be co n s t r u e d as a preliminary.        Do w e say that beca u s e s o mebody w o n ’t bel i ev e it, we
  d o n ’t do a n y t h i n g at all?

  Mr Fraser           - t h a t ’s right, there w i l l be one or two hot h e a d s w h o w i l l look for the
  u l t e r i o r m o t i v e b e h i n d this. The va s t m a j o r i t y w i l l accept it in the spirit w h i c h i t ’s
  done.     The press w i l l do the same.

    H M C - I a m quite sa t is f i e d in m y own m i n d that w e are n o t d o i n g it for that reason.
 - J h e r e are three scenarios w h i c h are w o r t h mentioning.             One, that the DP P decies to
t ^ p r o s e c u t e s omebody or several peop l e for manslau g h t e r .       If that w e r e to happen, then
    Section 16 of the C o r o n e r ’s A ct w o u l d apply and I w o u l d a d j o u rn the Inquests on
    provi s i o n s of that Section.         W h e t h e r I resume or not, I w i l l decide at the en d of the
    prosecutioh, but it is m y n o r m a l pra c t ic e not to resume w h e n pros e c u t i o n s for murder,
    j g n s l a u g h t e r or ........... take place.        Secondly, that he decides not to p r o s e c u t e for
    ® k s laughter or a charge that falls w i t h i n that Section.                  In that case, I w i l l have to
    decide on a r e s u mp t i o n then I w i l l m a k e up m y m i n d h o w m u c h further e v idence I w i l l ne e d
    to call.            Thirdly, he decides n ot to p r o se c u t e but that s o mebody brings a private
    prosecution.             Again, I ’m not s a ying it w i l l h a p p e n but it is a possibility, M r H y tn e r I
   think h i n t e d at that possibility.

   M r M e t c a l f - I w o u l d take h is remarks ve r y carefully, he at no stage gave the idea that
   he or his colleague, King, thought that there w as a n y t h i n g in w h i c h they w e r e p u t t i n g
   forward.         W h a t they w e r e saying was, "some of my clients believe".   He w a s v e r y careful
   in his wording.

   HMC - I w a s n ’t s u g g e s t i n g that he thought that one shou ld be brought, I w as just saying
   that he recogn i s e d that there w e r e some people w h o m i g h t w i s h to do so. A s s u m i n g that
   someone b r o u g h t a priv a t e prosection, then y o u ’re back in the Sect i o n 16 situation.

  Those are the three scenarios.                  If the D PP w e r e to prosecute, then if I h a d n ’t done the
   resumptions at this stage, I w o u l d h a v e h a d to resume on a limited b a s i s to at least take
   the m e d i c a l evidence.    B e a r i n g m i n d ev e n if the D P P does prosecute, he m a y no t actually
  jacosecute 95, he m a y select.              It m i g h t be that it w o u l d be u n f a i r n ot to at least take
          sort of ev i d en c e we ha v e b e e n t a l k i n g about for the other x n u m b e r w h o a r e n ’t
  m e n t i o n e d on the charge sheet, but itw o u l d be cove r e d u n d e r Section 16.                So I m i g h t be
   faced w i t h h a v i n g to do all this anyway after             the D P P has decided.         A s s u m i n g that w e do
   it now, that w o r k w i l l ha v e b e e n done if the DPP decides to prosecute, I w i l l resume the
   Inquests for the pur p os e s of a d j o u r n i n g under Sec t i o n 16 and then I w i l l m a k e up m y m i n d
   w h e n it is over.

   M r F r aser - I t ’s g o i n g to take a lot          of heat out of the situation.  There is a n e e d to
   know, I think so far as i t ’s pos s i b le            to give that information, I think i t ’s an excellent
   idea.

   M r Jones - Humanely, if y ou look at it in terms of not d o i n g a n y t h i n g at this stage, it
   c ould be quite a while, and the ps y ch o l o g i s t s tell us that the g r i e v i n g proc e ss needs
   this in o r d e r to w o r k through. The v a s t m a j o r i t y of families w a n t to settle d o w n and




              INIAAF
start r e b u il d i n g their lives but they c a n ’t do it.

HMC - I d o n ’t k n o w w h a t the DP P     is going to do any m o r e th a n y o u do.         When I mention        it,
t h a t ’s got to be put as part of           the scenario.

M r Jones - To h e l p y o u on that, if this goes ah e a d at the time w e are talk i n g about,                       the
final s u b m is s i o n to the DPP w o n ’t have b e e n ma d e w h i l s t this is g o i n g on.

M r Fraser - W h a t    sort of dates are w e talki n g about?

 HMC - Wh a t w e w a n t to do as soon as y o u are happy, w e w a n t to h a v e the p r e - i nquests w i t h
 y ou next w e e k because w e w a n t to give e v e r y b o d y a chance to h e a r and k n o w w h a t ’s going
,.pn, and resume the Inquests on the 18th April, and start a c t u a l l y t a k i n g evidence on
((individual cases on the 19th.                 W h e n we first set it, it w a s said, h o w can y ou do it
 a r o u n d the anniversary.           I t ’s c e r t a i n l y a point. The p e o p l e w i l l o b v i o u sl y very
 e m o t i o n a l l y inv o l v ed on the 15th anyway, and it m a y p o s s i b l y be b e t t e r to take t h e m while
 they are a l r e a d y upset, quite naturally, instead of lett i n g t h e m go d o w n a nd then lift



 M r Fraser - H o w long do y o u a nticipate this is g o i n g to                take?

 HMC - I ’d be i n t e r e s t ed to h e a r w h a t y o u think?

 M r M e t c a l f - A w e e k or two w e e k s came into m i n d straightaway.

 HMC - I think the m i n i m u m is two weeks.  Wh at w e w a n t to do is eight a day if w e can and
 that w o u l d take us 12 days.    The first day w e d o n ’t w a n t to take eight.

 M r Fraser - T i m e t a b l i n g is a problem. E ight a day is e ight families in and out,                      it can
 be done if the Social S e rvices support a nd e v e r y b od y gets t h e i r act together.

  M r Jones - Wh a t I i n t e n d e d to do w i t h Summary Officers,            that e a c h one w o u l d only have one
j f e r day, so h e ’d a c t u a l l y c h a p e r o n e t h e m in and out, so   they w o u l d n ’t have this idea  of a
  sausage machine.

 M r F r aser - I k n o w that the Social Services             in S h e f f i e l d are k e e n to he l p if t h a t ’s a
  j^sibility.
  HM C - The Zeebrugge D i s a s t e r m a n a g e d 18 a day but I think t heir p r o b l e m was different.
  A l t h o u g h they dealt w i t h w h e r e the p e ople w e r e found, it w a s b e a r i n g in m i n d that the
  ship w a s n ’t lifted u n t i l six w e e k s or w h a t e v e r a f t e r the incident.      Nobo d y k n e w w h e r e the
  peop l e h a d b e e n beca u s e the w a t e r h ad gone into the bow.          W e ha v e the p r o b l e m of trying
  to find 95 p e ople in thousands, out of thousands of p h o t o g r a p hs . So it w i l l p r o b a b l y take
  a bit longer to pre s e n t the evidence.              I d o n ’t w a n t this rushed, I w a n t ea c h family to
  feel that they have be e n t r e a t e d w i t h courtesy, i t ’s b e e n dignified.

  M r M e t c a l f - I c a n ’t see us and the others really h a v i n g a ny q u e s t i o n s      to raise,     I c a n ’t
  see us b e i n g m o r e than p r e s e n t h e a r i n g the evidence.

  M r Fraser - W o u l d yo u a t t a c h to the summary the P M report or w o u l d y o u include it in it?




              INIAAF
  H MC - The P H report w o u l d be separate.             I m i g h t c a l l the P a t h o l o g i s t to e v e r y Inquest and
  I ’d value y o u r comments.

  M r Jones  - I t ’s a q u e s t i o n w h a t the family w a n t to some extent.          I k n o w there are one or
  two PM reports w h i c h talk of fractures and w h a t the family w a n t to k n o w is w h e t h e r that
  fracture c a u s e d any distress.          In the m a j o r i t y of cases, they are v e r y sympathetic
  reports.   I c a n ’t see v e r y m a n y families w a n t i n g to put q u e s t i o n s to the Pathologist.
  One or two certainly.

   H MC - There are one or two w h e r e there w e r e queries.              I w a n t the families to be able to
   h e a r w h a t w as what, i t ’s b e t t e r if i t ’s dealt w i t h in Court.       W h a t I h a d in mind, and I
   h a v e n ’t yet spoken to Prof Usher, is on the o p e n i n g day, to take e v idence fro m Dr Forrest
   w h o did the alcohols, o t h e rwise h e ’s got to sit h e r e for 12 days, a bout h a l f d i d n ’t have
*|jp[ny alcohol at all, a n o t he r large b a t c h only h a d r e l a t i v e l y low levels, there m a y be a
   few w h e r e the alco h o l level is a bit high.           I thought that w e c o u l d call Prof U s h e r or
   some o ther s uitable Pathologist, so that he c o ul d give us a gen e ra l d i s s e r t a t i o n on
   traumatic asp h y x i a death.        The families w o u l d n ’t h a v e h e a r d it but the solicitors would.
         m ay be that if w e do that, w e c o ul d then take as d o c u m e n t a r y at least a p r o p o r t i o n of

  *     i      PMs.    But if y o u say this family w o n ’t be h a p p y u n less they h e a r from the
   Pathologist, then I w i l l c o n s i d e r that.

  The Jury, i n i t ially I w a s going to do w i t h o u t but I ha v e c h an g e d m y mind.               There w i l l be
  a Jury ev e n at this p r e l i m i n a r y stage, though the Ju r y w i l l ha v e n o t h i n g to do because
  there w i l l be no v e r d i c t as such at this stage.                 B e a r i n g in m i n d that one of the
  scenarios is that a p r o s e c u t i o n m a y take place and that I m a y a d j o u r n u nd e r Sect i o n 16,
  and at the en d of the day, m a y n ot resume, if w e do this w i t h o u t a J u r y then none of its
  b e e n h e a r d w i t h a J u r y and I think t e c h n i c a l l y i t ’s b e t t e r if the Inquests w e r e h e a r d
  w i t h a Jury.

  Mr Metcalf -        I c a n ’t fault y o ur logic but it w o u l d be n i c e for th e m if there wa s                aw ay
  round it but        I c a n ’t think of any.

^f^MC - In i t i a l l y I w a s g oing to do without, but a s s u m i n g I did resume in six m o n t h s time,
  w e ’d have to repeat a fair bit of it anyway, even if I c an get the same Ju r y ro w e ’d have
  to start w i t h a n e w one, a nd do the w h o l e job again.         I felt it w o u l d be u n w i s e to
  p r o c e e d w i t h o u t th e m from a legal po i n t of view.

  ^ r M e t c a l f - I t ’s case w h e r e y o u w o u l d a u t o m a t i c a l l y h a v e h ad a Jury h ad their b e e n no
   p o ssible elem e n t of prosecution.

   H MC - T h a t ’s the problem. The A c t says that if, a C o r o n e r shall p r o c e e d ........... I
   think its wiser.         The Jury is g o i n g to cause a bit of a p r o b l e m b e c a us e I k n o w fr o m    some
   of the, at least one, a b e r e a v e d r e p r e s e n t a t i v e that they are w o r r i e d about h o w y o u can
   get an i m p ar t i a l Jury.  B e a r i n g in m i n d that this is an Inquest not a trial, I ’m not
   really w o r r i e d about selecting.

   M r Jones - F or this purpose,           as they are not going to come to a verdict,                     it d o e s n ’t
   really matter.

   HMC - We w i l l p r o b a b l y exclude a n y b o d y w h o is rela t e d to any of the deceased, I think
   that is s o m ething w h i c h w e should discuss a nd d e cide w h e t h e r w e w a n t to ha v e any criteria




              INIAAF
 for exclusions on the Jury.               We d o n ’t w a n t to p i c k a nd choo s e b ut w e d o n ’t w a n t to have
 peop l e w h o by d e f i n i t i o n are involved in some way.            I have to think about this.

 We are i nclined to h o l d it he r e and I w i l l show y ou a r o u n d the b u i l d i n g later.          As we are
 going to be d e a l in g w i t h 95 Inquests and p r o v i d e d w e can get the summo n s i n g right, we
 s h o u l d n ’t h a v e too ma n y peop l e in the b u i l d i n g at any one time.       Exce p t on Day One w h e n
 the press w i l l be here,             then I think they w i l l go away.       We w a n t to try and arrange for
 coffee and the WRVS, an d we w a n t to i n f o r m the H i l l s b o r o u g h Support Group.          I d o n ’t wa n t
 to get i n volved in the running of that side beca u s e i t ’s m o r e for H r Fraser.                   W h a t Ihave
 in mind, is w h e n w e w a r n the family of attendance, w e w o u l d at the same time w a r n the
 Support Group.            We w i l l   then expect you to co-o r d i n a t e them, the Social Services etc.

 M r M e t c a l f - Are they all        represented, all 95?

 M r Fraser - T h e r e ’s about two or three that a r e n ’t, this                     is s o m e thing that yo u r Officers
 and I can check.        R e p r e s e n t a t i o n has changed.

    1C - C an y o u let me h av e y ou upda t e d list?

  M r F r aser - Yes, I can let y o u have that by the end of the week.                                 Our d i ff i c u l t y is one
  that I have no w i s h to e m barrass m y friend about, but w e as a Ste e r i n g Committee, may not
  be here because w e have a p r o b l e m w i t h the Insurers about b e i n g here.                           O ur original, if
  I ’m treading on d i f f i c u l t territory, p l ease say so. O ur o r i g i n a l a p p r o a c h                 to your
  I nquest w as this; w e ha v e alre a d y sent out a q u e s t i o n n a i r e to all solicitors w h o
   represent the b e r e a v e d and w i t h ve r y few exceptions, they have all r e turned them saying
   they w a n t b l o c k representation.             This m e a n s y o u w o u l d have one indivi d u a l or a team of
   two or three w o r k i n g on a rota basis a p p e a r i n g b e fore you.                It h a d o r i g i n a l l y bee n our
   i ntention to m a t c h r e p r e s e n t a t i o n w i t h ou r protagonists, but in v i e w of w h a t y ou have
   said today, m y view, subject to the v i e w of m y Committee, w o u l d be, that it w o u l d be at
   s olicitor level on l y a nd p r o b a b l y m e b e c a u s e I have 22 p e r s o n a l b e r e a v e d families and as
   I     lead the t e a m for the Inquests, I w o u l d p r o b a b l y be b e f o r e you.                That w as on the basis
^ £ h a t the Insurers w o u l d fund that en bloc.                  They have d e c l i n e d o ur i n v i t a t i o n to pay for
 ^.vepresentation for the b e r e a v e d at the Inquests at all.                       Not e i t h e r en bloc or as
   solicitors or for each i ndividual family.                       So the p r e s e n t p o s i t i o n is that w e either have
   to persuade th e m to see the error of their w a y s and there is a m e e t i n g on W e d n e s d a y of
   this w e e k at w h i c h an atte m p t w i l l be made, or, w e ha v e to tell the families they cannot
        repre s e n t e d unle s s they p ay for indivi d u a l solicitors themse l v e s an d the prospect
t h e r e f o r e is that y ou h a v e a d i f ferent so l i c i to r for each bereaved, or in some cases, no
   solicitor at all.           The third p o s s i b i l i t y is that there is funding av a i l a bl e from another
   source.        I c an tell y ou that as I speak there is no o t h e r source available.                               It has been
   suggested that w e a p p r o a c h the L egal A i d Board, it is not possible.                           I t ’s b e e n suggested
   that w e a p p r o a c h the D i s a s t e r Fund, and they ha v e declined, so there are only two
  p ossibilities, e i t h e r w e can pe rs u a d e the Insurers.                   In fairness to the Insurers, their
   stance was taken b e fore this infor m a t i o n came a v a i l a b l e to us, but e i t h e r w e can persuade
   them to change their m i n d s an d agree to fund b l o c k r e p r e s e n t a t i o n or fund individual
   solicitors r e pr e s e n t i n g their clients and those s olicitors inst r u c t i n g us as agents.                           Or,
   secondly, y o u ha v e a t e a m of d i f f erent solicitors, y o u h a v e a d i f f e r e n t solicitor for
   ea c h b e r e a v e d in front of y ou w i t h m y exception.              Some h a v e blocks of three, four and
   five solicitors, but there are quite a lot w i t h one.                           The p r e s e n t situation is that you
   c ould end up w i t h up to 40 solicitors in front of y o u a nd that is a p r o b l e m for w h i c h I
   TAPE ENDS




              INIAAF
 T h a t ’s the s i t u at i o n as w e   talk at 3.30 today.

 M r M e t c a l f - I think the p a r t i c u l a r p r o b l e m is that for two reasons m y clients, a nd it
  i s n ’t just the M M I in this instance, d o n ’t w i s h to go b e y o n d that w h i c h they are legally
  liable for a nd the two reasons are, firstly, w e are p u r s u i n g the others, the Club,
 Eastwoods,         the Ci t y Council, and if we pay out for s o me t h i n g for w h i c h w e are n ot liable
  legally, then w e w o n ’t get any of it back.                    Secondly, w i t h o u t g i ving any details of cover
  involved, it has b e e n a m a t t e r of comment and it is p a r t l y correct, that if the amount to
 be pa i d out goes over a c e r t a i n limit, it w i l l be the ratep ay e r s of S Yorkshire, w h a t e v e r
  Tre a s u r y support they m a y get, w h o w i l l be p a ying out compensation.                  In those
  circumstances, n o b o d y w a n t s to take a dec i s i o n w h i c h c o u l d lead t h e m to b e i n g surcharged
  at a later date for h a v i n g w i l l f u l l y g iven away w h a t turns out later to be publ i c money.
_^They p r e s e n t quite serious obstacles, w h e t h e r there is a n y t h i n g that can be done I ’m not
    ure. There is a m e e t i n g on W e d n e s d a y w h e r e this w i l l be d i s c u s s e d again.   M r F r aser is
  q uite corr e c t in s a ying i t ’s not me that takes decisions.

JjMC - F r o m m y point of v i e w it w o u l d be b e tter if w e d i d n ’t have, w e do ha v e m a n y cases
^ l e r e p e o p l e are not r e p r e s e n t e d and there is no objection, but g iven the    e motivenes of
 this case and the limitations, legal r e p r esentation m i g h t be h e l p f u l and d e s i r a b l e for me
 an d the.        In a sense I ’m in yo ur hands, a s suming for a m o m e n t that I w e r e m a k i n g a claim,
 then I w o u l d include in m y claim, the expenses a nd that w o u l d include legal, then I w o u l d
 ha v e to argue w h e t h e r it w a s legitimate expense.

 M r M e t c a l f - The d i f f i c u l t y is that it comes back to the q u e s t i o n of civil action, the
 m o v i n g on at speed.        In g e n e r a l terms, an Inquest takes p l a c e b e f o r e a c ivil a c t i o n and
 i t ’s always legit i m a t e expe n s e to go a nd be r e p r e s e n t e d at the Inquest b e c a u se something
 m i g h t come out that w i l l be relevant to the            civil action.

 H MC - In a sense w e are d o i n g that, we              have b r o u g h t the Inqu e s t forward.

  M r M e t c a l f - Except that w e are talking about r e p r e s e n t a t i o n here, the trouble is the
 a g r e e m e n t has b e e n m a d e to pay out so t h e r e ’s n o t h i n g for t h e m to gain in that sense.

 M r F r a s e r - O u r a r g u m e n t is one of the issues that y o u are go i n g to cla r i f y is the extent
 of s u f fering b e f o r e d e a t h a nd therefore w e are he r e to get that information, and
     ere f o r e w e think that w e should be paid.          If w e get the p ap e r s in advance, w e d o n ’t

«    ve to come.        It is m y w i s h that the Steering         C o m m i t t e e is h e r e and w i l l re p r e s e n t as
 m a n y as possible, I w i l l be here in any event and it is my v i e w that as m a n y as possible
 should be done, b e c a us e a l t h o u g h like y ou I ha v e no w i s h to do it any m o r e q u i c k l y that
 is necessary, if we ha v e done the first d a y ’s w o r t h at eight, then w e s h ould be able to,
 if w e can e s t a b l i s h a pattern, w i t h o u t it being too obvious, then it w i l l be e a s i e r for
 everybody.

 M r ...... - C a n I just c l a r i f y he r e INAUDIBLE If a d e c i s i o n w a s that it w a s n ’t g oing to
 be forthcoming, the costs, w h e r e w o u l d      that leave us in terms of communication,                talking
 to whom, the families d i r e c t l y and for       them to decide as to w h e t h e r they e m ploy at their
 own cost?

 M r F r aser - No w h a t the Insurers say is that they w i l l pay the generic costs of our
 p r e p a r a t i o n for the I n quests e.g. I ’m here today as one of the C o m m i t t e e as part of the
 generic costs of that Committee.              But the m o m e n t the I nquests start, then no w e w o u l d not




             INIAAF
  be here.  U p to the 18th A p r i l                w e w o u l d be in, but once y o u sw itch       on the m i c r o p h o n e on
  the 18th, t h e n w e ’re n o t here.

  HMC - Y o u w o u l d a c c e p t c o m m u ni c a t i o n s   and presumably n o t i f y i n g y o u r clients?

  M r F r aser - Yes t h a t ’s right.

  M r ..... - Bu t it does change h o w w e got here, the q u e s t i o n of So cial Services support is
  that it i s n ’t s o m e t h i n g that w e c ould a c tually lay off to you.

    M r F r a s e r - No, I w o u l d n ’t ha v e rais e d the qu e s t i o n of m o n e y h a d that n ot b e e n an obvious
    link.       Our p r e s e n t v i e w is that if funding is granted, w e w i l l be he r e in terms of an
^ a d v o c a t e an d at least one legal runn e r w h o knows his w a y a r o u n d the papers a nd c an assist
f J | o u r Officers.

   M r M e t c a l f -I w o u l d ha v e thought w e w o u l d have b e e n looking at one r e p r e s en t a t i v e here,
  ^ ^ l i c i t o r or a c l e r k a ft e r things got going.

  HMC - L e t ’s a s s u m e the f i na ncial side got sorted out and that y o u w i l l be here. If we
  are g oing to do e i g h t a day, I reckon w e w i l l have to m o v e at a fairly b risk pace and
  w h a t I ha v e in m i n d is to w a r n the family to come at x time, deal w i t h the case, take
  th e m out of Court, b r i n g the next family in.         That w i l l m e a n that if y o u w a n t to see the
  family w h o w e h a v e just dealt with, then you have got to ha v e so m e bo d y he r e to see them
  bec a u s e w e w i l l be s t arting the n e x t Inquest.

  M r F ra s e r - or they m a y w a n t to see me, but I w o u l d have s o mebody from my office here or
  from the C o m m i t t e e to deal w i t h any problems then, similar to the Public Inquiry.       W h o do
  yo u a n t i c i p a t e w i l l be befo r e you?

    HMC - I h a v e d r a f t e d a letter           to all solicitors I a m aware of, n ot ju s t the Committee.
    There are q u i t e a lot of firms w h o w e r e represented at the Inquiry w h o ha v e not
^ c o n t a c t e d m e at a ll but I i n tend to tell them about the p r e - i n q u e s t r e v i e w so that they
u ^ j a n a t t e n d if they wish.        I suspect that not e v e rybody w i l l come and that at the Inquest,
    it w i l l be y o u r s e l f an d p o s s i b l y you.

  M r M e t c a l f - I w o u l d h a v e thought the Cl u b and C o u n c i l w o u l d ha v e someone at the
 ^tquests.

  M r F ra s e r - I think to some extent that the pu b l i c i ty that comes f r o m your office about
  w h a t the I n q u e s t is for ma y reduce the numbers. If it is k n o w n that it is n o n liability,
  n o n adverserial.

   HMC - I t hink they w i l l be he r e the first two or three days,                          then they m a y decide t h e r e ’s
   no t much.

   M r Jones - C a n I just a dd that there w i l l be transcripts as well.

   H MC - We are w i r e d for sound and w e u s u a l l y t ranscribe fr o m tapes, b ut at the m o m e n t that
   even if w e h a v e it here, I w i l l get prefer a b l y the same f i r m that d id the Inquiry to do
   s h o r t h a n d t r a n s c r i p t s a nd w e w i l l pro b a b l y record as well.   We w i l l let a n yo n e w h o wants
   copies of the transcripts, ha v e th e m at the u s u al rate.                       I w i l l try and get individual




               INIAAF
                                                           11   -


  Inquests done s e p a r a t e l y so that w e w o n ’t get a w h o l e d a y ’s proceedings.              Y o u can ask for
  indiv i d u a l copies r a t h e r than all those for that day.

  M r M e t c a l f - It w i l l reduce the ne ed to go through the evi d e n ce at the end.                 I c a n ’t
  think at the m o m e n t of c i r c u m s t a n c e s w h e r e w e w o u l d have q u es tions to ask, if w e d o n ’t
  the l i k e l i h o o d is that w e w o u l d w a n t a low level r e p r e s e n t a t i o n and a transcript.

  M r F r aser - I think fr o m a p o l i t i c a l p oint of view,         the C h C o n s t a b l e m i g h t w a n t somebodv
  in.

  M r M e t c a l f - Yes a nd no.       If it i s n ’t necessary,      but I w o u l d have thought,         I ’ll have to
  think about it.

^ J m c - I w a n t to call the cases in Patho l o g i s t o rder b e c a u s e if I do n e e d to call a
   Pathologist, I w a n t to call h i m for h a l f a dozen.                    But of course w h e r e there are two
   pe ople in. the same family ha v e be en killed, then t h a t ’s an o v e r - r i d i n g consideration.
   Those Inquests sh ould be done on the same day.                        T here are other factors w h i c h come into
        as well.       They w i l l a p p e a r random.     The d i s a d v a n t ag e is that they w o n ’t be in
   so l i c i t o r order.  If the C o m m i t t e e d o e s n ’t represent, i t ’s n ot a problem.

  M r F r aser - H o w m u c h n o t i c e w o u l d y o u give the families or w o u l d y ou tell the
  solicitors?

  HMC - W h a t I ha v e in mind, is that w e w o u l d n o ti f y the s olicitors of the time and also
  the family directly.         A n O f f i c e r w o u l d tell them, and of course any w i t n e s s e s w e m ay want
  to call, the O f f i c e r s w o u l d notify.         A n d of c o urse the H i l l s b o r o u g h Support Group so it
  m a y w e l l be that in c e r t a i n circumstances, w e ’d turn up at the door as well. W e ’d have
  to say that the Inq u es t is g oing to be h e l d on x day but be p r e p a r e d for change. Mr
  Fraser, you c ould e x p l a i n those aspects.

  M r F r aser - It w o u l d he l p m e if y ou could also tell me w i t h m y Co m m i t t e e h at            on, the
  ■proposed dates as well.

   H MC - Yes.     If I k n o w that the C o m m i t t e e w i l l be r e p r e s e n t i n g en bloc,   I w o u l d n ’t notify
   the indiv i d u a l solicitors, I w o u l d ju s t n o t i f y y o u of the dates.

 ^ h r Fraser - I think it w o u l d be b e t t e r if yo u told the s olicitors as well.          To a large
   extent, w e are a n o nymous in the sense that w e have d e l i b e r a t e l y not ident i f i e d ourselves
   as individuals and if I h a v e the information, then by the time I get to his solicitor and
   he gets it out, or he gets the i n f o r m a t i o n get ba c k to me, I think if i t ’s possible, tell
   the family, tell the so l i c i t o r and also tell me.

   M r M e t c a l f - It only m a t t e r s   in terms of preparation,         rea di n g up etc.

   HM C - That      is all I really n e e d to say today.

   M r ..... -      This question, yo u r objec t iv e s as it were, in             asense      y o u are u n i t e d in termn
   of finding       out the i n f o r m a t i o n in o r de r to settle on

   Mr Metcalf       - W e ea c h ha v e the idea that this thing is b e t t e r set t l e d          quicker.




               INIAAF
  M r ..... - In particular, the pain and suffering levels, i m m e d i a t e l y b e fore and after
  death, there m a y w e l l also be needs amo n g s t the families to a c t u a l l y question, w h i c h they
  w o u l d n o r m a l l y do in an Inquest, q u e s t i o n the peop l e w h o w e r e a c t u a l l y there, to say w h a t
  did you do to h e l p m y client.                     One thing that y o u w i l l h av e to be sure of is that this
   ’d e v i c e ’ w i l l a c t u a l l y b r i n g out that to your satisfaction.              A lot of it w i l l centre of
  w h a t the s u m m aries say, but the abi li t y to cross exa m i n e w i l l n ot be there at that point,
  e i t h e r for y o u or for the families.                    If w e c a lled the p o l i c e a f t e r w e h ad just completed,
  and in m a n y instances they w o u l d be in a p o s i t i o n to g i v e that e v i d e n c e u n d e r cross
  examination, there c o u l d also be cons i d e r a b l e pro b le m s there w h e r e it could become
  a d v e r s e r i a l in terms         of c o m p l a i nt s against police.

   M r F r aser - The m a j o r i t y of the families w o n ’t be l o o k i ng for that problem, there w i l l be
   ssome.    I think the a d v a nc e p u b l i c i t y c an m a k e it as c l e a r as possible, on bo t h sides of
^ P|he Pennines, that this is an exercise to give i n f o r m a t i o n an d n o t one to

  HM C - This is the draft letter.

       Fraser - W o u l d it be y o u r i n t ention to talk to the p ress b e f o r e next w e e k ’s meeting?

  H M C - I ’m i n c l i n e d to say I should tell the press a b o u t            the m e e t i n g and I have drafted
  anot h e r press.

  M r F r aser - Some b o d y m u s t c o p y it to the press agency.

  M r M e t c a l f - The only thing I w o u l d m e n t i o n f r o m y o u r p o i n t of v i e w is that some people
  m i g h t p h o n e that n u m b e r on the s e cond page and be s u r p r i s e d w h e n someone says "W Midlands
  Police".

  H MC - It is g o i n g to solicitors apart f r o m those few w h o are n ot represented.                          I a m going
  to do a c o v e r i n g letter to those.

   ^lr Fraser - So this is to all those solicitors w h o h a v e n o t i f i e d y o u they                   represent the
F ^ e c e a s e d to all o r g an i s a t i o n s w h o w e r e repr e s e n t e d

  Mr Metcalf - Other           bodies w h o w e r e g i ve n r e p r e s e n t a t i o n at the Inquiry.

 t c    - Do y o u think        y o u c ould send me the addresses?

  M r F r aser - W h e n w o u l d y ou   expect to release this?

  HM C - T o n i g h t if w e finish early, w e n e e d the a d d r e s s e s so tomorrow.         I d o n ’t intend to
  send one to ea c h deceased, just one to ea c h firm.                    I do i n t e n d at some p o i n t to have a
  m e e t i n g w i t h the press and r e - e x p l a i n a) w h a t w e are doing, b) try and p oint out that I
  d o n ’t w a n t any mo r e b a d press in m y Court.           I also w a n t to talk w i t h the Social Services.

  M r M e t c a l f - I suspect y ou w i l l get quite a b i g turn out n e x t w e e k            from people,      I d o n ’t
  k n o w if t h e r e ’s scope for extra benches.

  H MC - We w o n ’t have all the families, it         w i l l all be solicitors.        I d o n ’tthink w e ’ll
  have enough      space   n e x t w e e k but I agree w i t h you, I s u s p e c t there w i l l be quite a few
  representatives.




             INIAAF
                                                         - 13     -


 M r ..... C a n I j u s t c o n f i d e n t i a l l y b r i e f y ou bo th in terms of the p r ogress of the
 investigation.            That is continuing, I saw M r M e t c a l f ’s eyes raise w h e n I said the final
 submission to the D PP w o n ’t have gone by the time this starts on the 18th.                                     It w o n ’t be
 long after, I inte n d to finish it in the Spri n g a nd await the D P P ’s response.                                 But in
 fairness, it w i l l n ot be completed, every t c r o s s e d a nd e v e ry i d o t t e d u n t i l the end of
 this p a r t i c u l a r process.          Not that this proc e s s is a n y t h i n g to do w i t h it, i t ’s just
 simply that other things are going on and that includes i nterviews w h i c h I w i l l be
 talking to y o u about.                I have h a d y o u r letter, we d i d n ’t d e l i b e r a t e l y resp o n d other than
 to a c k n o w l e d g e b e c a u s e w e w a n t e d to talk about this, b e a r i n g in m i n d yo u r lett e r came
 about the same time as Miss S t e e l ’s aski n g v e r y s i m i l a r questions.

 HMC - Are y o u con t e n t      that w e    should p r o ce e d in the w a y that I ha v e outlined?

   r M e t c a l f - I see no r e ason w h y not.

 M r Fraser - I agree entirely.               T here w i l l     be one or two p r o b l e m s w i t h this b ut on balance
     think i t ’s an e x c e l l e n t idea, p r i m a r i l y    fr o m the p o i n t of v i e w of the relatives to get
 the i n f o r m a t io n that they ha v e w a n t e d for        n e a r l y a year, a nd also f r o m the lawyers point
 of view, there is            an a d d e d bonus that            i n f o r ma t i o n w i l l come out, an d those f ew problems
 w i l l be the price         w e w i l l have to p ay           for a m u c h larg e r benefit.

 M r ......       - Without     n a m i n g any individuals, do y o u think there w o u l d be scope                        and w o u l d
 it be a p p r o p r i a t e to take those cases         w h i c h p e r h a p s c o u l d cause g r e a t e r d i f f ic u l t y
 towards the m i d d l e or towards the end, rather than on the first day w h e n all the press
 w i l l be q u e u e d up?

  M r Fraser - It depe n d s on the natu r e of the p r o b l e m really.

  M r M e t c a l f - I think it w o u l d be us u a l in m o s t Cour t s to take sho r te r cases b e fore longer
  ones and if the a n t i c i p a t i o n is that in some cases there w i l l be a lot of questions, the
  u s u a l thing w o u l d be to list them at the end.

                W h a t y o u m i g h t get is a lot of the other families h y p e d up.

^ 4 r Jones - I think it should be star t e d as a low k e y thing a nd h o p e f u l l y it                           w i l l run that
^pay.        W h e r e a s if y o u ha v e the w o r l d ’s press h e r e o n the first few days, the                  d i s a d vantage
   is that if they get h o l d of the timetable, I think t h e y ’ll do that anyway.                                   But I agree,
   the stuff w h i c h c an be got out of the w a y w i t h o u t any d i f f i c u l t y s h o u l d be,              so as n ot to
   u p s e t t h e m as individuals.

  Mr   .....   - M i n i m i s e the t r auma really.

  M r M e t c a l f - Again, if any cases w h i c h are               g oing to c a u s e a ny p a r t i c u l a r pro b l e m s are
  last on the list on any g i v e n day, then no                      ot h e r fami l y is g o i n g to be ke p t waiting.

  HMC - S t r u cture t h e m w i t h i n the days as well.

  M r Fraser - I w o u l d say that there is one p a r t i c u l a r case I can think of that should be
  h e a r d in the morning.

  HMC - If y o u ha v e any views M r F r a s e r you m u s t tell me.




               INIAAF
  M r Fraser - I h av e to be v e r y careful.

  HM C - I ’m not a s king y o u to tell m e now.

  M r Fraser - There is one family w h o w o u l d    swell the coffers           of the local h o s t e l r y before
  they arrived, so if they w e r e a 9 . 0 0 a m start.  O ne o t h e r thing, w h a t time w i l l y ou start
  in terms of travelling?

  H MC - A n y thoughts?

  Mr   .....    - 9 . 3 0 a m at the latest I w o u l d have thought.

— HMC - C an you do it?

  M r M e t c a l f - T h e r e ’s no p r o b l e m from o ur point of view,   I a m just th inking about.

       Fraser - A n ho u r and three quarters to             drive but          I        d o n ’t w a n t to do     that 15 days.

  H MC - No but fr o m the families,         if it takes two         h ours         for the j o u r n e r y    f r o m L i v e rpool

  M r Fraser -      A third of t h e m are not from Liverpool.

  M r ...... - IN A U D I B L E   see in fact in the order of the day w h e t h e r w e ca n              act u a l l y get
  the geography.

  M r M e t c a l f - I w o u l d ha ve b e e n inclined to suggest a start at 1 0 . 0 0 a m and be p r e p a re d to
  sit later rather than sta r t i n g at 9.30am.

  HM C - Iagree.   W i t h o u t a J u r y y o u can sit as long as y o u    like but w i t h           a Jury    y ou have
  to stop    for refreshments, etc.             W e ’ll have to do the best w e can.

ji^The w i t n e s s e s w i l l be p a i d in the u sual way.   T h e r e w o n ’t be m a n y w i t n e s s e s but none
   L/itnesses, that includes family, w i l l not be.

   M r .... - Do you w a n t to m e n t i o n the p o s s i b i l i t y not the probability,        the p o s si b i l i t y of
 ^ p o t h e r w e e k being set aside for.

  HMC - W e ’ve c h o s e n the dates bec a u s e they suited us f r o m a p r a c t i c a l point of v i e w but we
  recognise is that there m a y be I N A U D I B L E w e w a n t to f i nish it if at all p o s s i b l e before
  the 4th May.     We have t e n t a t i v e l y r eserved a n o t h e r week, b e g i n n i n g 21st M a y I think to
          the stragglers or those on holiday.




               INIAAF
