                                                                                              M IR .15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and tim e raised              H .              Num ber



   tin
T itle           '   (Ztfin                   <Ox~     rQ                                                          OS ^ o
(Include source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)
i
      ceiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                        Receiver




                                                                                                                           Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                    Statem ent Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions


                                                                                                                             lexer
    Indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                     O/M         SIO
    Examined - fu rth er action to be taken


                                                                                                                    I5 5 \
                                                                                                                           Indexer
    Further action No(s)


    When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

              MICHAEL DAVID KELLY




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

            The Medico-Legal Centre,
                 Watery Street,
                   Sheffield.

                       On

                  1st May 1990




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpnam, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55. Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                    A




                    B


                                                           INDEX


                        DR. JOHN CLARK - Called

                          By THE C O R O N E R .............................................. 3


                        POLICE INSPECTOR ROBERT MATTHEW SAWERS - Called




                                                                                             m n
                         By THE CORONER ...........................................
                    D    Cross-Examined by MR. F R A S E R ............................




                                                                                             00
                         C ross-Examined by MR. LIMB .............................


                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                         By THE C O R O N E R .............................................. 9




                                                         -oo--oo —




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        1st May 1990

                                  INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF MICHAEL DAVID KELLY

                               MR. FRASER:         Sir, the next evidence you will hear
                          relates to Michael David Kelly.        Michael's brother and
                          sister and their spouses are present in Court this morning
                          with the help of social workers.        I appear in a personal
                    B
                          capacity for the family but obviously for today I appear as
                          a member of the Steering Committee, in fact, as agent for
                          myself I s u p p o s e .

                                 THE CORONER:      Yes.     Is it brother and sister,       did you
                          say'

                                 MR. FRASER:      Yes     sir.

                                THE CORONER:   Which are the brother and sister?   Yes,
                          thank you.   Good afternoon.   Let me briefly describe to you
                          the general format of the Inquest so that you can follow
                          what is going to happen.    I am going to read to you in a
                          moment the evidence I took on 18th April 1989.    There are
                          one or two minor errors which I will correct when I have
                    D     read it.   Then I am going to tell you what Dr. Forrest said
                          with regard to the blood alcohol and then Dr. Clark is going
                          to come, that is the Pathologist, and he will tell us the
                          relevant parts of the pathological findings.    When he has
                          completed his evidence the West Midlands Police Officer will
                          present the summary and Inspector Layton will deal with the
                          visual side of the evidence.    As I said, the Jury must be
                          getting tired of this because I say this in nearly every
                          case.   The visual evidence when it is first presented is
                          very confusing because it refers to plans and numbers and
                          things, but hold on because he is coming round here in a
                          moment and he will demonstrate to you on the big plans what
                          he is talking about and then the whole thing becomes very
                          very much clearer.   So don't despair when you hear all the
                          numbers.   We need them for the record so that we can find
                          our way around the paperwork later on if we should have to
                          do it.   Is that clear?  Then when I have done that we will
                          take no further evidence at this point.

                                This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
                           the 18th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony
                           Parkin, Acting C o r o n e r 1s Officer said:

                                 "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                 identified to DI Timms of the South Yorkshire Police as
                                 that of Michael David Kelly by Stephen Paul Kelly, his
                                 brother.  He was 38 years of age having been born on
                                 1st March 1951 at L i v e r p o o l • He was a divorced man and
                                 he lived at                                      L i v e r p o o 1. He
                                 was a warehouseman by occupation.          He died at
                                 Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
                H
                                                                 1

J. L. Harpham Ltd
       there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.   PC 1791 Wilmott
       caused the body to be removed to the Medico Legal
       Centre and there he identified it to Detective
       Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently identified the
       same body to Prof. Usher and DI Timrns.  It is the
       family wish that the body should be cremated."

Just bear with me for one moment.    Sirnon Weigold did not as
such identify the body to DI Timrns.    I think they were
probably together at the same time but that is not strictly
right as I have read it out to you.     In fact, Dr. Clark, who
is the Pathologist, was present when Prof. Usher was there
and Dr. Clark, perhaps you will deal with the identification
in a little bit more detail on this occasion.

     I wrote to Stephen Paul Kelly.   Is that you?
(indicating agreement ? On 13th May you signed a form which
I sent to you and, in fact, you confirmed that the
information that we had was correct with regard to name,
address, age, date of birth, occupation and that is still
so, isn't it?  Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol levels in
the case of Michael and gave us the evidence on the first
day, on the Wednesday, and in fact in the case of Michael
none was detected.   It was negative.  Dr. Clark.

     MR. FRASER:   Just before you call Dr. Clark there is a
question which may not matter for your records but the
family are keen to clarify it and that is the question of
the legal next of kin.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we sent you a copy of that sheet
but we aren't using it.  It is really a summary sheet for me
but I understand technically the next of kin is Joanne
Kelly, isn't it, the daughter?

       MR. FRASER:   Michael's daughter.  Strictly speaking,
yes.    She is a minor but she is the legal next of kin.

     THE CORONER:   I quite accept that.  It isn't relevant
to my proceedings but I do know if there was a child she
would take precedence over the mother.

       MR.   FRASER:   Thank you.

     THE CORONER:       You are happy for me    to record that,
aren't you?

       MR.   FRASER:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:       I believe   you represent that firm   on an
agency basis?

       MR. FRASER:     It is a bit complicated but,    yes.
                                                                                    DR.   JOHN CLARK



                                     THE CORONER:         Right.     Are you happy now    if we go on to
                              Dr.   Cl ark 7’

                                     MR. FRASER:      Yes, sir.

                                                    DR.    JOHN CLARK - Called

                                                           Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                    B    Q. Yes. - A. Dr.     John Clark,          Forensic Pathologist,    University
                            of Glasgow.

                         Q. Dr. Clark, can you just tell rne how this lad was identified?
                            W e 11, he i s n 11 a 1ad he was 39. We will call him gent 1eman
                            I think? - A. As I recall he was identified to rne by Police
                            Officers of South Yorkshire Police whose names I don't know
                            at the moment but also with certain information which was
                            with the body, a name with the body and a number.

                         Q.   In fact,   the serial       number was 72 I believe? - A. Yes,       72.

                         Q. You are quite satisfied you are telling me about Michael
                            David Kelly, aren't you? - A. Yes.

                    1}   Q. On that basis can you tell me what your findings were?
                         A. Cause of death was crush asphyxia.  This was based on
                            finding signs of asphyxia in his face.  His face was rather
                            congested and had a bluish discoloration.  These changes, I
                            have to say, were fairly mild in comparison to a lot of the
                            other people and one of the other features of asphyxia is to
                            find little haemorrhages on the skin.  These weren't in fact
                            present.

                         Q. Were not present? - A. Were not present on the skin.  They
                            were present internally.  So really what I am saying is that
                            there were signs of asphyxia but it was really relatively
                            mild in comparison to other people but it would nevertheless
                            be consistent with pressure on his chest preventing him
                            breathing and thereby being able to get air into the body.
                            There was no other obvious cause of death.  He hadn't
                            inhaled vomit and he had not suffered any internal or severe
                            injuries and there was no natural disease to account for his
                            death and so I still think he died of crush asphyxia and for
                            some reason the signs of that were rather mild.

                                   It may be with some people who die an asphyxial death
                              there is an additional element in that there can be pressure
                              on nerves, particularly in the neck, which can stop the
                              heart very quickly and it may be an element.  It is
                              something which is impossible to prove but it may be his
                              heart stopped for some particular reason very very quickly
                              and he died.  In any event there was nothing to indicate he
                              suffered for any great length of time-  He probably lost
                              consciousness within a short period of time, ten or fifteen


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          DR.   JOHN CLARK



                             seconds or so, and then knew nothing about it after that.
                             As I said, there wasn't any major injuries internally.

                                  He did have a number of grazes and bruises on his body,
                             his face, his arms and his legs, some caused by fingers, by
                             people gripping his arms, and the other is probably caused
                             by pressure against other people or some surface like the
                             ground.   Again these may well have occurred after he lost
                             consciousness.   So the cause of death, as I said, was crush
                    B        asphyxia.




                                  MR.   FRASER:   The family have no questions.     Thank you,
                             Doctor.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   I believe this is, in fact       the last
                             Inquest you are giving evidence at, isn't it?        A. That is
                             right.

                        Q.   It is right you have given evidence at 20 Inquests and have
                    D        done 20 post morterns? - A. Yes. that i;= r ig h t .

                        Q.   I know and we all know that you come from Glasgow.  People
                             might wonder why you were here but, in fact, you were on a
                             private visit last April? - A. That weekend, yes.

                        Q. You very kindly agreed to help and, in fact, you did a great
                           deal of work and if I may say so you have given your
                    E      evidence in a most admirable manner, clearly understood by
                           the Jury and also by the families and also I believe you
                           have done it in a compassionate and helpful way.  I would
                           like to thank you very much indeed both for your assistance
                           at the time and since, and in particular at these Inquests.
                           Thank you very much indeed. - A. Can I say in turn as
                           someone dealing with this sort of work and investigation of
                           death very regularly how impressed I have been with the
                           professionalism and sensitivity with which the proceedings
                           have been carried out here, in particular your handling and
                           explanations to the relatives of the bereaved people.   I
                           think it has given comfort to everyone who has worked here
                           and I felt it a very appropriate atmosphere.

                                   MR. FRASER:    Could I add my thanks on behalf of my
                             Committee and my clients for those words you have expressed
                             to Dr. Clark.    I have certainly spoken to many families who
                             have spoken to Dr. Clark and they have very much appreciated
                             t he time he has spent with them personally.   It is very much
                             appreciated.

                                  THE              Thank you very much-

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  P.I.      MATTHEW ROBERT SAUERS



                               THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser,          is it likely the family will
                          want to speak to Dr. Clark?

                                MR. FRASER:      They may do, sir.

                                THE CORONER:   Dr- Clark, will you stay?  Once you have
                           spoken to the family, should they wish to do so, then of
                           course feel entirely free to leave us.  Thank you again.  I
                           take it none of you have questions of Dr. Clark.
                    B
                                MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, sir.

                                MR. LIMB:     No, sir.

                                POLICE INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAUERS - Called

                                                   Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                        Q. Yes, Mr. Sawers.   • A. Matthew Robert Sawers            Inspector,   West
                           Midlands Police.    I am already sworn, sir-

                        Q. Would you take me through the summary please when you are
                           ready? - A- On Saturday, 15th April 1989, Michael David
                           Kelly travelled to Sheffield on the Avon, South Wet>t and
                    D      South Wales Liverpool Supporters Club coach.    He met Dean
                           W illiam Macey and a. number of other supporters on the coach.
                           It was their intention to watch the FA Cup Semi Final
                           football match at the Hillsborough Stadium.

                                The coach party arrived in Sheffield at about 1400
                           hours.  Michael made his way towards the ground together
                           with Alan Warden, Karl Thomas and Dean Macey.  With the
                    E      exception of Michael the others stopped at a shop and
                           Michael continued to the ground alone.

                                Paul Kelly, a Liverpool supporter, entered the
                           Hillsborough football ground through Gate C.  He stood in
                           the concourse waiting to meet friends and whilst standing
                           there saw Michael, whom he knew, and he saw him enter the
                           ground through a turnstile.  The two men spoke briefly and
                           Michael stated he was going to the terracing.

                                At about 1535 hours Police Constable Wilmott made his
                           way on to the Spion Kop end of the ground.  There he saw a
                           man whom he now knows to be Michael lying on the pitch on
                           his back.  Michael appeared to be unconscious.  Together
                           with Police Constable Lally the Officer checked for vital
                           signs of life but could not find any.  Michael was placed on
                           to a temporary stretcher and carried to the gymnasium where
                           a temporary mortuary ha.d been set up. Police Constable
                           Wilmott remained with M i c h a e l -

                                At about 1559 hours, Dr. Andrew Byrne examined Michael
                           in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   P. I. MATTHEW ROBERT SAUERS




                                    At about 0530 hours on Sunday, 16th April, Police
                               Constable Wilmott escorted Michael's body here to the Medico
                               Legal Centre where he confirmed the identification by
                               reference to Detective Constable Weigold.  At this time
                               Michael had not been identified by name.

                                       At about 2110 hours on Sunday, 16th April, Stephen Paul
                    B          Kelly attended at the Medico Legal Centre where he
                               identified the body of his brother to Detective Inspector
                               T im m s .

                                    On Monday, 17th April 1989, following identification by
                               DC Weigold, Dr. John Clark carried out an autopsy and
                               submitted a report giving cause of death-

                                    No match ticket was found in Michael's personal effects
                               but Paul Kelly saw him enter via a turnstile.  Further, sir,
                               I would add that Michael's jacket has never been found
                               despite exhaustive enquiries to trace it and, of course, it
                               is possible that the match ticket could have been contained
                               in that jacket.

                         Q. As we have already said on many occasions in circumstances
                    D       like this the presence or absence of the ticket itself
                            doesn't prove ~ well, it may help in certain cases but you
                            can't draw too many conclusions from it, particularly in a
                            case like this.  Now, Paul Kelly whom we are talking about,
                            that is no relation, is it? - A- None whatsoever, sir.

                         Q.    It is just coincidence he happens    to have the same name?
                    j£   A-    A complete coincidence, sir, yes.

                         Q. Paul had an unfortunate encounter with a horse, is that
                            right? - A. Certainly he had an injury to his right foot and
                            toe which he attributes to the actions of a horse.

                         Q. From our point of view we are not too concerned with how he
                            got the injury but it meant he wanted to get into the ground
                            rather more quickly and rather more comfortably than going
                            through the turnstile? - A. That is so, sir, yes.

                         Q. That is page 15, isn't it?  Paul Kelly isn't here, is he?
                         A- He refers to it first on page 13 and describes the same
                            injury on page 15 with the horse.

                         Q.    In effect, what he says is that he was told the gate was
                               going to be opened which we take it to be the concertina
                               gate, or one of the big gates, and he would be able to get
                               in? - A. He does refer specifically, sir, to Gate C.

                         q .   Yes, that is right, he does. - A- It was certainly brought
                               to his attention he may be admitted through that gate.


                H
                                                            6


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      P.I.   MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS



                        Q.   I think he says, "I walked in the gate",          doesn't he,     on page
                             15? - A- Yes, sir, he does.

                        Q. He says, "I walked in the gate and I walked behind the
                           turnstiles and I saw Michael David Kelly come through the
                           turnstile?’ - A- He does, sir, yes.

                        Q. You have not got it in front of you but we have.  Up to now
                    B      we have only referred to three gate openings, the earliest
                           being the 1448 opening? - A- Yes.

                        Q.   You can remember that,      can't you?   - A.   Yes.

                        Q.   Would I be right in thinking that these gates were opened on
                             earlier occasions as well for short periods of time.-’ - A.
                             That is true, sir, yes.
                    C
                        Q. We don't know which opening Paul refers to, do we? - A. We
                           have no precise information.

                        Q. He gives no time? - A. He gives no time that we can
                           attribute to the opening of the gate.

                                     THE CORONER:   Can you deal with the openings of the
                    D        gate,    Inspector Layton, or not?

                                     INSPECTOR LAYTON:      Only in general     terms.

                                     THE CORONER:    Yes,   Mr. Fraser.

                                     MR. FRASER:    Would you give    me a    moment please?
                    E
                                     THE CORONER:    Yes.

                                              Cross-Examined by MR.       FRASER:

                        Q.   Just to deal very quickly with the question of the fact that
                             there wasn't a ticket with Michael, you say he was seen
                             going through the turnstile which is suggestive of the fact
                    F        he almost certainly had a ticket.      Correct me if I am wrong,
                             but I believe it is the practice of this particular coach
                             operator, you may not know, not to allow anybody on the
                             coach who h a s n ’t got a ticket of the game.  The motives
                             behind that are fairly obvious-      Is that something which has
                             come up in your investigations? - A- It is certainly within
                             my   knowledge that the coach operators who operate on behalf
                             of   the Liverpool Supporters Football Club are quite strictly
                    G        administered and tickets are usually checked on boarding the
                             coach.   People aren't usually allowed to travel on a
                             Liverpool Supporters' sponsored coach, if I may use that
                             term, without a ticket.

                                     MR. FRASER:    I am grateful     for that.


                H
                                                               7

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    P.I.   MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS



                               THE CORONER:    Can I just explain this to you because
                          it is obviously a matter which conce'rns you?  These Officers
                          can only say what is in the statements.   They can guess like
                          all of us can but it would be unfair to expect an Officer to
                          hazard a guess on Oath.   So he can only say what is in the
                          statement and if there is nobody there who saw him hold a
                          ticket and can say, “ I saw him hdld a ticket" and if we'have
                          not found it, he can't say somebody saw it or that we found
                    ^     it because both of those things would be guesses but that
                          doesn't mean to say you need to be too concerned.   I am not
                          particularly concerned about this point, not with regard to
                          Michael.  All right.

                               THE WITNESS:   It might be helpful, sir, if I make one
                          comment.  There are statements in the file which I have seen
                          from three supporters who travelled on the same coach and
                          each supporter refers specifically to being in possession of
                          their own ticket.  It is an assumption that the same applies
                          in Michael Kelly's case but that, taken together with the
                          evidence of Paul Kelly through the turnstiles, leaves us no
                          reason to suppose he didn't have a ticket.

                                                Cross-Examined by MR. L I M B ;
                    D
                        Q. Paul Kelly states he went through Gate C but he is unclear
                           as to time.  Does he give any evidence as to whether he was
                           part of a crowd or a party of people going through Gate C or
                           he found himself on his own in the end?

                                  THE CORONER:       I think you will      find it on page     15.

                                  THE WITNESS:       Yes-   Would   it assist   you,   sir,   if I set
                           this   in context?

                        Q. Yes, go ahead. - A. Briefly, Paul Kelly has made two
                           statements and refers to this incident in both, sir.   He
                           refers to having acquired an injury to his foot in the
                           vicinity of the enclosure between the outside gates on
                           Leppings Lane and the turnstile entrances.  He refers to
                           speaking to a Policeman and being led to believe the gates
                           may be opened at some time in the future.  He refers to a
                           witness whom he was standing with who spoke to the Officer
                           and said words to the effect that the gate is opened, "Can
                           you get this person in because he has injured his foot?"   He
                           does not refer specifically to how many other people entered
                           through the gate at the time he entered through Gate C-

                                  MR.   LIMB:     Thank you.

                                THE CORONER:   You will see in a moment why we are
                           stressing this because it comes up in the visual evidence.
                           We can come back to it if necessary.



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                               D .I . MICHAEL LAYTON



                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:      Sir, I only rise as a matter of
                             clarification.     Idon't think we have got the wrong
                             impression but    itwould be right to say I think that the
                             only two openings of the gate, in which a substantial number
                             of people went through, were those you have referred to
                             previously.   If there were any earlier openings for a very
                             short period of time, if there is any evidence of people
                             going through,    it is only one or may be two people.
                    B
                                  THE CORONER:    Yes, that is a very good point.   We
                             haven't mentioned any of the earlier part because what was
                             happening was that the gate, I was going to say, was
                             continuously being opened-   That is not true but it wat>
                             being opened intermittently, usually to throw people out and
                             not to allow them in.   For example, one is timed at 1438, an
                             opening, and there is another one timed at 1439 where, in
                             fact, somebody was actually taken in on that one, one boy,
                             on the picture.   There were other openings but they haven t
                             been terribly relevant until this particular Inquest and you
                             will see in a minute why it is relevant.    Shall we leave it
                             at this stage with the gates and we can come back to it in a
                             minute when we have heard Inspector Layton?    Any more
                             questions?
                    D
                                  I1R. LIMB:   No thank you, sir.

                        Q.      THE CORONER:   In fact, it is only fair to say that
                           Paul Kelly does mention a time, I have just noticed, but the
                           first time he mentions is that he says it is after three
                           o'clock and then he gives a supplemental statement when he
                           says that can't possibly right or words to that effect.
                        A. That is true, sir, yes.

                        Q. His timings can't be relied on? - A. His timings can't be
                           relied on.   I am satisfied the witness is doing his best to
                           recollect but certainly his information about timing c a n ’t
                           be relied on, sir.

                        Q. There is an interesting sentence here.     Turn to page 16
                           because this may actually help.  The last paragraph, Paul
                           Kelly says, "Once I was inside the ground I saw the gate
                           open again.  This was about five minutes after I entered the
                           ground.  This was the last time the gate opened and
                           everybody came in and went down the t u n n e l . I now know the
                           gate was opened at this time about 1450." - A- Yes.

                        Q. As I say, I w o u l d n ’t be too reliant on his timings but that
                           is what he says? - A- He does say that, sir, yes.

                                      DETECTIVE   INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                                                      By THE C O R O N E R :

                        Q. Mr. Layton.    - A- Sir,    Michael Layton,         Detective Inspector,
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       D. I ■ MICHAEL LAYTON



                           West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination has been made of
                           video film and photographic evidence and Michael has been
                           identified alive in Enclosure No. 3-  Stephen Kelly,
                           Michael's brother, as you have heard is in Court, has viewed
                           visual evidence and identified his brother alive in
                           Enclosure No. 3 on a number of photographs.

                    B           Photograph referenced DB16/30 is timed at 1445 and
                           that, sir, is in Enclosure No. 3.  I wonder, sir, at that
                           point whether you wish me to elaborate slightly in relation
                           to Paul K e l l y ’s evidence.

                        Q. Yes, please. - A. As I have said, that photograph is timed
                           at 1445.  Paul Kelly is seen in a BBC video tape outside the
                           ground which was taken between 1437 and 1450.  As you have
                           already heard, he cannot be specific and his description is
                           he is entering via Gate C and from my knowledge of the gates
                           doesn't accord with the two openings at 2.48 and 2.52.  So
                           we can be sure he was outside the ground between those two
                           times but we can't be sure at what time he actually entered.

                        Q. This is? - A. Paul Kelly, sir.  Sir, on a photograph
                           referenced PR2/21 which is timed at 1508 that shows Michael
                    D      in Enclosure No. 3 and whilst the detail again is not great
                           it appears to show him certainly alive at that time but I
                           can't say at what stage of the process medically he is at.
                           I think it is fair to say at that point as well that
                           Michael's sister has also viewed that visual evidence and
                           so, in fact, both brother and sister agree that the
                           p hotographs show Michael.

                        Q. He looked a bit distressed you think       in that? - A. That   is
                           my impression.

                        Q. You can't say whether he is conscious or unconscious, alive
                           or dead, at that particular point? - A. It is -d i f f i c u l t . I
                           would say he is probably still alive, sir, but certainly in
                           distress.  In respect of the photograph at 1445 he is
                           certainly alive and there are no problems at that stage.
                           The later photograph does show him.

                        Q. That is the one, yes. - A. Yes-  PC Wilmott has viewed
                           visual evidence and he was unable to identify himself
                           dealing with Michael but the Officer has signed a plan of
                           the pitch indicating the approximate location at which he
                           first came into contact with Michael at the Spion Kop end of
                           the ground.  That plan, sir, is referenced C R W 1.

                                PC Maughan attempted to resuscitate a man at the
                           Leppings Lane end of the pitch but without success.   He
                           assisted spectators to carry the man to the bpion Kop end of
                           the ground where he states that he left him with a iat - Johns
                           Ambulance Officer who has not been identified.  The Officer
                           has viewed visual evidence and feels Mr. Kelly may be the
                H
                                                          10

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                              D. I . MICHAEL LAYTON



                            man he assisted.  Sir, if I can just say this, in fact, I
                            saw PC Maughan.  At the time of making his statement to the
                            best of his belief he believed that it was Michael but I
                            think it is fair to say that Michael's sister has since met
                            PC Maughan and following that meeting I think they are both
                            satisfied that it was actually Michael that he attempted to
                            ass is t .
                    B
                        Q. But in the statement he gave whenever it was he said it
                           might have been? ~ A- To the best of his knowledge, bearing
                           in mind the time and the description-  Sir, can I refer you
                           to a plan which has been given the reference number MWJL93?

                        Q. C 185 - - A- And perhaps, sir, PC M a u g h a n 's plan next, JRI11
                           which I think is a little bit further back in the file.

                        Q. C186.    - A- And do you want PC Wilmott's plan,          sir?

                        Q. Yes,    I think we will have that one as well? - A- CRW1

                        Q   C187- - A- (moved to p l a n ? If we can deal with the tiret
                            plan, MWJL93, in respect of the earlier photograph at 1445,
                            Michael is shown in this position here in Enclosure No. 3.
                    D       In respect of the later photographs again it is shown in
                            Enclosure No. 3 at this point here.     Sir, in respect of the
                            plan by PC Maughan, J R M 1, on the pitch plan, the first
                            position that is indicated is here (indicat i n g ? on the pitch
                            at the Leppings Lane end and the second position he refeis
                            to is at the Spion Kop end here ( indicat i n g ? and then in
                            respect of PC Wilmott on the plan, C R W 1 , he actually
                            indicates a position here (indicat i n g ? •

                        Q. That again is a recollection, is it not? - A. Yes,               so there
                           is a slight variation between his recollection.

                                   THE CORONER:       Mr- Fraser.

                                   M R . FRASER:     No questions,    sir.

                                   MR. LIMB:       No questions,    sir.

                                   MR. CATCHPOLE:       No questions,      sir-

                                 MR. FRASER:   Again, sir, before you conclude the
                            evidence in this case, Michael's mother, who as it were 1 s
                            the head of the family, is unable to be with us today,  She
                            is in Liverpool but through her son and daughter they
                            specifically want me to thank through you everybody who
                            helped Michael on the day obviously.  Everybody's efforts
                            are very much appreciated and they want to offer their
                            thanks to the Officers of the West Midlands Police as well.

                                 THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed, Mr. F r a s e r -
                            Would you make sure that you pass my thanks on to your mum.
                H
                                                             11
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                               D .I . MICHAEL LAYTON



It is very kind of her to say that and it is much
appreciated by me on their behalf and I am sure by all the
people-

      Before I just finish, the reason why we were talking
about the other times with the gates is that this young man
has been identified visually at 1445.   Just remind me of the
posit ion-

       INSPECTOR LAYTON:    In this position here      ( indicat in,e;) ,
sir.

     THE CORONER:     If he came in at 1448 that is difficult,
as you can see.   There are several explanations.   One is
that Mr. Kelly may have made a mistake, Paul that is, but he
does say quite clearly that he came through the gate and he
gives a reason why he came through.    So although we can't
say with absolute certainty the only way to make it make
sense is to assume that he must have come in through one of
the earlier openings.    Mr- Limb, is that reasonably clear
and satisfactory to you?    I realise we are drawing a few
conclusions here but I can't see any other way of doing it.

       MR.   LIMB:   Most definitely,   sir,   yes-

     THE CORONER:    I suppose another possibility is that we
can't explain it.   If we have the time and visual evidence
in a sense that is a fixed point, isn't it?

      I am very sorry that we have spent so much time talking
about times and so on but in a way that is what Inquests are
about.   We are here to try and sort out, you know, who^
people are, where they are identified and where they died,
and obviously if we get what looks like a discrepancy we
need to try and think about it but it does get a bit
confusing and also you may think unnecessary bearing in mind
we are talking about your brother, your mum's son, and of
course Joanne's dad.

      I try to be conscious, at least for a m o m e n t , in each
Inquest of the fact that we have spoken not about some
number, anybody, but somebody very very special to the^
family who you represent and who you are and I would like
you to know so far as I am able I arn conscious of the loss
which you suffered when you lost M i c h a e l . Thank you for
being here this morning.

     Ladies and gentlemen,     we now rise and have lunch and we
resume at two o'clock.

   (The Inquest into the death of Michael Da vid Kelly
       was adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )
