                                                                                               M I R . 15

                                                                                                                        / 0 %
        OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised           ^            -_____    Number


        Title                             <yv   C 3 lL-                      P etT T ?^—     ^oOT2--Vlv^fV
    '   [Include source and any document number i f relevant)
■% t
A       Receiver's instructions - urgent action — Yes/No ___
                                                                                                                            Receiver




                                                                                                                            Indexer
        Document registered/indexed as indicated

        No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                     Statement Reader
        Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                            Indexer
        Indexed as indicated

        No(s) of actions raised

        Examined - further action to be taken                                                                        0 /M         SIO




        Further action No(s)                                                                                                Indexer


        When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL,      1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


             PETER ANDREW BURKETT




                       Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,    LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                         At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                         On

                   3rd May, 1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                             INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                                                             Page N o ,

                        POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PAPJvS Called

                             33V THE C O R O N E R ......................

                    B   PROP. ALAN USHER Called

                             By TI-IS C O R O N E R ......................     2

                             Bv MR. FRASER           ..................        3
                        POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKS Continued

                             By THE CORONER ......................             b

                        POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                             B y THE C O R O N E R      ...............



                    D




                    E




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
        INQUEST INTO TilB DEATH OF PETER ANDRST.f BURKETT

     ME. FRASER:    Sir, you will now hear evidence relatin
to Peter Andrew Burkett.   Sir, Peter's wife, Michelle, is
in Court with a social worker.   I represent Mrs. Burkett
in a personal capacity but I am here today as a member of
the Steer5.ng Committee on the usual basis.

     TITS CORONER:    Are you Mrs. Burkett?

     MRS. M. BURKETT:      Yes.

      TUB CORONER:    Good afternoon.   Can I just tell you
briefly the format so that you will be able to follow it
more easil 3^? I am going to road the opening which I
dealt with on the 18th April, 1 9 8 9 and then I am going to
dea.1 with the blood alcohol levels.    Then Prof. Usher
is going to come along and tell us about the pathology
and when ho has completed the evidence a Vest Midlands
Police Officer, \vho is sitting over there, will tell you
about the evidence that has been summarised.     When she
has concluded her evidence Inspector Layton, who is
sitting there, will deal with the visual side of the
evidence.    He will describe it, first of all, in words and
give us the references and so on, and then he will come
round here and, on these big plans, he will show us the
points that he has been talking about so that it is
easier for you and me and the Jury and everybody else
to follow. When he is talking it is a bit confusing.
Do not worry.    It becomes clear as we go along.

     This then is a resumed Inquest which was opened on
the 18th April, 1 9 8 9 . Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting
Coroner's Officer, said:

        "The body which is the subject of this
        Inquest has been identified to PC 25 6 6
        Hargreaves of the South Yorkshire Police
        as that of Peter Andrew Burkett by
        Michael Robinson, his friend.           He was
        2k years of age having been born on the
        16th February, 1 9 6 5 tit Birkenhead.       He
        was a married man and he lived at ____
                                Prenton, Birkenhead.
        He was an insurance clerk by occupation.
        He died at Hillsborough Football Ground
        following an incident there on Saturday,
        1 5 th April, 1 9 8 9 .  PC 2 5 6 6 Hargreaves
        caused the body to be removed to the
        Medico Legal Centre and there he
        identified it to Detective Constable
        Simon Weigold who sub sequent 3,3^ identified
        the same body to Prof. Usher.           It is the
        family wish that the body should be
        buried,"


                            - 1 -
                                                                      n.   T> A y>7- q
                                                                      PROF. A. USHER


                           I then wrote to you and - I do not know if you remember
                        but you signed a form for me 011 the 2 5 th April, 1 9 8 9 ,
                        you cannot remember? But what it was, it just gave all
                        the names and the dates of birth and so 011 and you
                        confirmed that that was all correct and that is still
                        so, is it not?

                               MRS. M. BURKETT:     Yes.
                    B
                             THE CORONER:        And you are Michelle, I believe, is
                        that right?

                               MRS. M. BURKETT:      Yes.

                              THE CORONER:     Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol
                        estimation on Peter and the result which he measured
                    C   was 9 9 m g / 100 ml. Prof. Usher has not quite made it
                        but I woiidor whether we can listen to you and then we
                        will take Prof. Usher out of turn, so to spealc. He is
                        in the building but he has not quite made it to the
                        Court.    It does not matter.

                                   POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKS Called:

                    D                         By THE CORONER:

                        Q. Tell us who 3>-ou are? - A. Gillian Parks, Police
                           Constable of the West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Can you tell me what the summary is? - A. Yes, sir ....

                                    THE CORONER: I am sorry, Prof. Usher is here.
                    E        Shall we let Prof* Usher have his sa}^ Well, come on,
                             Prof. Usher, as you have walked in we will listen to
                             3rou .

                                         PROF. ALAN USI-IER Called:

                                              By TI-iE CORONER:
                    F
                        Q. Prof. Usher, can you just introduce yourself and then
                           we will turn to the post-mortem? - A. Yes, my name is
                           Alan Usher.  I am a Home Office Pathologist and Prof.
                           of Forensic Medicine here in the University of
                           Sheffield.  I examined the body marked no. 2 3 as
                           Identified to me as being that of Peter Burkett ....

                    G             THE CORONER:     How do you pronounce it, is it
                             Burkett?

                                  MRS. M. BURKETT:         Yes.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:     Yes? - A ....... in the mortuary of
                             the Medico I,egal Centre here in Sheffield on the 16th
                             April, I9 8 9 . What I can say is that the bod 3^ I
                H
                                                      - 2 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   PROF. A. USHER



                          examined vas that of a slimly-built but fairly
                          muscular young, white nan, 1 7 7 eras in height and
                          weighing 6 6 kgs.  He presented the fairly t^/pical
                          picture of traumatic asphyxia together with some
                          swelling of the brain.   There were small grazes
                          and scratches about his body but nothing that
                          •played any part in bringing about his death.
                          Internally, he appeared to be normally-developed
                    B     and perfectly healthy and I believe he had an
                          average expectation of life for his age.     I did
                          take a sample of blood for analysis for alcohol
                          but I am not, at this time, aware what the analysis
                          revealed.

                        Q. I can tell you - it is 99? - A. 99? That is perhaps
                           3 y pints, something of that order.  I give you the
                           cause of death as being traumatic asphyxia,. That
                           simper means that he was pinned in such a position
                           that his chest wa3_l was unable to move in or out
                           and, once that happens, consciousness is lost very
                           quickly within, I would say, 10-20 seconds and
                           whatever happened subsequent to that he would be
                           unaware of.
                    D   Q. Prof. Usher, can you just deal with, in this case
                           as well ---- 10-20 seconds I think you said for loss
                           of consciousness? - A. Yes.

                        0. The point about that is that, onee that happens,
                           anything else that happens, a lot of these findings,
                           he would not have known anything about? - A, Yes,
                    E      that is right.

                        Q. So he personally %fOuld not have been distressed once
                           he was unconscious? - A. That is right.

                                              Tj-y MR. FRAS ER:

                        Q. Prof. Usher, just briefly, I think you mentioned a
                           slight swelling of the brain.   That is nothing unusual
                           in a case of traumatic asphyxia, as I understand it,
                           and Mr. Burkett would not have known anything about
                           that process talcing place once he had lost
                           consciousness? - A. That is all true.

                                MR. LIMB:    No, thank you.

                                MR. CATCIIPOLE:   No, thank you.

                                TIED CORONER:  Prof. Usher, thank you very much.
                           ¥e will see you again in a few minutes.




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  G. PARKS



                             POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKS Continued:

                                          By TI-IE CORONER:

                        Q, Now, you have told us who you are.    It is Gillian
                           Parks, is it not? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. You are no%f going to tell us about what you found? —
                    B      A. Yes, sir.   At about O 9 I5 hours on Saturday, 1 5 th
                           April, 1989, Peter Burkett left Liverpool together
                           with Michael Robertson and Jonathon Owens, who also
                           died in the disaster.   They travelled by private car
                           to Sheffield.   It was their intention to watch the
                           FA Semi Final match at the Hillsborough Stadium that
                           da}^.

                           They arrived in Sheffield at 1115 hours and visited
                           licensed premises in the City centre.

                           At about 1hhO hours that day they joined the crowd
                           outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles and a short time
                           later entered the stadium via. a concertina gate to the
                           right of the turnstiles, Gate C. They went together
                           into Enclosure 3 of the West Stand terracing where,
                    D      due to the crowd pressure, Michael Robertson became
                           separated from both Peter Burkett and Jonathon Owens,

                           Fo11owing the severe crushing in the West Stand
                           terracing, PC Barlow has been identified moving Peter
                           from the Enclosure,  PC Walton has also been identified
                           treating Peter on the pitch,  Michael Robertson made
                           his way onto the pitch following the severe crushing
                    E      and saw Peter lying in the penalty area at the Leppings
                           Lane end.  He could see he was dead.  He then went on
                           to try and find Jonathon Owens,

                           At about 153° hours Police Constable Hargreaves was
                           directed to the gymnasium and he was given responsibility
                           for Peter Burkett,

                           At 1600 hours Dr, Andrew Byrne examined Peter in the
                           temporary mortuary and certified his life extinct.

                           At 0105 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989? Mr,
                           Michael Robertson identified the body of Peter to
                           Police Constable Hargreaves in the temporary mortuary.
                           Police Constable Hargreaves escorted the body of Peter
                           to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the
                           identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

                                                         ,
                           On Sunday, 16th April, 1989 f ollowin; I identification
                           by Detective Constable Wei ^old, Prof, Usher carried
                           out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of
                           death.

                H          Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                           blood sample taken from Foter Burkett where the
                           presence of ethanol was detected.  The witnesses
J. L. Harpham Ltd
proving continuity of the blood sample are Dennis
Chambers, Detective Sergeant John Turner and
Detective Sergeant James Fletcher.    Dr. Alexander
Robert Forrest carried out the anal 3'_sis.

Found in the personal effects of Peter Burkett was
a full match ticket which is consistent with an
entry via Gate C.

     Sir, that concludes the summary.

I cannot remember what time you said the identification
was done.  It is paragraph 7.     Can you just remind me? -
A. At 0105 hours it is recorded by Michael Robertson.
There was a small discrepancy because an Officer
recorded in his statement 0 1 3 ° hours.

But, in fact, it is assumed to be 01 0 5 which is much
more likely because of the ambulance log which is timed
at 0116, is it not? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

     HR. FRASE R;   No questions,    sir, thank you.

           POLICE INSPECTOR frJCHABL LAYTON Called;

                       By TIES CORONER:

Yes? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
vlest Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination has been
made of video film and photographic evidence and Peter
has been identified alive outside the grotmd being
r’emoved from Snclosure No. 3 and also being carried
across the pitch.

Michael Robertson has identified Peter on a video
tape, a BBC video tape, referenced MAP 9 showing the
digits 0 0 1 2 t12:00. As 3 >-oti have already heard before,
sir, that is not an accurate time but we do know
that that film was taken some time between 1','-37 and
1450.   Sir, that shows Peter acttially outside the
ground in Leppings Lane and, in fact, quite near to
the bridge which goes over the river.         Sir, he has
identified himself, that is, Michael Robertson, on
a photograph referenced PR 5 / 2 9 and, at this stage,
he is seen running alongside a hoarding which, in
fact, Peter is being carried on by a number of
spectators.      If you can just give me a moment, sir,
I would, just like to check the time for that.        .Sir,
that photograph is timed at 153^»         Mr. Robertson
does not actually recall accompanying Peter across
the pitch and, in fact, we have not been able, as
yet, to identify the other spectators.         Again, sir,
it is something you have hea.rd before - people have
not always remembered everything that the 3/ have been
involved in.
Sir, I have been able to identify from clothing Peter
being removed from Enclosure Ho, 3 on a BBC viaeo
referenced MAP 7 timed at 1519:33:06 and we have not
been able to identify/ the persons involved in that
particular action, but I am satisfied, a3.tho'agh it
is from clothing, that it is Peter,

Police Constable Barlow has identified himself on a
video, again a BBC video, MAP 7» timed at 1521:23:02
and this shows him, together with other unknown
officers, carrying Peter from the gate of Enclosure
No, 3 onto the pitch.

Police Constable Walton has identified himself on a
video, MAP 7, timed at 1528:55:03 assisting to treat
Peter on the pitch.

In fact, sir, Mrs, Burkett has viewed visual evidence
and, as far as she is able, she has confirmed the
identification made.

Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been given
the reference number MWJL 168?

Yes, that will be C226. - A, And a second plan,
MWJL 31, which is a plan of the pitch.

Yes, C227. - A, Sir, in respect of the first plan,
MWJL 168, the identification made outside the ground
shows Peter in approximately this location h e r e ,
Actually in Leppings Lane,      Then in respect of the
pitch plan, sir, there are a number of identifications
shown, 'Two video locations off the BBC tape, HAP 7»
and that shows a location here actually in the gateway
of Gate no, 3 and another on the pitch h e r e . Then
the photographs I referred to, sir, PR57"2S shows a
location h e r e . That is one of the timed photographs,
six’. There is also reference on that plan to a
photograph DEl/5 which is not timed.      That shows
another location h e r e , and again it shows the progress
across the pitch, as in the case of man}^ other
people, from Leppings Lane end to the Spion Eop end,

     MR. FRASER:     No questions,   sir, thank you.

     MR. LIMB:     No, thank you.

      THE CORONER:    Mrs, Burkett, I understand that
really ]rou were a 3^oung married couple, were you not?
Yo^^ had not been married for very long and I am very,
very sorry that this should have happened to you and
that you should have lost your husband at an early
age for him and, of course, a very early age for you
as well.   Hot only have you lost your husband but,
I think, Jonathon was somebody who you knew and he
lost his life and I think do you also work at the
same insurance company?
                             1-..UO ,   M. 3UKEETT:   Yes

                             TI-ElD CORCITSR: So you have been hit from all sides,
                        have you not, by this tragedy and I am very, very sorry
                        indeed but, of course, the one who you now think of
                        most and miss most is Peter and I am just very sorry
                        that it has happened.    Thank you for being here this
                        morning.
                    B
                             Ue •'./ill rise just for a few moments so that we can
                        do the last one and then we will have a proper break for
                        lunch.




                    D




                    E




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
