HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

 VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

           STADIUM DISASTER

        ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                  At

            The Town Hall,
              Sheffield.

                  On

           12th March, 1991




       TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
      Off icial Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street» Sheffield SI 2DX
                    INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




B.D. MURRAY Recalled

     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King          1
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole             2
     Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien              3
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell              19
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr s . McBrien   23
     Further by The Coroner                     25
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning              29

D-G- DUCKENFIELD Sworn

     By The Coroner                             32
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                66
     Cross-Examined by M r . King               67




                r
             SIXTY EIGHTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                TUESDAY. 12th MARCH 1991

     THE CORONER: After you left we had another chat
and we think that perhaps Saturday may not be
necessary. That is good news, isn't it? What I did
think is that if I do decide we need extra time, would
starting half an hour earlier be better for you rather
than Saturday? Yes, okay. I am not saying we will do
that because we will be able to judge but it will
actually give us two and a half to three hours if we
need it, which is equivalent to a Saturday. Are you
happy with that? Good.

     MR. KING: Sir, there is one matter which is very
short which I should have raised with the witness
yesterday, if I might do so now.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, do that.

     MR. MANNING: Sir, perhaps before my learned
friend does that, in the interests of saving time
again, could I make reference to the caution, if one
may call it that? Periodically yesterday you did
remind Mr. Murray that he was not under an obligation
to answer a question which might tend to be
incriminating and that he had that right not to do so.
I simply come to my feet, of course, simply to remind
ourselves that that holds good overnight and the
position has not changed but also to say, sir, yet
again we acknowledge that. Whilst I know that you
might from time to time especially want to say, "This
is a potentially incriminating question" again we do
not need you to say it on each and every occasion.

     THE CORONER: That is very, very kind of you.
Thank you, Mr. Manning.

              BERNARD DEAN MURRAY Recalled

           Further Cross-Examined bv MR.   king

Mr. Murray, it relates to my questions to you as to
whether or not you accepted that the Police had a
responsibility in relation to the distribution and
filling of the terraces. Can you confirm that at some
time between twelve and two, some time between that
time, in the Control Box, Chief Inspector Creaser
visited you and asked you what strategy was going to be
adopted by the Police for the purposes of filling the
pens? - A. Yes, sir. I find it difficult to recall
Chief Inspector Creaser coming into the Control Room.
I have given it a lot of thought.  I do not want to go
back on what I said before but I am quite satisfied
that Chief Inspector Creaser did come in although I
cannot recall it myself.
                                                                          2

                                                                B. D. MURRAY


Q. You would, therefore, not take issue with his evidence
   that he came and spoke to you, asked what system was
   going to be adopted, and you indicated the system of
   the fans finding their own level? - A. I wouldn't
   dispute that at all, sir, no.

Q. In other words, you were indicating to him what system
   ought to be adopted by the Police for the purposes of
   the filling and the distribution on the terraces? - A.
   Yes, I was telling him that they would find their own
   level.

Q.        THE CORONER:   I think what you are saying is that
     although you cannot remember your part of the
     conversation you do not dispute his evidence that that
     took place? - A. I wouldn't dispute it, sir, and if he
     had come in and asked me that is what I would have told
     him.
                 C r o s s - E x a m i n e d bv MR. CATCHPOLE

Q. Superintendent Murray, I have only two areas which I
   would like to explore with you very briefly. The first
   is the evidence you were giving yesterday partly in
   answer to my learned friend, Mr. King, about the north­
   west terrace. You have told us your observations were
   that it was filling at about the same rate as the
   centre pens? - A. Probably. The north-west terrace is
   popular and the centre pens in the north-west terrace
   did fill first.

Q. Do you mean the whole of the elevated section over on
   the far side by the North Stand? - A. I mean the
   elevated section, yes, sir.

Q. Does that mean what we call pen 7 and the bit above it?
   - A. It means the raised area over and above pen 6.

Q. That whole corner from the pitch right the way up to
   the top? - A. Yes. Sorry, the raised section. The
   actual raised area. There is a wall.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Walk up to it and show us because
     that will be easier? - A. I mean this section here,
     sir. There is a wall that goes round here and people
     tend to find that very popular, probably because it is
     higher than the rest of the terrace.

Q.        MR. CATCHPOLE: Can we take it from your evidence
     that at about 2.30, when questions are being aimed at,
     that section is at roughly the same density as the
     centre pens?, - A. I cannot remember the density but
                                                             3
                                                   B. D. MURRAY


   there were a lot more people in the raised section and
   the centre pens than there were on those terraces.

Q. Your evidence is that those two areas were the ones
   that were looking fuller? - A. The most popular, yes.

Q. Turning to a slightly different topic, you said in
   answer again to questions by my learned friend, Mr.
   King, that you did not know precisely where all the
   stewards were going to be around the whole ground? - A.
   No.

Q. But that you expected the stewards to be briefed by the
   Officers in charge of that particular section of the
   ground as to their proper duties on the day? - A. Yes,
   I did.

Q. If I told you that we have had evidence from Chief
   Inspector Creaser that he both himself knew where the
   stewards were going to be and also overhead and
   applauded the briefing given by Inspector White to the
   stewards on the day, would that be what you would have
   expected from an Officer in his position? - A. Yes, I
   would have expected that.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   Thank you very much.

                Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Mr. Murray, you had an input into the 1989 Operational
   Order, didn't you? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. So if improvements needed to be made you would be able
   to make suggestions? - A. I did make suggestions of
   areas where I considered we needed to pay attention to.

Q. You mentioned a number of problems but one was that the
   fans were climbing up from the West Terrace into the
   West Stand. Do you remember? - A. Yes, I had seen that
   at the 1988 Semi Final.

Q. Did you think that something should be done about that,
   that some alteration should be made in the Operational
   Order to cater for that? - A. I wanted the Officers in
   the West Stand to be very aware that people were going
   to take that course of action. I just felt that having
   done it once it may become more prominent a second
   time.

Q. Do you think it may have been difficult for the
   Officers up in the West Stand to actually see these
   people climbing up? They may have already got to that
   point before the Officers spotted them doing it, might
                                                                 4
                                                      B. D. MURRAY


   they not? - A. I think it is difficult to see them
   climbing from the terraces into the West Stand, yes.

Q . So do you think in the way of an improvement a
    suggestion could have been made to have Officers
    positioned below on the terraces so that that could be
    prevented? - A. I am sure that now you mention it that
    that would possibly have been a better deterrent but we
    didn't have Officers on the terraces at football
    matches behind the fans.

Q. Did you find out why the fans were moving up into the
   stand? ~ A. I didn't find out. I could only assume
   that it was to get a better vantage point to watch the
   game.

Q. Might it have been a good idea to find out from the
   fans why they were doing that just in case there was
   overcrowding there? - A. I think it is very sad that we
   do not have a good dialogue between football supporters
   and people in charge at football matches about problems
   at football.




                                  /Q. So that they.


              f
                                                          5

                                               B. D. MURRAY


Q. So that they could be alleviated, couldn't they? - A. I
   think it would be very encouraging and very useful to
   know problems from people who attended matches, yes.

Q. You have accepted the "find your own level" for fans on
   the Leppings Lane Terrace, didn't you? - A. I had seen
   it operate and seen it operate successfully.

Q. That would work as a circuit, wouldn't it, really?
   They would come in and they had the freedom to go down
   the tunnel and round via the radial gates. They could
   make a complete circle if they wished, couldn't they? -
   A. There were several entrances and exits from the
   terrace and also, yes, you could walk right along the
   back of the terrace.
Q. As   we know, with the circuit system it is fine as long
   as   we don't    overload the system? -A. I think that you
   have got to be able to get from place to place, yes.

Q. If you had blocked the tunnel off in 1989 or '88, to
   stop fans going down there, there was nothing to stop
   fans going around and then using the radial gates to
   get to the centre, was there, because the radial gates
   were open? - A. The radial gates were open and people
   could pass from pen to pen via the radial gates.

Q. Sothat may not act as a deterrent for overcrowding in
   the centre pens, might it? It could still happen? - A.
   I am not sure what you are saying, I am sorry.

Q. It was possible for fans to move, if the tunnel was^
   blocked, go round to the left or right and make their
   way by way of the radial gates to the centre, if they
   wished to do so? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. In fact, crushing, although we know the centre pens are
   the most popular, we know that in 1981 there was a
   crushing incident in pen 1. Were you aware of that? -
   A. I wasn't aware before 1989, before the 1989 semi­
   final.
Q. But you would agree that crushing could take place
   anywhere depending on the numbers who come into that
   area? - A. I think you can have problems anywhere in
   the Ground, yes.

Q. In 1989 you were in overall control of the Control
   Room, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is correct,
   yes.
Q. You were in control of the event itself? - A. I was
   monitoring the events. The Officer in charge, there is
   only one Offficer in charge of the whole event.
                                                            6

                                                B. D. MURRAY


Q. But you were adviser to Mr. Duckenfield in the Control
   Box? - A. I considered that I was there as an adviser,
   yes.
Q. You were particularly interested in communications,
   weren't you? - A. Well yes, communications came under
   my sphere.
Q. You agreed with the allocation of the ends, didn't you?
   Liverpool in the Leppings Lane end and Nottingham
   Forest in the other end? - A. That wasn't my decision,
   that was the decision that was put to the Club by Mr.
   Mole and that was accepted.
Q. Did you think it was a good idea?    Did you have any say
   in the matter.
         THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien, I don't think


Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   As Mr. Duckenfield said he would
     like a log kept of the events that day, you ensured
     that this would be done, didn't you? - A. I discussed
     it with the Sergeant in the Control Room. I wanted an
     extra person in there but because of the size of the
     Control Room, and acting on his advice and in
     agreement, decided that it was impractical to have
     anyone else in the Control Room so I endeavoured to
     keep a log, yes.

Q. Were checks carried out that day on the radio equipment
   and on individual radios before the match started? - A.
   The radios are always tested. It took a considerable
   time on that day because there were so many serials,
   but they were all tested after the briefing.

Q. What time was that, please? - A. It is in the log. I
   think it would perhaps be about 11.30, maybe a little
   later. The whole thing lasted about an hour.

Q. Was the public address system tested, as well? - A. The
   public address system was tested by the Control Room
   staff just before I arrived at the Control Room. In
   fact, as I went to the Control Room an engineer was
   working on one of the speakers near to the Control Room
   and he completed that and that was tested while I was
   there.

Q. Did you   personally go to see the referee to tell him
   about a   coded message in the event of an emergency?
   Did you   brief him in that way? - A. Yes, I saw the
   referee   and told him about the message.

              f
                                                           7

                                              B. D. MURRAY


Q. You said you got a message at 17-minutes-past-2 from
   Superintendent Marshall asking for Leppings Lane to be
   closed to traffic. That is in the log, isn't it? - A.
   Yes, that is correct.

Q. I presume you did not see a problem in Leppings Lane at
   that time? - A. I didn't consider there was a
   particular problem from what I could see on the
   monitor, but he being the man on the ground had the
   best view, and if he wanted    it closed then he had
   reasons for it.

Q. Strangely enough, Superintendent Marshall when he gave
   his evidence, he said that there was nothing unusual at
   that time happening, as the numbers arriving at that
   time were about what he expected and the behaviour of
   the fans was very satisfactory. Did you query what he
   was asking for? - A. He was asking for Leppings Lane to
   be closed.  I think a message came through saying that
   people and vehicles were getting mixed up, words to
   that effect, and Superintendent Marshall, I know him,
   he is very experienced, he is the one that took command
   of football matches in Mr. Mole's absence, he asked for
   Leppings Lane to be closed and I arranged for it to be
   closed.

Q. So you did not query it? - A. No, I did not query it.

Q. Did you think it was an unusual request to be making at
   that time of the day, such a while before the match was
   to begin, three-quarters of an hour almost before the
   match was to start? - A. It was an unusual request in
   that we had not closed Leppings Lane before to my
   knowledge, before a football game, and it showed there
   were a lot of people in Leppings Lane, yes.

Q. As Mr. Duckenfield was a new Commander, did you tell
   him that that was not the usual procedure? - A. I don't
   think so. I can't recall but I don't think so.

Q. You said you had not known of it closed before a match
   before, didn't you? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. When you were planning the Operational Order you did
   not think it might be necessary to close Leppings Lane
   at that time, did you? It wasn't written into the
   Order? - A. It wasn't written into the Order. Like I
   say, it was a complete one off, it was unexpected.

Q. Although the request came at 2.17 it took a little
   while before the traffic stopped completely though,
   didn't it? You saw buses going along at a later time
   on the photographs? - A. It took a little while to
   close becaMse we could only contact one serial
                                                           8

                                              B. D. MURRAY


  initially to close the bottom end. I had to get back
  to Mr. Marshall and ask him to send someone up to close
  the top end, or find some Officers up there to close
  it. I think I said yesterday it would not be unusual
  for an Officer to use his own initiative and perhaps
  allow a bus or a couple of buses through. I can't
  really say.

Q. But about 2.30 did you see that a larger than usual
   crowd had developed outside the turnstiles? - A. I
   can't say whether it was a larger than usual crowd. It
   was a large crowd; I did notice it was a large crowd,
   yes.
Q. Did you think at that time, when you looked at the
   monitor, that all the people you could see outside the
   turnstiles would get in by 3 p.m? - A. I thought that
   all those people and more would get in by 3 p.m.

Q. So it did not appear a problem then at 2.30? - A. It
   did not appear a problem to me at 2.30, no.

Q. Would you say that the turnstiles were operating
   efficiently at that time, as far as you could tell? -
   A. I certainly did not see anything which made me
   believe that the turnstiles were not working
   efficiently at that time.

Q. But you did become concerned at just before 2.45,
   didn't you? - A. About?

Q. Just before 2.45? - A. Concerned about what?

Q. About the crowd and the happenings at the turnstiles? -
   A. Oh yes, I was getting concerned about matters at
   that time, yes.

Q. At that time did you try to contact the Club or
   Security Officer? - A. I did. It may have been a
   couple of minutes before 2.45 but I did try and contact
   Mr. Lock on the Club's radio system.




                   /Q. Were you successful
                                                           9

                                                B. D. MURRAY


Q.   Were you successful in doing that? - A. No, I wasn't.

Q.   Did you or Mr. Duckenfield consider delaying the kick-
     off at that particular time just before 2.45? - A. I
     don't know about Mr. Duckenfield. I did not consider
     it. I think that so many things were happening -
     again we were in a state of turmoil in the Control
     Room - that that thought never crossed my mind at that
     time.

Q.   I believe the radio had become faulty at 2.42, that is
     right, is it not? - A. I would think it was some time
     about 2.40-ish and for several minutes the Control
     Room was in disarray and disruption.

Q.   And you threw the radio down, did you not? I made a
     note of that. - A. I think Sergeant Goddard threw the
     handset down. When I say threw it down, he just went
     like that (Indicating) in disgust.

Q.   This disruption that was caused then, it was only for
     a very short time, though, was it not, a minute or so?
     - A. I really can't say. I don't know whether it was
     a minute or two minutes. That was when the radio was
     down. I don't know how long it took the engineer to
     sort everything out. It wasn't the time, it was the
     disruption to the communications. It was disruption
     to everybody in the room. It was having to get up out
     of your seats and move around. It was very
     disruptive.

Q. I believe about that time you sent a reserve serial to
    Leppings Lane. I am talking now about 2.40? - A. Yes,
    it would be slightly before the reserve serial was
    sent.

Q.   That was Sergeant Higgins, was it? - A. Yes it was.

Q.   The Crime and Vandal Squad. You also sent extra
     mounted Officers to the area? - A. Yes, extra mounted
     Officers had been deployed from the Penistone Road
     end.

Q.   Did you consider doing anything else to enable
     Officers to manage the situation at that time? - A. I
     would be looking to see whether there were other
      serials that we could perhaps get together if the
     situation became worse. I was hoping that the
     additional mounted Officers and the extra serial might
     be able to give the support that Mr. Marshall needed,
      together with the tannoy messages that were being sent
     from the Control Box over the public address system.
                                                            10
                                                B. D. MURRAY

Q.   Was this to try and retrieve the situation outside the
     turnstiles? Was that the purpose of the extra mounted
     Officers and the serial being sent there, so that
     control could have been regained? Was that the idea
     of it? - A. I am sure that was the idea.

Q.   You were getting a lot of messages at about the time
     the radio was faulty and just after, and you received
     one from Superintendent Marshall asking for the gates
     to be opened at Leppings Lane. His initial request
     did not mention crushing at the turnstiles, did it? -
     A. I really cannot remember. I do not know, I am
     sorry.

Q.   That request came at 2.47, did it not? - A. So I have
     been told, yes.

Q.   Did you notice on the monitor at that time that the
     number of people who were outside there did not look
     as though they were going to get in by 3 o'clock? Did
     the numbers look too large? - A. I would not dispute
     that at that time, no.

Q.   So kick-off could have been a possibility then,
     looking at the numbers on the screen that you were
     getting? - A. I say, I don't dispute that. I didn't
     give thought to postponing the kick-off at that time.
     I didn't give thought to it.

Q.   Was it noticeable that the turnstiles had actually
     slowed down? Do you think this was causing a problem?
     " A. It was noticeable to me at about — I do not know,
     I think I would put it about 2.44/2.45 that there
     seemed to be a problem behind the A to G turnstiles.
     I was watching the turnstiles and I couldn't see the
     amount of people coming in that I expected.

Q.   The rate flow had altered, had it then? - A. It
     appeared to me that the rate of flow was far less than
     it should have been, and that is why I tried to get in
     touch with Mr. Lock.

Q.   You then received a further three requests from
     Superintendent Marshall to open the gates, did you
     not? - A. I think I described them as two requests
     fairly close together, and then a pause, and then a
     further two requests fairly close together, yes.

Q.   Have you ever thought of Gates A, B and C being
     entrance gates at Hillsborough? - A. I have never
     thought ?of the exit gates being entrance gates, no.

Q.   When Superintendent Marshall made his first request he
     was told to stand by while the situation was assessed,
                                           B. D. MURRAY


fruf   not? *■? see      could be recovered? - A. I
think I said it was an extremely serious step to take
and, yes, he was told to stand by. Whether it was me,
or probably the radio operator, but I did ask the
radio operator to tell him to stand by.

After the fourth request was made, which was five
minutes after the first one,, you said, "Mr.
Duckenfield are you going to open the gates? You have
got to make a decision now." That is right, is it
not? - A. I don't think so. I think the first part is
right. I don't recall saying, "You've got to make a
decision now". I think I said, "Mr. Duckenfield, are
we going to open those gates?"

1 believe Mr. Duckenfield was still considering the
possibility of regaining control, was he, outside at
that time? - A. I don't know what he was considering,
but I was hoping that we might retrieve the situation
and I came to the conclusion that we couldn't, we
couldn't wait any longer, that we weren't going to
recover what was happening outside, and that the risk
to the people out there was far too great to wait any
longer.                                             J
So in your opinion you thought the gates had to be
opened? - A. Yes, I did.

Although Superintendent Marshall's initial request
came at 2.47, we know that Gate A was not opened until
2 •58 •

     THE CORONER: I think on that point we have got to
be a little careful. In fact, Mr. King said that as
well. We will be showing a video of Gate A opening,
and I think all that is on the video is it shows Gate
A open at 2.58. It does not show the opening and so
it is very difficult actually to be certain exactly
what time it was opened. So I do not think you can
quite put like that. That is not your fault. It is
just that the video of that particular gate is not as
good as some of the other videos which we have had the
advantage of seeing. But I do not want you to put it
like that because you might get an answer which does
not actually make any sense.

     MRS. McBRIEN: But the requests from
Superintendent Marshall did say "gates", did they not?
They did not say "gate"? He was not referring to one
specific gate, was he? - A. He said, "Open the gates".

So it wo'uld include B and C, would it not? - A. I
thought it would include B and C gates, yes.
                                                               12

                                                   B. D. MURRAY

Q. But we know that Sergeant Higgins made a request for
    Gate A to be opened, did he not, later on? - A. Yes,
    he did.

Q.   As far as I can make out, it wasn't opened and this is
      why he made the request for it to be opened. That is
     how I am summing it up.

          MR. KING: Sir, to help Mrs. McBrien on the
     evidence on timing, I think it is established, is it
     not, that it was after 2.52, whatever time it was,
     that the request to open Gate A came, because it was
     after Gate C had been opened?

          THE CORONER: I cannot quite remember when
     Sergeant Higgins made the request, but I think there
     is no doubt that Gate A was opened after 2.52.

          MR. KING: I think the evidence of this witness,
     sir, is that the request came after Gate C had been
     opened.

          THE WITNESS: There is no doubt in my mind, sir,
     that the request for Gate A did come after Gate C was
     opened.

             THE CORONER: Okay, fair enough.   Thank you Mr.
     King.




                                  /Q.   MRS. McBRIEN:


               r
                                                             13

                                                   B. D. MURRAY


Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   Thank you.    Gate B was never
     opened, was it? - A. I don't know.

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien,   how can you say that?

          MRS. MCBRIEN:   I would like to turn to the
     transcript of Superintendent Murray's evidence at the
     Taylor Inquiry, where it says that.

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, it may say that, but
     you are putting it to him.   You can put to him whether
     he knows whether Gate B was opened, but you cannot say it
     wasn't opened unless of course you say that Mr. Ridge,
     and several of the spectators like Mr. Pitt and
     Mr. Seddon and various others all were telling untruths.
     Not just untruths.

          MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am sorry to interrupt, but I spoke
     to the gentleman who was at Gate B...

          THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, I said you cannot put
     that question.    I was trying to be helpful but I am now
     telling you that you can ask the question as to whether
     or not he knew that Gate B was open and you cannot ask
     him anything else on that score.

Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   Superintendent, do you know if
     Gate B was opened or not? - A. I don't know, no.

Q. The radio was on talk-through that day, wasn't it? - A.
   Yes, that was the usual state at Hillsborough for all
   matches.

Q. Would that mean that all Officers could hear what was
   said? - A. With talk-through all Officers can hear both
   incoming and outgoing messages.

Q. Did anyone in the Control Box notice anything unusual or
   alarming in pens 3 and 4 a few minutes after Gate C had
   been opened for the second time at 2.52? - A. I don't
   know whether anyone else did, but no-one said anything to
   me, no-one drew it to my attention.   I think I have
   already said that I didn't.   None of the Officers in
   there said to me there was something wrong.

Q. Did you notice anything at 2.59 happening there? - A. I
   can't go by the exact timing but    I did notice that the
   gates were   opened and an Officer  was helpingsome people
   out.   I do not know exactly what time that was.

Q. You do not   know if it was before   kick-off? -A. I don't.
   It is very   difficult, but it was at an earlystage.
   There were no other people on the track at that stage.
                 r
                                                               14

                                                   B. D. MURRAY


Q.    Did you connect those two events, the opening of Gate C
     and the people coming out on to the pitch?    Did they
     connect in any way? -A. They did not form a connection to
     me, no*

Q.    Did you go on the pitch at that stage, or was it a little
     later? - A. I went on to the pitch to try and stop the
     game and them a minute or so after that.

Q.    But you did not stop the game? We    know that
     Superintendent Greenwood did that, didn't he? - A. That
     is correct.

Q.    At that particular time did youconsider using the PA
     system to announce there was an emergency in theground
     when the Superintendent was going to stop the match?
     Was it considered necessary to make an announcement to
     the whole ground? - A. I didn't consider making a public
     address message at that time because I did not know
     exactly what the problem was at that time.

Q. Did Superintendent Greenwood speak to you at all?   Did
   you discuss anything before he went to stop the match? -
   A. No, I did not speak to Superintendent Greenwood at
   all.   I had seen him from the track side indicating to
   me to stop the match.   He actually stopped the match
   before I did, but I did not speak to Superintendent
   Greenwood after that.

Q. Did you think it must be something quite serious for the
   match to be stopped? - A. Well, people were on the pitch
   and I think that is a stage when play is normally
   stopped.   I would expect it to be stopped once people
   are actually on the field of play.

Q. However, you weren't able to assess what was happening in
   the pens, is that what you are saying? - A. At that time
   I was unable to tell exactly what was happening.

Q. I believe you did put out tannoy messages at that time,
   didn't you, telling people to move back?

          THE CORONER:   I don't think it was Superintendent
     Murray.   Let's just check that:

Q. Did you yourself authorise the tannoy messages around
   this time, PA messages, for people... - A. I was on the
   pitch and asked for them to be sent.   I asked for tannoy
   messages to be sent asking for people to move back.

Q. This was after the match had finished? - A. That was
   after the match had finished, yes.

                r
                                                                   15

                                                        B. D. MURRAY


          MR. KING:   I think the evidence was he asked for
     it, but there is no evidence as to whether or not it was
     broadcast.

          THE CORONER:   Or, to put it another way, no
     evidence that anybody heard it?

             MR. KING;      Either way, sir, one can say it is the
     same.

             THE CORONER:     No, it is not quite the same.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:         I remind you of the evidence of
     Mr. Mackrell.

             THE CORONER:     That is why I rephrased the comment.

          MR. MANNING:   We were almost there.   I think what
     the Superintendent said was that he did pass a message
     through for the public address to used, but he cannot say
     himself whether it was.

             THE CORONER:     That's right, yes:

Q. That is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:     I know there have been a lot of
     comments.   What I have got written here is that tannoy
     messages were put out saying, "Please move back and stop
     pushing."   Was that ever said? - A. I don't know. I
     cannot recall hearing tannoy messages, but I don't know.

Q. If it was that message, "Please move back and stop
   pushing," do you think a message such as, "There are
   people being crushed in the front of the centre pens.
   Will people at the rear of those pens come out of the
   tunnel immediately," that might have been a better
   message?

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, no.   This is a
     hindsight question which really does not help us one tiny
     bit.   Do not answer that question.   It is not a proper
     question.




               Q. MRS. MCBRIEN:    So you

                   r
                                                               16
                                                     B. D. MURRAY


Q.        MRS. McBrien, So you were not aware of the
     messages you said? - A. I didn't hear the messages. I
     didn't consciously hear the messages. I do not know
     whether they were sent but I didn't hear them myself.
Q. I made a note that they were sent out at seven minutes
   past three and nine minutes past three...
          THE CORONER: He has given you an answer, Mrs.
     McBrien, and I am not letting you introduce evidence.
     I am sorry.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: When you went on the pitch were you
     just standing there? I think you did say you helped
     one or two people, is that right? - A. When I went on
     the pitch I was going to try and clear the people off
     the centre of the pitch towards the wings so that they
     could see exactly what was happening and I think I said
     that I very quickly realised that that was an
     impossible task. It was different. There was
     something different about the whole scenario. People
     appeared shocked and appeared dazed and were standing
     around. I think I said that as I approached the goal
     posts I then saw that people were actually trapped
     against the fence. I could see their faces against the
     fence. It was then I realised we had a very serious
     incident and my first thought then was to get some
     ambulances to the ground because I had heard the
     operator saying he was putting an ambulance on standby
     as I left just half a minute or so earlier and I
     realised we wanted a lot of ambulances.

         I went to get a radio. I think I said Iapproached
     one or two Officers who were PCs who did not have
     radios and then found a Sergeant and took his radio off
     him and asked for the fleet of ambulances and asked for
     the tannoy messages and asked for the    cutting
     equipment.    Then it is very difficult  to sayexactly
     what I did then. As I looked around I saw that people
     were being got out of there. They were lying on the
     track. There were attempts to resuscitate them by
     Officers, by fans at the game. I gave what little bit
     of help I could to some. I couldn't afford to get
     involved with one individual. That wasn't my role. I
     wanted to try and keep some control of what was
     happening.

Q. Did you decide to go round to the back, to the
   concourse area and round to the tunnel?

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I have tried to be as
     patient as 1^ can but all we have done up to now is to
     recite the evidence which I elicited in chief and which
                                                                   17
                                                          B. D. MURRAY


     everybody else, in so far as it was relevant,
     questioned. There is no need to repeat all the
     evidence. You know he went round the back. You do not
     need to ask him. He has told you. If you have a
     question relating to that then by all means ask it but
     we are not going to go on reciting the evidence which
     is what we have been doing for 85 per cent of your
     questioning time. All we have done is repeated what he
     has already told us and it is of no use whatsoever.
     Have you got a question about him being at the back of
     the terrace?

          MRS. McBRIEN: When I ask a question I may be
     asking it in a different way, looking for a different
     answer.

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I have given a ruling.
     You have to abide by it whether you like it or not. I
     have not said you may not ask a question. What I have
     said is that you are not going to recite all the
     evidence which we have already heard. It is sometimes
     difficult and that is why I have allowed you to go on
     for three quarters of an hour but common sense has got
     to prevail as well at some point.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: What were you intending to do when
     you went round to the back of the terrace? - A. I was
     hoping to get people to move back from the terraces.

Q. When you first went down the tunnel, did you see an
   Inspector, some Police Officers and some people in the
   tunnel?

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, were you listening,
     with great respect, to what was going on yesterday? I
     am sorry, he does not have to answer that question. He
     has already answered it.

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I wanted to investigate who
     they were.

          THE CORONER:    He has answered that as well.

          MRS. McBRIEN: I am terribly sorry but I made a
     note when evidence was being given that it was said,
     "We have got them all out". I wanted to establish who
     it was you were referring to and so I checked up on
     that and I found it was not the injured people who were
     got out.

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, the Officer has told
     us that he does not know who the name of the Inspector
                                                               18

                                                     B. D. MURRAY

     was. Is that right? Are you going to read it?    Will
     you help Mrs. McBrien?

           MR. MANNING: You tried very hard, sir. You asked
     him about Inspector Sykes and Inspector Bullas and he
     said:

         "I just cannot recall which Inspector it was."

          MRS. McBRIEN: Thank you, Mr. Manning. I know
     Superintendent Murray said he did not recall who the
     Inspector was but what I am concerned about is the
     little bit that was said, "We have got them all out
     now”. That could mean to anybody that it could be
     referring to the injured people.

          THE CORONER:   Just a minute.

Q. You heard the remark made, "We have got them all out"
   or words to that effect by one of these Police
   Officers. You have answered this as well but I do not
   mind you repeating it. What did you understand that
   remark meant? - A. Because of what was said I thought
   it meant people in the tunnel.

Q. People in the tunnel? - A. In the tunnel.

Q.       MRS. McBRIEN: I was looking at the transcript of
     your evidence at the Taylor Inquiry, Mr. Murray, and
     the 50 people or thereabouts who were in the tunnel
     were people who were moved out because, as it says in
     the transcript, they were the worse for drink. They
     were the people who had been removed from the tunnel.
     This is why I felt it was important to establish who it
     was who had been removed, not the injured people who
     were in front, in the front of pens 3 and 4. - A. What
     the Inspector said to me was, "We have got them all
     out. They were all drunk". That is what he said and I
     assumed he meant people who were in the tunnel area.
     There were still some people there when I got there. I
     estimated a figure of 50, I don’t know. It may be
     higher and it may be lower. There weren’t a lot of
     people in.

Q. So they were got out safely these people, of course,
   were they not? They were in no danger, were they? - A.
   No.

Q. Not in the position they were in? - A. They were just
   standing about.

Q. I think you .said in your evidence that you saw Officers
   on the terrace but once again I found in the transcript
                                                             19

                                                   B. D. MURRAY


   of your evidence at the Taylor Inquiry that you were
   not able to make your way down on the terrace. Which
   one am I to read as—   - A. I don't recall saying that.
   I didn't consider that there was a need to go down.
   The need to make people move back from the front had
   gone as far as I was concerned. You must appreciate
   that I had seen people trapped against the fence. I
   wanted to get the pressure off those people because I
   thought it was pressure from behind that was trapping
   them. When I looked down the pressure had come off.
   Police Officers were on the terrace side and were
   actually working there. I didn't know, and I had no
   idea that there had been a particular problem, that a
   barrier had collapsed, that people had been trapped in
   those circumstances. The people I saw were against the
   fence.

Q. That was from the trackside though that you saw that,
   wasn't it? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Not from the tunnel side? - A. No, not from the tunnel
   side.

Q. You turned back and went back to the pitch, didn't you?
   - A. Yes, I did.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you very much.

                Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL

Q. I have one or two questions, the first of which is
   going to relate to something Sergeant Griffiths may
   have gone to fetch. Perhaps I can introduce the matter
   first? Superintendent, may I touch on three matters?
   First of all, you were asked yesterday about a time
   which came when you dispatched an Officer from the
   Control Room to assist in the relocation of supporters
   on the perimeter track following a time when you had
   seen a number of supporters coming out from the centre
   pens? - A. Yes.

Q. You told us that you dispatched the Officer to assist a
   woman Police Officer who was at either gates 1 or 2? -
   A. Yes.

Q. That Police Officer, can you remember his name? - A. It
   was Chief Inspector McRobbie.

Q. He was an Officer who was in plain clothes that day? -
   A. Yes, he wasn't involved in the event.

Q. You were asked by the Coroner whether you could
   remember when that happened and when Chief Inspector
                                                                 20
                                                        B. D. MURRAY


     McRobbie went down. First of all, can I clarify this;
     did you see Chief Inspector McRobbie do what you asked
     him to do? - A. Yes, I think he went down on to the
     track and spoke to the Policewoman, yes.

Q. I wonder if you could please look at a photograph of
   which I hope Sergeant Griffiths has prepared an acetate
   which may assist you with the time about which you said
   you were unsure yesterday. That is from album PR1 and
   it is frame 4A.

          THE CORONER:   This is a new one I take it?

          MR. RUSSELL: Sir, it is a new one and that is why
     I have had an acetate done.

          MR. BEECHEY:   The C number for this, sir, is
     C.534.

Q.        MR. RUSSELL: First of all, Officer, you can see
     the perimeter fence running across the bottom of the
     photograph, can you not? - A. Yes, I can, sir.

Q. At the bottom left hand corner of the perimeter fence
   is an open gate which would be gate 1? - A. Yes, there
   is a gate open.

Q. Can you see in that open gateway there - unfortunately
   you can only see half her head - a woman Police
   Constable? - A. Yes, it appears to be a female Officer,
   yes.

Q. To the right of the photograph in the bottom right hand
   corner,  do you see a man pointing tothe left with his
   back tothe camera? - A. Yes, I can.

Q. That is   Chief Inspector McRobbie, isit not? - A. Yes,
   it looks very much like it.

Q. That photograph appears to illustrate a man directing a
   number of fans towards that open gate where the woman
   Police Constable is standing. Would you agree with
   that? - A. That is what it appears, yes.

Q. That photograph has a corrected time of exactly three
   o'clock. Does that help you in your recollection as to
   when you sent the Officer down to assist the woman
   Police Constable to relocate the fans you had seen come
   out of the centre pen? - A. I would think that is
   probably about right. It was at a very early stage.

Q. The next matjter concerns the radio message that you
   sent either at that or about that time to
                                                         21

                                               B. D. MURRAY


Superintendent Greenwood asking him to go from the
players' tunnel to see what was happening at the
Leppings Lane end. Do you remember that evidence? - A.
Yes, I do remember that.




                            /Q. As I understand your.
                                            B. D. MURRAY


As I understand your evidence you sent a radio message
to him but you don't know whether he received it or
not? - A. I don't know. I have heard what Mr.
Greenwood said but I don't know. I don't recall an
acknowledgment as such.

But as I understand your evidence, could I just deal
with the timing of it, there came a time when you saw
Superintendent Greenwood going from the area of the
players' tunnel towards the Leppings Lane end, is that
right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

That time at which you saw him do that was very shortly
after the radio message was sent? - A. Yes, everything
seemed to fall into place.

So either he received the message or coincidentally, as
he told us, he was acting on his own observation? It
all happened at one and the same time? - A. It happened
in perfect sequence, yes.

The importance of this is there was not a delay between
the sending of the message and any perceived reaction
in Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Not that I am aware
of, no.

The final matter that I want to touch upon is you say
there came a time when you saw Superintendent
Greenwood, whom you have described as being head and
shoulders above the crowd at gate 3, gesticulating to
the Control Box? - A. Yes, indeed.

You were in no doubt that what he was telling you   or
advising you was that in his view the game should   be
stopped? - A. No doubt at all.

I just wonder if we could look at a photograph which he
has identified, in which he has identified the gesture
that he was making, and see if that rings any bells
with you?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sergeant Griffiths, the original
reference was PR133A.

     SERGEANT GRIFFITHS:   I think it is C529, sir.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Thank you, it is.   Could you please
put that up?

Do you have that photograph, Superintendent? - A. Yes,
I do.
                                                        23

                                              B. D. MURRAY


Q. In that photograph we can see Superintendent Greenwood
   gesticulating in the direction of the Control Box? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Is that, albeit a frozen image of it, but is that the
   sort of gesture that you recall him making, by which
   you understood him to be saying the game should be
   stopped? - A. It would appear so. I saw the gesture
   quite clearly; there was no doubt in my mind as to what
   he wanted.

Q. And that, of course, was at 4-minutes-past~3, as we can
   see from the time of that photograph. That would fit
   in with your recollection, would it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Thank you very much.

        MR. MANNING:   Are there some questions, sir, that
   you have for the Officer? I can promise you that what
   I have left to do would, I think, militate towards
   trying to finish the Superintendent's evidence before
   we break.

        THE CORONER:   Okay. I have got a few from the
   Jury so let me do those first, and then if that is the
   case we might as well have our coffee break afterwards.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, before you do that I have
   just thought of another three questions, please, if I
   may ask them? I am sorry, I thought I would have had a
   second chance.

        THE CORONER:   No, you don't normally get a second
   chance any more but ask your three questions, if they
   are relevant, of course. Put your three questions and
   I will decide whether you can ask them. Carry on.

          Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Mr. Murray, is it correct that no one was briefed as to
   the method of getting fans out of the pens if there was
   a crush? - A. I did not brief anyone on that particular
   method.  I don't know whether there is an authorised
   method and I don't know whether any Officers considered
   that.

Q. There was mention of a coach in Leppings Lane when you
   were giving evidence, but I believe you said there
   would be a coach there but it would have no Officers on
   it? That is the note I made. - A. The coach that I
   arranged was to contain Officers who were doing public
   order duties and would have made their way down to the
   coach after the kick-off, or after we had authorised
   Officers to go on what we call phase 2. There should
                                                             24

                                                 B. D. MURRAY


   not have been a coach with Officers in at any time
   prior to 3 o'clock.

Q. So you are saying the Officers would be there after
   kick-off? - A. These were Officers ....

Q. Not before? - A. These were Officers who were
   performing duties on the periphery of the Ground, round
   the shopping malls, round the public houses. Once the
   fans were all into the Ground I had arranged for two
   coaches to park in Penistone Road and Leppings Lane,
   and 50 Officers to board each coach and stay there as a
   standby in case they were needed during the event.

Q. So there were Officers then in the coach.     I am getting
   a bit muddled with this. I was reading in
   Superintendent Greenwood's evidence at the    Taylor
   Inquiry, when it was stated that there was    a coach with
   50 Officers positioned in Leppings Lane in    order to
   deal ....

        MR. RUSSELL:    Sir, I wonder, could we have a
   reference?

        THE CORONER:    Have you got a page number then we
   can look it up.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Unfortunately I was going through
   the whole of Superintendent Greenwood's evidence last
   night and it got to 1 o'clock and I thought ....

        THE CORONER:   Well unless we have a page number
   it is very difficult to take it up.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    It is in that transcript.    I do
   know that ....

        THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien. I don't like
   using other people's evidence anyway. It is bad enough
   using the individual's. You can ask him about the
   coach ....

        MR. MANNING:   I think probably Mr. Murray is only
   going to be able to say he knows what he had arranged
   and not anything else more than that, because of course
   he was static in the Control Box.

       THE CORONER:     That is right.

       MRS. McBRIEN:     All right, thank you:

Q. Just this last question: P.C. Buxton we know did ask
   for a delay of the game, didn't he? - A. Yes, I think
   it was P.Cji Buxton.
                                                       25

                                              B. D. MURRAY


Q. And you said Sergeant Goddard said no to him? - A.
   Sergeant Goddard said, "It's too late now, the players
   are out".

Q. I am sorry, I thought he said the gates had been
   opened. I don't know where I have got that from, but
   would you agree that it is never too late, if there is
   a risk of fans being injured in any way by the action
   that is being taken? - A. I think I have said that
   there are no rules, or there were no rules about
   delaying kick-off.  It can be done at any time for any
   reason.

Q. Thank you very much.

                  Further by THE CORONER

Q. The Jury have got a few questions. The first question
   is, "Were any alterations made in the Operational Order
   to account for the cuts in manning level?" I think
   what the Jury are asking you is, in fact, what cuts if
   any were made in manning levels, where and why? - A. I
   think there was one reserve serial was removed that
   would normally be   down at the Ground, that was
   reduced from three to two. Most of the public order
   serials were reduced from a Sergeant and ten Officers
   to a Sergeant and eight. These are the serials that
   are outside in the residential area around the Ground.
   The mobile units were cut down by one Officer into a
   Sergeant and five instead of a Sergeant and six, or a
   Sergeant and four, I can't remember.  I think one
   serial was cut out down at the Hillsborough precinct
   end. I had been very concerned about that the year
   before but the problems that we had anticipated never
   arose. The general reduction was right across the
   board outside the Ground, and I think that apart from
   the one reserve serial there was no alteration to the
   manpower actually in the Ground.

Q. Were these alterations made in the light of the
   experience of 1988, is that what you are saying? - A.
   Very much so. We tried to balance it by bringing in a
   number of new features.  I arranged for three prison
   vans to be utilised. What we had found the year before
   is that if a prisoner was arrested, say at
   Hillsborough, we had to send one of our tango units,
   which was a Sergeant and six men, and they were tied up
   in just taking one prisoner away. I introduced three
   single man prison vans that would go to wherever there
   was a necessity and the Officers making the arrest
   would go back with the prisoner, hence not tying the
   tango units up.

            ?
                                                        26

                                              B. D. MURRAY


   We have also heard about the coaches. We found that
   there was an enormous amount of manpower last year, in
   1988, that was obliged to take its meal and its standby
   position down at our Police garages at Claywheels Lane.
   When we did have problems in the Ground they were too
   far away to deploy and everything fell upon the
   unfortunate "D Division serials that for the whole of
   the game were employed within the Ground and did not
   get a chance to get a meal. I arranged for the two
   coach loads and Officers on standby during the match,
   who would be there and very easy to deploy, but there
   were certainly Officers that were very much under
   employed the year before, and because of the few
   problems we had I was instructed to aim for a reduction
   in manpower, which I did.

Q. Would the size of the Control Box have any effect on
   the duties of the Officers inside? - A. I think the
   Control Box is just about the right size for the amount
   of people who are intended to be in it. On semi-finals
   we are quite disciplined. On other matches we get a
   lot of people visiting the Control Room but we try and
   keep it tight on a big match. Obviously, I think it
   was big enough for the normal staff but it is not big
   enough when you want more people in, or when more
   people come to it.

Q. On the day of the disaster were you able to monitor the
   different parts of the terrace at random? I think what
   the Jury is asking is with the cameras, not with the
   eyes. - A. The camera that would be best equipped for
   that was the one that was in the centre of the South
   Stand, which would show a slightly oblique picture of
   the terraces and the Kop. Unfortunately for most of
   the event that was trained on the problems that we had
   in the Kop, particularly after some ejections and
   arrests had been made from that area. What we normally
   use the cameras for is evidence gathering and you can
   only gather and preserve the evidence of what you are
   actually looking at, at the time. When we foresee
   problems in a certain part of the Ground we will record
   that particular area for the whole of the event, and
   that gives us the chance to then take still photographs
   from the video and blow them up later, and utilise them
   as evidence and identify people who are wrongdoers.

Q. The next question is a supplemental one on that really.
   Did you rely more on your own physical view from the
   Control Box or on the monitors, and I think we must be
   talking about the terracing still because you could
   not, of course, see outside, could you, without looking
   at the monitors? - A. No. We had a good view of the
   terraces from the Control Box. We could see the
   terraces, had a good view of the terraces. I probably
                                                   27

                                          B. D. MURRAY


relied more on what I could see with my own eyes than
anything else. If I had seen a particular problem I
would have tried to get the video operator to zero in
as close as he could get. All cameras have a zoom lens
but their capabilities are only as good as the actual
lens, and the better the lens the much more expensive
they are. They seemed to be all right for our
purposes.




              /Q. Do you think .
                                                            28

                                                B. D. MURRAY


Q«      y°u think that concentrating on the matters outside
     the turnstile areas may have distracted you from
     seeing the build-up of fans on the terraces? In other
     words, were you distracted, was your attention
     directed away from the terraces, because of the events
     which were occurring outside? - A. It is very
     difficult to say, but obviously the major problem
     between 20-to 3 and whatever time the gates opened was
     going on outside the Leppings Lane terraces. I feel
     that that is where the majority of my attention would
     be directed. I would still be looking at different
     aspects of the ground. I would still try and keep
     abreast of everything that was happening inside and
     outside, but obviously the problems that were apparent
     there and that were increasing there would take my
     main attention, yes.

Q.   Do you, by chance, remember what the radio technician
     was wearing? - A. He would be in civilian clothes
     because he is not a Police Officer, he is a civilian.
     I can't remember, no sir.

Q.   One of the questions that Mr. Russell dealt with was
     what Chief Inspector McRobbie was wearing. He was in
     civilian clothes, was he not? - A. He was in civilian
     clothes, yes.

Q.   Do you recollect what he was wearing? - A. I have just
     seen him on the photographs, but I couldn't have
     recollected it. I seem to remember him in a jacket
     and trousers, but I have just seen it, it is a dark
     blue jacket, but I don't know whether I would have
     recalled it.

Q.   In other words, it is what you have^ just seen? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   The final question from the Jury is could you have
     used the tannoy system to stop the match rather than
     the procedure which, in fact, was adopted? - A. That
     is very interesting. I would never have considered
     it, and I do not think that the referee -- I don't
     know. I don't know whether they are tuned into what
     is going on. Certainly we have from time to time
     tested the emergency evacuation procedure by passing
     messages and the referee is briefed immediately before
     the event and told the message that we would use. On
     one occasion I have known a referee say what was the
     problem, he heard the message; and on other occasions
     they have never heard them. That is why we utilise
     the linesmen to try and attract the referee's
     attention. I do not think it is a recognised form of
     stopping the event.
                                            B. D. MURRAY

 Can I just ask you one question for clarification. We
  now you had, I think, five monitors, presumably five
 cameras? - A. Yes.

You had another two screens which could record? - A.
For recording purposes, yes.

Is it right that not everything that is visible on
your screens is recorded on tape? - A. No.

Only what is selected at the time? - A. Only what is
selected by the operator.

     MR. RUSSELL: Sir, before my learned friend Mr.
Manning gets to his feet, if the Jury will be
assisted, there are other photographs which are before
the Jury which show Chief Inspector McRobbie much more
clearly.

     THE CORONER: Give us the best ones.

     MR. RUSSELL:   525 show his face.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Once the Jury have seen what he
looks like, if they are still interested, he is shown
quite clearly on the video at about this time, and his
activities in that area, I can remember.

     MR. RUSSELL:   He is full length in 529.   (Shown
on screen)                                       -----

     THE CORONER: I think we are reasonably clear
about it now.

          Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:

Superintendent Murray, you are a 25-year service
Officer? - A. Yes, I have 25 years service.

You have been proud of being a member of the Police
Service? - A. Yes, I have.

You had gone on duty in the course of your service
that morning at 8.00 a.m. to dd your duty? - A. I
think that would be about right, yes.

You knew that your duty was based upon a plan which
had been devised by Chief Superintendent Mole? - A.
Yes, that is correct.

You had worked to that plan in 1988 shortly after
taking position in Control? - A. Yes, I had.
                                                            30
                                                B. D. MURRAY

Q.   You had found that plan and the arrangements for the
     match to be almost wholly satisfactory? - A. Very
     successful, yes.

Q.   You had considered the de-briefings, the comments made
     by people and, as a result, you had made and suggested
     refinements to the plan and with others it had been
     worked upon, ultimately being submitted through the
     hands of Mr. Duckenfield, who signed it, to Mr.
     Jackson, the Assistant Chief Constable who approved
     it? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q.   You had with you in your team very experienced
     Superintendents? - A. Yes - Mr. Marshall, Mr.
     Greenwood, Mr. Chapman.

Q.   Chief Inspectors who knew their job and had worked
     there, Inspectors who had worked there and knew what
     to do, Sergeants and PCs? - A. Very experienced
     Officers right down to the PC level, yes sir.

Q.   All of them had that experience which comes from
     practise in addition to the written and spoken word? -
     A. Very much so, they were experienced Officers on the
     ground. They had done it all before.

Q.   Although there was care in briefings and at briefings
     at various levels, in effect many of them knew what to
     do and what was expected of them as Police Officers,
     men and women who had carried out this function
     before? - A. They knew their role, they knew what they
     had to do.

Q.   In your Control Box you had with you your Commander,
     you had your ears in Sergeant Goddard, a man who had
     worked in Control since 1986, and PC Ryan, who had
     been in Control since 1985? - A. They were experienced
     Officers. I was very pleased with the team.

Q.   You had as your eyes the camera, or video operator, PC
     Bichard, who had been in Control since 1987? - A. I
     will accept the dates, but I know that PC Bichard had
     been properly trained in the use of the equipment.

Q.   As you said a few moments ago, none of those
     experienced Officers drew your attention at any time
     to any problem or any necessary action? - A. Not on
     the terraces. They would from time to time at all
     events let me know if there was an area of concern or
     a problem that needed attention.

Q.   That is', indeed, what they were there for and what you
     expected of them? - A. We were all part of a team, we
     worked together.
                                                           31

                                                B. D. MURRAY

           J all of that, a time arrived when a man who
     was a Commander when the Chief Superintendent was not
     present, namely Superintendent Marshall, asked on two
     separate occasions, indeed demanded on the last of
     those occasions, that gates be opened because people
     were being injured and would be killed unless that
     action was taken? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q.   In reply to my learned friend Mr. King, did you say
     this:

          "What was obvious to me is that we had a terrible
          problem outside. Experienced Officers were
          letting us know that people were being injured,
          likely to be killed. We had never had anything
          like it before. There was tremendous pressure to
          take a course of action to relieve that, and that
          course of action was taken. Nothing else was
          obvious."
     A. I think that is what I said yesterday, yes.

Q.   Superintendent, if there had been anything that was
     obvious, anything that would have saved injury to one
     single person, anything that would have saved the
     death of one single person, you would have taken that
     action, would you not? — A. Of course, yes.

          MR. MANNING: Thank you, Superintendent. You
     have answered every single question that has been
     asked of you through these difficult times. Thank
     you, sir, for your forebearance. I have nothing
     further for this Officer.

          THE CORONER: Superintendent Murray, it has been a
     slightly longer session, but at least we have
     concluded. Thank you very much for being here and for
     giving your evidence. It is much appreciated. We
     will break for quarter-of-an-hour and then we will
     start with the next witness.

                    (Short Adjournment)
                                                           32

                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD


        MR. ISAACS:   Sir, before Mr. Duckenfield comes to
   the witness chair, Ishould   say after he is sworn there
   is one matter I wish   tomention you.

        THE CORONER:   Yes.

               DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD Sworn

        MR. ISAACS:   Sir, the matter is this:
   Mr. Duckenfield will   do his very best to assist both  you
   and the Jury in relation to the events that took place
   before and on the 15th April, 1989.     You know, sir, he
   gave evidence before Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.
   That was a time of great stress, both for him and no
   doubt for the others.    It is now almost two years ago.
   His evidence to that Inquiry covers over 200 pages of
   transcript; many aspects of this case were asked about
   time and time again.   His evidence lasted for some three
   days, often, as I have mentioned earlier, giving evidence
   for some three hours at a time without a break.      I say
   this now so it will be of no surprise if it happens, but
   on my advice - and I stress this - if he is asked about
   any matter relating to the evidence he gave before Lord
   Justice Taylor he will exercise his privilege.      I make
   that point very clearly at this stage.

        MR. KING:    Sir, in the lightof that, and I make no
   complaint that I had no notice of it, it is helpful
   because I will not even attempt now in the light of that.

        THE CORONER:   Thank you.

                       By THE CORONER:

Q. I ought to establish who you are.     It is David Godfrey
   Duckenfield? - A. Yes.

Q. You are a Chief Superintendent in the South Yorkshire
   Police? - A. Yes.

Q. You, of course, have heard all about these warnings
   because I know you have been in Court.    Mr. Isaacs
   clearly has discussed it with you, but I think it is only
   proper that I should remind you of the situation right
   from the outset because a substantial number of questions
   which you may be asked may well be of a nature which may
   tend to incriminate you.    Under the Coroner's Rules, and
   indeed other rules as well, but we are only concerned
   with the Coroner's Rules, you have the right and the
   privilege not to answer any question which may tend to
   incriminate you.    If you were to be asked such a
   question, strictly speaking I should tell you each and
   every time.    However, there are two problems with that;
   one, that I jnay not notice that the question is of this
                                                             33

                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD


   nature and secondly, of course it does tend to slow down
   proceedings.

         THE CORONER:   Can I just turn to Mr. Isaacs and
   check?    Are you happy if we do what we did with
   Mr. Murray, which is to give the reminder intermittently,
   just to keep it in the forefront of Mr. Duckenfield's
   mind?

        MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I am.   If you would say, for
   example, when the time came when you felt it was
   important, "You are not obliged to answer that", that
   would be sufficient for my purposes.

        THE   CORONER:   As I say, we don't want to have
   needless   repetition of words, in effect:

Q. The point is, Mr. Duckenfield, that merely because I have
   not warned you does not necessarily mean that the
   question is not incriminating.   If you perceive it to be
   so, indeed if Mr. Isaacs feels it is and he feels it is
   unwise for you to answer, he will no doubt rise and say
   something. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. It is a privilege which you are entitled to exercise and
   you must do so if you think it is appropriate.

        MR. ISAACS:Sir, I only wish to stress again     what
   Ithink my friend   Mr. Manning said yesterday.   The fact
   that a question may have a tendency to incriminate does
   not meant that the answer does.

        THE CORONER:   Indeed, I quite understand that.
   This has always been one of the problems with the rule:

Q. Now we have established who you are and that you are in
   the South Yorkshire Police.   I think you will be able to
   confirm for me that you were appointed Chief
   Superintendent in March 1989? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Was it the 27th as far as I remember? -A. As far as I can
   recollect it was Easter Monday and I think that was the
   27th of March, 1989.

Q. You were in fact taking over Mr. Mole's job? -A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. One of Mr. Mole's tasks had been and, indeed, whoever was
   in that seat, was Hillsborough Football Stadium and the
   running of matches there? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Of course by the 27th of March it had already been
   decided that the semi-final between Liverpool and
                                                           34

                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD


   Nottingham Forest was going to take place at Hillsborough
   on the 15th of April? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You knew that because I think you had been invited to
   attend a planning meeting on the 22nd of March? - A. Yes,
   sir.   Mr. Mole, as you have previously heard, already
   knew of the arrangements and called a planning meeting on
   the 22nd, which he chaired, and I attended as an
   observer.

Q. You had policed at Hillsborough previously but it was
   quite a few years ago, would that be right? - A. That is
   perfectly true, sir.   If my memory serves me correctly I
   was there in the latter part of 1979 and the early part
   of 1980.   I was then a Chief Inspector at the Hammerton
   Road Sub-Division, which is the Sub-Division formerly
   commanded by Mr. Murray, which actually covers the
   ground.   However, at that stage I was merely a Chief
   Inspector and my role in football was limited.

Q. Just so we can get this right, you weren’t there in
   1981,were you? - A. No, sir. In 1981 I think I was at
   Attercliffe Police Station.

Q. In the interim between 1980 and 1989, I think you had
   done some football policing at the other stadium in
   Sheffield, is that right? - A. Yes.   Perhaps I can
   explain it a little more accurately.   Whilst Commander
   of the Attercliffe Sub-Division it was not my direct
   responsibility.   Then I left there and went to West Bar
   Police Station as the Deputy Divisional Commander and so
   whilst the Sheffield United Football Ground was in the
   Central Division and commanded by the Central Division
   Superintendent, I had an indirect overall responsibility
   because I was the Deputy Divisional Commander.   On
   occasions I would go to the football ground at Bramall
   Lane, but I think it is fair to say that at that stage
   Sheffield United were in the Third Division.

Q. If we add all that together, you have had some experience
   of football matches, but it was relatively limited?
   Would that be a fair summary? - A. I think that is fair
   to say, sir, yes.

Q. In any event you were appointed to your appointment not
   because of your football experience but because the Chief
   Constable decided you were the right man to run that
   particular Division? - A. If I can expand a little on
   that, sir. The role of a Chief Superintendent in the
   South Yorkshire Police, in general terms they are, shall
   we say, generally - an over use of the word - they are
   generalist roles, as opposed to specialist.   If I define
   specialist as being the Head of CID or the Head of
   Traffic, the^ they are the specialist roles.   However,
                                                          35

                                            D. G. DUCKENFLgLD


   in my particular case, I think that looking at the role
   of the Commander of a Division, which is Hammerton Road,
   then there are many and varied talents that are required.
   I am not wishing to promote my own image, far from it,
   but in describing the job situation it is one of
   commanding in the region of 300 Police Officers, managing
   the public order situation overall - I mean the Saturday
   night rowdiness, the crime situation, the traffic
   problems - and being something of a diplomat liaising
   with the community and committees.

   Now the football policing role is only one facet of a
   vast array of duties and responsibilities and it is my
   view that the Chief Constable promoted me probably for my
   generalist qualities as opposed to my specific ability
   with regard to football.

Q. You have told me you went to the meeting with Mr. Mole
   and various other people on the 22nd of March as an
   observer.   Indeed, Mr. Mole invited you because he knew
   you would very soon be in his chair? - A. Yes.

Q. At that meeting were the general principles of what was
   going to happen discussed?   Can you remember that? - A.
   In fairness, sir, my memory is a little vague.   I can
   probably give you an outline as to my recollection.
   Mr. Mole had invited all those agencies he considered^
   necessary to draw together in the form of a partnership
   to draft the Order for a successful operation.   It was
   just not confined to members of the Police Service.    My
   recollection was the people from the Transport Department
   were there.   I think probably someone from the British
   Rail Police, and people of that order, people you might
   consider in the normal course of events were peripheral
   organisations, but vitally important to ensure that
   everybody who had an input knew exactly what was going to
   take place on the day.

Q. I am not too interested in the precise detail of that
   meeting, but at that meeting, or subsequently before you
   took over, were you given any - I use the word
   "briefing , I don't like it, actually - but did you have
   any discussions with Mr. Mole about the sort of problems
   you might have to face in your command role at
   Hillsborough?   I realise it wasn't the only thing in
   life, but it was an important event. - A. We had the
   meeting on that day and I think it fair to say he set the
   scene and drew up the plans.    After that time we had
   another meeting, but on that particular meeting as far as
   I can recollect, we discussed many matters.    I am sorry,
   I cannot bring to mind specific conversations about
   specific problems at Hillsborough.    I was given to
   understand that the plan was well laid, that the team
   doing it kn^w what they were doing, it was a tried and
                                                            36

                                            D. G. DUCKENFIELD


   trusted plan and that I would be well served by the
   individuals who would be making the necessary
   arrangements.   Nothing was drawn to my attention at that
   time that caused me to think there were to be any
   difficulties.

Q. In fact we know that Mr. Murray and various other people
   set about working on the Operational Order for 1989? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. Did you have any reason to assume that it was in any way
   different - substantially - I do not mean in detail, but
   substantially, from the previous Orders which had been
   drawn? - A. No, sir.   I think on the Wednesday following
   my appointment I called a meeting with Mr. Murray, Chief
   Inspector Beale and Inspector Sewell.   We had a meeting
   in my office, the fine detail of which I cannot remember
   other than to say that being the new man I asked
   questions about the Order, I discussed matters with them
   generally and as to progress, and they gave me, in the
   light of my limited experience of that Hillsborough
   Order, they assured me that matters were progressing
   satisfactorily and that there would be no substantial
   differences.

Q. In due course the Order was put in front of you and you
   eventually signed it? - A. Yes. I think probably I made
   a couple of adjustments, which were minor, actually.    If
   I can describe one of them which, with hindsight, may not
   be a major issue - there are a couple actually.   I had
   previously worked at West Bar Police Station where we
   always had a log for events and I suggested we should
   have a log.   Of course, not fully appreciating the
   situation and the confined area in the Control Box, I
   think we subsequently found that my suggestion and my
   idea probably wasn't such a good idea because of the
   space difficulties.

  The other one was that bearing in mind that on the day of
  the briefing of the 801 Police Officers, for the Saturday
  match, it concerned me that it would not be very
  professional if 801 Police Officers all arrived for a
  briefing at 10.00 am and they were just to find their own
  place and sit down.   It is a minor matter, really, but I
  thought that professionalism dictated that we would
  allocate a row and we would allocate seat numbers to
  Serials so that when an Inspector or a Sergeant got out
  of their transit from Doncaster or Barnsley, wherever it
  may be, they would enter by Gate 0, they would walk into
  the North Stand, they would find their row and they would
  sit.

  There were minor things but really nothing substantial.
               t
                                                                37
                                              D. G. DUCKKME'TTgr.r)


Q. Would I be right in saying as far as you knew prior to
   the match there were no particular problems with regard
   to the order? - A. No, sir.

Q. The general format? - A. No, sir. I was told that the
   order was a tried and tested Operational Order. I was
   told - and when I say this please don't think I am
   moving any responsibility away from me - it was a tried
   and tested order. I was told that the plan was tried
   and tested and I think it fair to say that it should
   not be changed for change's sake and really it is an
   established practice. Everybody know the practice and
   it works.

Q. Did you, because we might as well grasp this now,
   understand what I will call the 'find your own level'
   system which was going to be used in the Semi Final? -
   A. The difficulty I find with that, sir, is that I am
   not so sure at the time prior to the day. There is a
   degree of uncertainty in my mind that I knew what that
   situation was. As I understood it, the ground had a
   Safety Certificate, the ground had been passed as being
   safe by all concerned and they have specific capacities
   for specific areas and I think when I recall the 'find
   your own level' there was some conversation, I think
   probably on the match day. I know Mr. Murray does not
   remember it probably but I thought that somebody had
   said, "Is it going to be 'find your own level'?", as to
   when that occurred or what, and I think that that was
   on match day.

Q. Are you thinking of Mr. Creaser coming to the Control
   Box, is that what you have got in mind? - A. It is
   difficult. One of the difficulties I find, and I make
   no excuse, is that with the passage of time some of the
   things I thought were accurate tend not to be on
   occasions and so all I can say is that on the day in
   question I have a view that somebody said, "Are we
   operating 'find your own level'?"

Q. I take it that you went round the ground at some point.
   In fact I think you policed two matches prior to the
   Semi Final but they were small ones. I think that is
   right, is it not? - A. Yes, I think on the first
   occasion, sir, it was a Saturday afternoon game with
   Millwall and I met with Inspector Sewell and, as had
   been normal under Mr. Mole, I think Mr. Murray was
   probably in the Control Box running the match because
   it was a match that didn't attract an awful lot of
   attention and there weren't many fans. I did probably
   what most Commanders do. I picked up Inspector Sewell
   who was the ^experienced Inspector who dealt with these
   matters and said, as I say like any new boy, "Give me a
                                                                 38
                                               D . G . DUCKENFT1?r.n


   Cook's tour, if you like, of the area" and I did that
   looking around the ground. So I visited the ground and
   walked with him on that particular Saturday afternoon.
   I think after that there was a Tuesday evening match
   with Wimbledon but I didn't play a role in that as
   such. I went there probably much the same as Mr.
   Jackson. It was a night match. I couldn't see an
   awful lot and I sort of observed it more from a
   spectator's point of view but certainly popped my head
   in at various places. I cannot recall too much.

Q. Did you realise that Mr. Mole had specifically chosen
   the Superintendents and allocated them to jobs because
   he realised that you yourself had limited experience of
   Hillsborough or did you not understand that? - A. Yes,
   I did, sir, actually. What happened was I think even
   by the time of the meeting on the 22nd before I was
   promoted, the thing I recall from my own memory is that
   people had been chosen to fill command positions.
   People were filling those positions and it was all done
   and I looked at it. I suppose as any new Commander,
   you look at it and think, "Well, it has all been
   arranged" and I questioned him about it. I don't say
   that in a disrespectful way. I said, "You have picked
   all these people. What is the situation and why?" and
   he said, "Well, I know the personalities, I know their
   capabilities and I have seen them in action". He said
   words to the effect, "With no disrespect to you, I know
   what they can do and where they should be”. He said,
   "I am helping you out by doing that" and so I was
   grateful.

Q. Did you also have an opportunity to speak to the Club
   people, Mr. Mackrell and Mr. Lock in particular? Prior
   to the match I mean? - A. I am sorry, sir?

Q. Prior to the match, before the match? - A. Mr. Mole and
   I had an arrangement whereby he would take me to the
   Club and introduce me to Mr. Lock and Mr. Mackrell.  I
   suppose in a professional sense, that is in policing
   terms, I knew Mr. Lock because he had been a serving
   Police Officer although I do not think we had ever
   worked together closely. Mr. Mole was to arrange for
   me to go to the Club but for some reason that meeting,
   prior to taking over, didn't take place and I cannot
   think why not. I mean it is one of those things in
   business sometimes.

Q. You had walked round the ground with Inspector
   Sewell? - A. Yes, sir.

               ?
                                                              39
                                               D. G. PUCKFNFTRT.n


Q. How good an image, if that is the right word, did you
   have of the geography of the ground? I know you may
   have a very good image of it now? - A. Yes.

Q. I want you to try and think back to 15th April 1989? -
   A. I think that - how can I put it in context? It is
   not a football ground I have visited on regular
   occasions, shall we say, and if you consider if for
   instance I might have visited the ground at the other
   end of town as a Policeman and as a spectator whereas
   at the Sheffield Wednesday ground I think it is safe to
   say that my visits were confined to my visit at the
   Semi Final in 1980 I think it was and then after that
   that one tour round it. So, on the one hand, if you
   say to me, do I know the ground and do I know the
   features, I know where places are but if you want to
   tie me down to specifics then I am limited.

Q. Would I be right in saying you had received no, in
   Police parlance, intelligence to indicate that this
   match would be any different to previous years or had
   you received any indication that there would be any
   alteration, major alterations? - A. Yes. As you may
   know, sir, we liaise with other Police Forces and
   obtain intelligence about football supporters and we
   did have an intelligence document in relation to the
   visiting football fans but if I can just, to be fair,
   confine my remarks to matters that concern this
   Inquest.

Q. Yes, indeed. - A. About public order matters then I
   think in fairness, sir, we didn't receive any
   intelligence that related to public order matters as
   such.

Q. You I think made arrangements to have a briefing
   session with senior Officers on 14th April, is that
   right? - A. That is the day before the football match,
   yes, sir.

Q. I think that that was a conventional thing as well? -
   A. There had been I think an accepted practise and the
   main reason was this that at ten o'clock on Friday
   morning prior to the match it had been practise to
   gather together all of the senior Officers of Inspector
   and above to sit them in the North Stand, actually in
   the ground, to let them get the feel of the place. The
   reason being is this; whilst I have said that Mr. Mole
   had hand picked his Officers who knew the ground and
   knew the places there were other people coming along
   who were Inspectors and probably Chief Inspectors who
   may not have, been so conversant. The idea being that
   on the Friday morning I would give a briefing to them
                                                                  40

                                                 D . G . DUCKENFTKT.n


   and during that briefing point to, for instance,*"That
   is Leppings Lane end on my left, that is the South
   Stand behind me" and point out those features. Those
   people would have read their Operational Order by that
   time and would know what the written word said.

       It would be part of my job to give them an overall
   briefing, a broad brush picture of the situation, and
   then at the conclusion say to them, "Ladies and
   gentlemen, walk the ground, for want of a better term,
   go to your locations, look at your areas and acquaint
   yourselves with them so that tomorrow when you arrive
   at ten o'clock after the briefings when you have got
   your men you know where you are going, you know what
   you are doing and you know the situation". To that
   extent we had laid on transit vans for those people who
   were working in outlying areas to be put into those
   vans and be driven around to look at the situation and
   get a feel of the area. That was the purpose.

       There was just one other point as well, of course,
   that if any one of those supervisory Officers had read
   something in their order and then having gone to their
   particular location to do their policing we would have
   at least 24 hours to overcome any difficulties that
   they foresaw.

Q. As a matter of interest did you get any feedback that
   required any major changes? - A. I personally did not,
   sir.

Q. In that briefing did you discuss aspects of safety with
   your senior Officers? - A. Yes, I did, sir. I have got
   a typed briefing note.  May I refer to it?

Q. Yes, by all means. - A. I am sorry, I handed it to the
   West Midlands Police at the time of the Inquiry.

Q. You have not got it now. - A. The original is missing
   but if you have a copy?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes, I have got it, sir. Can you just bear
   with me so that I can just glance over it?

Q. Yes, certainly, and   remember you do not have to answer
   any question out of   this briefing note which may tend
   to incriminate you?   - A. Yes, sir. Sir, I am in a
   position to comment   upon it if you wish.
                                                         41

                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. What I would like you to do is to tell me, first of
   all, you have already told me partly what your
   objective was of having this briefing, but what were
   your objectives with regard to this pre-match briefing
   on 14th April, and secondly what were your views with
   regard to responsibility towards the public in general?
   - A. Right. I think the situation, sir, is this, that
   anyone who has seen the Operational Order, and the
   thickness of it, and the information it contains, must
   be well aware that we cannot cater for every
   eventuality and it is important for me as a Commander
   to set out what my objectives are on the day, so people
   are quite clear where we are. In that respect I
   prepared a briefing. Now another unusual feature is I
   typed this briefing, because I was new and I wanted to
   get it right I typed it out and what have you, so this
   is the briefing I prepared. I went down it and
   basically it was to outline, first of all, the fact
   that it was a 54,000 - I am jumping paragraphs which
   are not relevant.

Q. Yes, we don't need everything. - A. I told people about
   the crowd, how many people we expected, described to
   them the layout of the Ground, and I told them about
   extra time being played, the difficulties with the same
   colours. Then I came to what I considered to be a very
   relevant part and I said specifically to them:

        "It is our intention today that this match will
        take place without any public disorder and we must
        ensure the safety of the public both inside and
        outside the ground and segregate the opposing
        fans".

  and I talked about obstruction of the highway.   I then
  went on to say:

        "I want the public to be treated properly but
        those who transgress should be dealt with firmly
        but fairly within the law."

   Then, sir, I went on to say:

       "I cannot stress too highly the word 'Safety1.
       This ground will be full to capacity today and
       some of you may never have experienced a football
       match of this nature before ...."

Q. Does it say "before" there? - A. I am sorry, no, it
   doesn't:

       "OUr job is to ensure the safety of spectators and
       you must make sure you know the escape routes, the
       problem areas, and that you are fully conversant
                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD


          with your responsibilities should a crisis arise.
          There will be a tremendous atmosphere within the
          ground but you must not be caught up in this or
          the events that are taking place on the field you
          must remain detached and clear headed at all times
          to respond to events."

 I then went on, sir, to discuss matters generally and
 point out the individual responsibilities of the Sector
Commanders, that is who was in charge in the Control
Room, I said that the Control Room would be commanded
by Superintendent Murray, and I went on giving
information, I think, that has already come before this
Inquest.

Yes. - A. I did make the point that -- I am sorry,
sir, just bear with me a moment. Another, I believe,
relevant paragraph is that I said:

         "All Inspectors ...."

- and this was on the Saturday briefing -

         "All Inspectors who attended briefing yesterday,
         these officers will, at the end of this particular
         briefing, speak to their respective contingents
         and advise them of what they expect and of the
         particular problems in their area."
I went on to say:

         "Any difficulties or any decisions within those
         areas will be taken by ...."

- a n d this, sir, says Section Superintendent. I think
it is a misrepresentation in the transcribing. It
really should be Sector Superintendents, so it should
read:

         "Any difficulties or any decisions within those
         areas will be taken by Sector Superintendents."

I then went on to make mention of CID matters. I
talked about train times, travelling arrangements and I
think at the bottom of page 5, sir, I emphasised at
this point something that has probably come out
previously.  I said:
    ||
         Gentlemen* the order covers most eventualities and
         I can't in this limited time cover everything, but
         there will be additional briefings by your
         Supervisory Officers and your Inspectors have a
         copy of the operational order and are fully
         conversant with what our intentions are today."
                                                          43

                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD


   I finally said to them, sir, in the final couple of
   sentences or so:

        "Firm but fair policing with the correct attitude.
        Safety of supporters in this ground is paramount.
        Nobody gets in without a ticket.
        Nobody takes a drink or banners into the ground
        and nobody goes in who is drunk."

   and that was the closing of my briefing, sir.

Q. It is only a very minor point and it is not important:
   the paragraph where you say that all Inspectors who
   attended the briefing yesterday, that presumably was
   included in your briefing on the Friday as well, wasn't
   it, but I take it you changed the words when you spoke
   it? - A. Yes, sir. What happened was this, that I had
   a draft and when I gave the briefing on the Friday it
   had to be changed slightly and in the transcribing the
   odd word is incorrect, but it is substantially correct.

Q. You used the same format,   butI think somewhat
   shortened, on the Saturday, is that right? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. That was, of course, addressed to the 800-odd people
   who were in the Stadium? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think just so that we don't mislead anybody you
   actually left out out one paragraph which dealt with
   the safety aspect, didn't you, in the Saturday
   briefing? Is that right?     Do you want to have a look?
   - A. Which one?

Q. I am not in any sense complaining about it, it is just
   that I don't want to have any misunderstandings. My
   understanding is that you did not deal with, I cannot
   stress too highly the word 'Safety'"? - A. Are you
   suggesting that I did not say that on the Saturday?

Q. I am asking you. - A. As far as I am concerned, sir, it
   is my view that I said it. The only difficulty I have
   is that my original papers were handed in and I make no
   complaint about that, but I have only got the
   transcribed version and I can't check back.

Q. I may be wrong. - A. It is my view, sir, that I ....

Q. Yes, you did say it. It is in the transcribed version,
   I beg your pardon, I take it back. It is certainly in
   the transcription anyway. - A. Yes.


              r
                                                          44

                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. You have mentioned that you knew about the Safety
   Certificate and the allocations of specific numbers? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Were you conscious prior to the day of the penning in
   Leppings Lane? - A. I think I knew of the radialfences
   as such but to say I knew of the penning, I am
   uncertain of that, sir.

Q. Would it be fair to say that you did not on the day
   have detailed knowledge of the signing, directing
   people which way to go at the Leppings Lane end? - A.
   No, sir, I had only had that one visit.

Q. In fact, you were very dependent upon thequality of
   the order which you had inherited and the quality of
   the people who were working under you and supporting
   you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Before I actually turn to the day itself I just want to
   deal with this one aspect which has been mooted several
   times, namely the issue of postponing the kick-off? -
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. I don't want to talk about the conversation in the
   Control Room, which may or may not have taken place, we
   will find out in a minute, but had you considered the
   aspect of postponing the kick-off in general terms? -
   A. I had had a conversation with Superintendent Murray.
   When or where - and I am not talking about the Control
   Box now - my belief is that it was sometime in the run
   up to the match, just as a matter of general
   conversation, as a new man would, "Would you tell me
   about this, that or the other", and that was one of the
   things I asked him about, "When would we delay a kick-
   off", and he gave me the answer in general terms,
   "Well, when there is something significant", such as, I
   think his words were, "which seemed unusual for the
   time of year, fog on the Pennines, snow or ice". I am
   not so sure about that, but something significant which
   would hamper the fans from arriving at the time, and
   that basically was the original gist of the
   conversation.

Q. In any of the other matches which you have ever
   policed, wherever they may have been, had you ever had
   to take a decision to postpone kick-off? - A. No, it
   was quite outside my experience.

Q. In any event, you came to the Ground on 15th April and
   we are now moving on to the day itself, and you have
   told us that you had your briefing, and then I don't
   quite know what you did, but in fact you were not in
   the Control Box until about quarter-to-2, is that
                                                           45

                                            D. G. DUCKENFIELD


     right? - A. Yes. What happened on the day was, very
     quickly, after the briefing I walked around the North
     Stand where people were sitting after their briefing,
     speaking to people generally as one might do, saying,
     "Do you understand the Order? Is everything all right?
     Any difficulties?", the usual sort of conversations
     that one might have in the early stages before people
     went out on the streets.

     I then went in a Police car and toured the area, much
     the same as I think Mr. Mole has given evidence. It is
     the sort of thing one does and I got in the Police car
     and toured the area and toured the outlying districts.
     Then I returned to the Ground at some stage, I am not
     too sure at what      time, and had something to eat
     and then, as you say, went to the Control Box.

Q. Just as a matter of interest, when you were touring in
   your car had anything struck you in the outlying area
   which alarmed you? - A. No. I think that the mood of
   the day, sir, it was a beautiful day, glorious
   sunshine, it was the day where I think people were
   going to come and enjoy themselves, and looking at it
   there was absolutely nothing to cause me any concern
   whatsoever.

Q. Having done that you then had a meal? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Was itat the Stadium or was it at the Police ...? - A.
     It was in the gymnasium, sir, at the Stadium.

Q. Then you made your way over to the Control Box? - A.
   Yes.

Q. When you got there I take it Mr. Murray was already in
   place? - A. Yes.

Q. As were the other three Officers? - A. Yes, the Control
   Room staff were in situ.

Q.    Having got there I take it you made a few enquiries as
     to how things were in general terms, and were you
     reassured that everything appeared to be satisfactory
     at that point? - A. Yes, in general terms everything
     was going as expected.

Q. I think it was at about that time that Mr. Jackson
   popped in, is that right, the ACC? - A. Yes. Mr.
   Jackson was there.

Q. He was already there? - A. Well, I am uncertain. I
   went to see the referee with Superintendent Murray.         I
   think Mr. Jackson was there when we came back from
   seeing the?referee, I think that is what it was.
                                                       46

                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. So having got there you left again fairly shortly
   afterwards with Mr. Murray to look for the referee? -
   A. The intention was that Mr. Murray and I would go to
   see the referee and the linesmen, to explain about the
   safety procedures and evacuation and to identify
   ourselves to him, so I went to the Control Box and met
   with Mr. Murray and our intention was to go and see the
   referee straightaway, but as on all big occasions -
   well I say this, I presume it is - the referee was in
   the centre circle in his civilian clothes with his
   officials, looking at the ground, and we had to wait
   while they came off and then they came off and went
   into their room and we went to see them, and Mr. Murray
   spoke with them.




                  /Q. This was really


             r
                                                            47

                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q.   This was really to pass on the coded messages? - A. It
     was to pass on the coded message and basically,
     generally speaking, you say, "What's on the pitch is
     yours, what's off it is ours", that sort of thing.

Q.   Then you returned to the Control Room? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   At that point did you have a look round the field? I
     am sorry, you are saying Mr. Jackson was there at that
     point? - A. Yes.

Q.   He was not in charge of this match, was he? - A. No,
     the Operational Commander was myself, and Mr. Jackson
     was the Assistant Chief Constable on duty weekend.

Q.   Was it more a passing the time of day conversation, or
     did he say to you, "Call me if you need me", or
     anything of that nature? - A. No, it was a case of he
     as there and I walked into the Control Room and it was
     the sort of informal chat one might have - "Hello, how
     are you? I understand things are progressing
     satisfactorily." I think he had little need to ask me
     what the situation was, and I make a presumption here.
     He was there already and one presumes he might have
     had a conversation, I don't know, but he just asked
     the usual things, "Hello, how are you? How is the
     situation going on? It seems to be all right", and
     that was the sort of general chat.

Q.   You then stayed in the Control Room? - A. Yes.

Q.   In fact, did you look round the field at that point? -
     A. I think I would be always looking around and seeing
     what the situation was, obviously taking in what I
     saw.

Q.   I think at those earlier times the arrangements were
     working satisfactorily, the videos were on and Mr.
     Murray was also in position, is that right? - A. Yes,
     that is right, sir.

Q.   Can you remember the request coming through for
     Leppings Lane to be closed? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Do you have a recollection of what time that might
     have been? We have heard different accounts and I am
     just interested to see what you say. - A. I have
     always maintained that it was 2.30-ish and Mr. Murray
     and I have always disagreed on this. It is fair to
     say we have never agreed. I have a recollection that
     it was about 2.30. The only reason I say that is that
     I have got a thought that I saw a bus passing, and at
     some stage later I saw a bus passing on a video but,
     to be honest with you, sir, my recollection of 2.30 is
                                                        48

                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD


     what I think, but it is as good as anybody else's
     recollection. I think the only other person who might
     agree with me is probably Superintendent Marshall, but
     other than that it is open to discussion.

Q.   In any case, you remember the request, whatever time
     it was? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did it alarm you when that came through? - A. I think
     what I did, I was standing towards the back because,
     as you probably know, that control room is a little
     bit confined and I got the impression if I stood at
     the front I was in people's way, just purely
     physically, not by being a senior Officer but by being
     stood there. I remember turning to my left and
     looking at the video screen thinking, 'What does he
     want Leppings Lane closed for?' It was that sort of
     thought - 'What does he want that closed for?' The
     reason I remember the bus is I saw a bus goingpast,
     and I thought, 'Well, why does he want Leppings Lane
     closing if the bus can go past and there aren't any
     difficulties?' That was the sort of thought process
     going through my mind - 'What's it all about?'- and I
     can remember doing that.

Q.   In any case you did not countermand it, you allowed it
     to go ahead? - A. No, not at all. He was the man on
     the ground, he knew exactly what the situation was. I
     had got a very limited view from a TV monitor.

Q.   At that point had you noticed the filling of the
     stadium at all? - A. I think about that time I was
     beginning to check up on where we were mentally,
     asking mental questions, as you might say, and I
     remember looking at the Spion Kop and that seemed to
     be filling. That seemed to be filling more so than
     other parts of the ground. If you can remember the
     Control Box, you can't see the South Stand because the
     South Stand is on your right, so in effect you cannot
     get a very good assessment, I should say, sir. In
     terms of the North Stand, then I think possibly at
     that stage it appeared half-full, but I don't think
     that concerned me greatly because I think, knowing
     people as I do, if you have got a Stand ticket people
     do tend to stand on the gangways and have a cup of tea
     rather than take their seat, so that in itself
     probably is not all that significant. But the
     Leppings Lane terrace, that was filling more so in the
     centre, but I recollect spaces at the front, as though
     people weren't moving forward in that bottom - I have
     heard s,omeone describe it as "well**, but really that
     at the 'time was outside my knowledge. But I have an
     impression that we had the normal sort of 2.30-ish
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIET.D


 situation of filling centrally and space more so on
 the side, shall we say.

Did you look at the monitors to see what it looked
like outside at that point? - A. Yes, because having
had my mind focused and thinking, 'Why does he want
that?' I looked at it and I didn't see a particular
problem at 2.30. But, having said that, as you are
going through your checking processes and having the
time to do it, I looked at the ground, I looked at the
bus, and I think probably the words I said - and I
used his Christian name - were, "What do you think
about the crowd, Bernard? Do you think we'll get them
in?" looking at the crowd on the monitor, and he sort
of said words to the effect, "Yes, we'll get them in
all right”, words to that effect. I am not saying
that is exactly what he said, but that was the sort of
gist of the conversation.

Reassuring to you, in other words? - A. Yes.

Did you at that time discuss the possibility of
delaying the kick-off? - A. I did again in that
checking process, and can I emphasise that there was
no significance in the linkage of these events. Some
people may wish to heighten the importance of what I
am saying, but I submitted my statement weeks after
and they were just events that I recollected. I
r®”e®ber saying to him again, "What about the kick-
off? and that was it, and I was reassured of the
facts we had discussed.

Was it that you at that point took the view that
unless there were defined external circumstances the
kick-off would not be delayed? - A. I think that what
we would always say is this. If there were
circumstances beyond the control of the people, then
we would very seriously consider it, but each case and
each situation must be tried and tested on its merits.
There is no rigid policy and the other aspect, of
course, is if there were a crisis and injury could be
avoided by delaying kick-off, then obviously you would
consider that very seriously.

In any event, at 2.30, apart from re-exploring —   A.
Ground I had already gone over.

The principle, so to speak, you were not contemplating
that as a possibility at that stage? - A. No. My
recollection is that at 2.30 we had a state of what I
would call normality.

During this time from 2.30 onwards did you obtain any
print-outs, or figures, from the Club Room as to the
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD


 numbers of people who had already entered the ground7
 “ A. I did not, sir.

 You did not? - A. No sir. I think it fair to say,
 sir, that the knowledge of the capability of the
 equipment that Sheffield Wednesday had was not
 something that I had acquired by that stage.

Your attention, I think, was taken up for a time with
 the segregated section at the Kop end, is that right?
- A. Yes sir, a problem had developed and if I
remember correctly that really was causing me a little
concern at that stage because our segregation policy
had broken down. What had happened was that some
Liverpool supporters had purchased - I do not know but
I presume they had purchased - tickets for the
Nottingham Forest end which was the Spion Kop and we
had got Liverpool supporters in with the Nottingham
Forest fans on the Spion Kop. Now that was a
difficulty because there is no area that can be
properly segregated, and what had been a policy in the
past, if that had occurred, then we would put the fans
in a spur of the Spion Kop near the North Stand, and
it could quite properly be cordoned off. But when I
say a cordon I am talking about a barrier of Police
Officers and that created a problem because, as one
can imagine, if difficulties do arise you can have
one, two - I do not know - a thousand Liverpool
supporters mixing with Notts Forest fans and there is
a potential for difficulties and that was causing us
some concern.

At what point did you first become aware that things
were not quite right outside the ground? - A. We went
from a stage of what I would say was normality at 2.30
and the next moment of crisis I can recall is when the
radio went down. I do not recall, shall we say,
anything specific. That is, of course, not to say
things were not happening, but my recollection is that
at - and I think it has been established as 2.40, then
when the radio went down things were, I am not saying
categorically all right but as far as I was concerned,
but as soon as the radio came back on, then we were
into what I would say was a very difficult situation.
   , I mean, the radio breaking down was so
disruptive, it really was unbelievable.

I will take a general point: would I be right in
saying that certainly until that time you were
expecting your team, the Superintendent and everybody,
t° act; you were not actually expecting to have to
take any decisions on, I can say, the day-to-day or
perhaps the minute-to-minute activity that was going
on, is that right? - A. Yes.I am not wishing   to
                                                            51
                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD

     abrogate any responsibilities I might have, but
     matters were progressing whereby the Superintendents
     in charge were taking action well within their area of
     responsibility and there was no need for me to
     intervene.

Q. Had you any clear idea what sort of things you might
    have to take decisions on? - A. One presumes the
    serious nature of, shall we say, an evacuation of the
    ground, or the delaying of the kick-off, or any other
    major eventuality. The role of a Chief Superintendent
    is one - not to say there would be disagreements
    between Superintendents, but if there was a need to,
    shall we say, remove all the men from the Spion Kop,
    then I would have to look at that situation, something
   major which was against policy or the Order.

Q.   You say that the radio had gone down, disruption, it
     came back on and from that moment things were --- A.
      In difficulties, sir.




                            /Q. In difficulties.




            f
                                                            52

                                              D, G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. In difficulties.   Can you recollect whether at this time
   or earlier, or at any time but before the match kicked-
   off, any tannoy messages were broadcast, either to the
   Leppings Lane end or to the crowd in general? - A. I have
   got a recollection.••   I don't know what tannoy messages
   were given by other people, but I have recollection of
   saying to the PC in the Control Room, one of those
   remarks that probably Chief Superintendents make
   sometimes when they are looking round the ground, "Don't
   forget to ask people to move forward and spread out," and
   that sort of thing, but that is all.   I don't know
   whether it was carried out.

Q. Can you hear the tannoy in the Control Box?   Assuming it
   is broadcast can you actually hear it within the Box? —
   A. Do you know, sir, I cannot give you an honest answer.
   I don't really know.   I think probably later the noise
   was so great it would have been drowned but I cannot give
   you an honest answer.

Q. Anyway, you have told us about the radio breaking down.
   We have heard from others that the radio officer turned
   up, I think you would agree with that? -A. Yes.

Q. You have saidthere was quite a bit   of disruption and it
   all came back.   What happened then?    The radio came
   back on, things settled down after the disruption, what
   was the problem that you could see? - A. Sir, I am not so
   sure things settled down.

Q. Perhaps that was the wrong word. - A. Forgive me, I have
   no wish to disagree.   I have a recollection that once we
   - and I will say it now - once we had got back to our
   positions and settled ourselves after the disruption of
   the radio, then it became apparent that in that short
   period that - and these are my words - I think
   Mr. Marshall must have been overwhelmed by something
   totally unexpected because the situation had gone from
   what I said was normality to a situation where there was
   a large crowd at the Leppings Lane end and a sequences of
   events - I am not sure, but I think by then people were
   beginning to climb over the turnstile walls and that sort
   of thing.

Q.   Could you see that on the monitors,  or have you learned
     that since?   It is difficult. - A.  It is difficult.
     The most specific thing I recall next is the gate
     bursting open. Would you wish me to go on to that?

Q. Before you deal with that, can you remember any messages
   requesting the gates to be opened before that happened? -
   A. Yes. I think we are talking in terms of things that
   happened simultaneously.    I was not looking at the
   monitor at t^iis particular moment and I recall a request
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD


from Mr. Marshall for the gate to be opened.   I remember
turning and looking at the monitor on my left.   The
monitor, as I recall it, is on the left and I remember
turning and much the same as I was taken a little by
surprise with the closing of Leppings Lane and the bus
passing, I turned and looked and thought, "What does he
want the gates opening for?"    An absolute shock. As I
turned and looked the gate burst open.   Now I know...

Can we just make sure we know which gate we are talking
about?   Are we talking about the gate we now all know as
Gate C? - A. Gate C.

You didn't know it was called Gate C? - A. No, no idea.
As I turned and looked, I don't know whether I said it,
it may be I didn't say it, but in my mind thought, "The
gate has burst open," but PC Bichard, if my memory serves
me correctly said, What's he on about?    The gate has
burst open anyway."   Bearing in mind we have got a small
TV screen - and I am guessing - 9" square, black and
white, possibly 10' away from me, and our perception was
at that time, and still is today, even though others will
say that we are incorrect, that that gate had burst open
and some fans had got in.

A mounted Officer came to their assistance, whoever they
were at that gate, and recovered the situation and the
gate was closed.   As far as I was concerned, I thought,
 He has made the request. That has relieved the
situation," and that matter was finalised in my tnind.

So what happened then as far as you are concerned?
Before you tell me that, can you remember where you were
within the Control Box?   Put it another way, where was
Mr. Murray at that point?   Was he seated in the place
where he was supposed to be or were you in that spot? -
A. No - if I answer it in this way: I was stood
somewhere towards the back and on that...   There is a
raised platform.

There is a raised platform. - A. I was in about that sort
of location and I can only presume that Mr. Murray was in
the front somewhere.

You were at the back? - A. I was at the back.

OK, carry on. - A. The next thing that occurred, having
retrieved the situation, and the next thing that happened
was that Superintendent Marshall came over again and made
a request.   Now my understanding is he just made one
request and this request was quite a shocking experience.
He said, "If you don't open the gates, someone is going
to get killed."   That really was, I think it is safe to
say, quite riveting.   In that respect, I think to stand
                                                           54

                                            D, G. DUCKENFIELD


   there and to be faced with a situation where a colleague
   who is extremely experienced and there have been no
   messages prior to that of a deterioration that is causing
   him concern, to say to you, "Open the gates or somebody
   is going to get killed, that really was something which
   was unprecedented, was totally outside my police
   experience and obviously totally outside my police
   training, and really to accede to his request to open the
   gates it would defeat everything we had planned in our
   Operational Order of not allowing people in who were
   drunk, not allowing people in who might be carrying
   offensive weapons.   I do not need to go over that.    I
   am sure you understand that.

Q. Yes. - A. I was stood there thinking about that and the
   enormity of that decision, and thinking, "If I don't open
   the gates people are going to get killed."    Then
   Mr. Murray - the atmosphere in the Control Box, to say it
   was a football ground with probably 50,000 in it, and we
   talk frequently about the noise etc., to use a well worn
   phrase you could hear a pin drop.    The atmosphere was
   electric.   I was stood there and I was asked to make
   that decision and it seemed as though the world had
   stopped.   Mr. Murray then said to me, "Mr. Duckenfield,
   are you going to open the gates?"    As you can imagine,
   whatever rigid plans people might have, whatever policies
   you might have, if it means saving lives and preventing
   injury then you do your level best, don't you, to save
   people's lives?     So I gave the order to open the gates.

Q. The Officer put that out across the radio, I take   it?-
   A. Yes.   Superintendent Murray said...  Just bear with
   me a moment.

Q. Yes, of course. - A. Superintendent Murray - I recall
   him, he had got this personal radio in his hand.
   Forgive me sometimes for demonstrating but this is how it
   comes back to mind.   He had got this personal radio and
   I recall it in his hand, held something like at shoulder
   level like this.     He turned to me and said,
   "Mr. Duckenfield,   are you going to open the gates?" Of
   course I told him to do so.   He then spoke into the
   radio and said, "Open the gates.    Open the gates."  In
   my mind it was "gates" and there was no distinction, and
   that was it.

Q. Did you hear PC Buxton, or somebody from the Land Rover,
   request the postponement of the match?    Did you yourself
   hear that? - A. I am not sure.    If I can just go through
   the thought processes at about that time.    I remember PC
   Buxton being asked for and I remember him coming.    I
   have some difficulty about the postponement which it
   probably may be better to explain later.    I am confused
   because I had it in my mind that postponement was raised
                                                          55

                                            D, G. DUCKENFIELD


   in the Control Box and I went through a thought process
   about that, but as to whether I actually heard PC Buxton
   say it, or it was probably Sergeant Goddard responding at
   some time, I cannot accurately recollect, sir.

Q. Let's put the question the other way.   What is your
   recollection when the issue of postponing the kick-off
   came up?   We know it came up at 2.30 in conversation. -
   A. Yes.

Q. Which you have explained to me.   Are you saying it came
   up again? - A. Yes.

Q. Tell me what your recollection of that is. - A. I have
   got a clear recollection in my mind as to what I thought
   and what I did.   The unfortunate thing is that my
   recollection does not fit into the timescale of events.
   I preface my remarks, but because of the crisis I am
   probably out of sequence with it, but my recollection as
   far as I am concerned, is that at some stage I was on the
   back step of the Control Box.   I remember being, as you
   might say, on my own and thinking through situations.
   Something - and I don't know what it was - flagged up in
   my mind, "Isn't it now time to consider very seriously
   postponing the kick-off?"   I have a recollection of
   looking through the window of the Control Box to my
   right. I don t know why I did that.    You can see the
   players' tunnel.   At that stage I recollect seeing a
   crowd of photographers.   I think they were photographers
   because they had all got these orange tabards on.    They
   were in a semi-circle by the players' tunnel.   There
   were other people there, but that is what struck me.    I
   thought, "It is time probably to seriously consider
   delaying the kick-off."

  Something happened which made me believe that the players
  had run out on to the pitch.   I cannot tell you if I saw
  a team - this is where the confusion arises - but
  something triggered in my mind that the players were
  coming out and it was too late for that option.   The
  reason I say it was too late for that option is that I
  thought that whilst I had difficulties outside at
  Leppings Lane, then the difficulties I was going to get
  inside the ground were quite serious, and I saw this
  much.

  I mean, the reason I did not delay it was this, I
  thought, "I have already got 50,000 people in the ground.
  I have got the players coming out," or so I thought.
  There was an air of anticipation about all those people.
  Everything was ready to start and everything was ready to
  go.   I had also got Notts Forest fans on the Spion Kop.

              r
                                                                56
                                               D . G . DUCKEMFIET.n


Q. Sorry, you had Liverpool fans on the Spion Kop? - A.
   Yes, thank you. I had got Liverpool fans on the Spion
   Kop. So it was my view that had I decided to delay
   kick-off at that stage I would be concentrating my
   efforts and my resources on two fronts. I would have
   to communicate the delay of the kick-off to the crowd
   within the ground and cope with - can I use the word
   'discontent'? I am not saying that is right but I just
   cannot think of a better one.

Q. Yes. - A. And cope with the problems within the ground,
   explaining it to them and explaining all those
   difficulties etc. but, of course, if the players were
   on the pitch or had come out they were, dare I say it,
   contented to some extent and I could focus all my
   attention on the Leppings Lane end. There is another
   aspect and I am not so sure whether this is one that
   came after. Delaying kick-off is a decision that one
   can make. Delaying kick-off and communicating it to a
   group of people who you want to act upon it is a
   totally different thing than just making the decision.
Q. Your recollection is that whatever sparked it off in
   your mind it was at either just before or coinciding
   with the players coming on to the pitch. Is that what
   you are saying? - A. Yes, sir, but - and I add the but
   in there - I have also got a recollection it might have
   been before the gates were opened. This is where I say
   to you I am uncertain. There is confusion and with no
   disrespect to anybody that is the best I can do with
   that.

Q. In any event you rejected it as an option on the day? -
   A. Yes, I did.

Q. I think that is a convenient point. We will pause and
   we will have lunch. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,
   as I have said to every witness who has had a break,
   please remember that you are on Oath and strictly
   speaking you are in the witness box during the lunch
   hour and so do not discuss the evidence if you would be
   so good please. Yes.

                    LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
Q. Mr. Duckenfield you can probably remember where we had
   just got to the point where you had told me about
   authorising the opening of the gates? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Then I discussed with you and you told me about your
   thinking regarding the possibility of postponing kick-
   off and somefof the reasonings that went through your
   mind at that time? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                                57
                                                D. G. DUCKHNFTTCT.n



Q. I think you have already told me that you did not know
   the numbers of these gates. You just said "the gates"
   or words to that effect? - A. That is right.
Q. Did another message come through from the Sergeant
   asking that another gate be opened? - A. Yes. What
   happened was that having given the order for the gates
   to be opened then a short time later, it might have
   been a minute or so, I can't be precise, I heard a
   message on the radio that seemed to come into the whole
   of the Control Box where someone said, "If you don't
   open Gate A it is going in anyway". I personally
   couldn't identify the individual but that is the
   message I heard.
Q. Did you respond to it or did you hear any response to
   it? - A. To the best of my recollection it was
   responded to because the belief in the Control Room was
   that the message was, "Open the gates", meaning plural
   and I took that to mean all the gates and that should
   have been opened as well.
Q. The cameras were focused in the main on Gate C, would
   that be right? What we now know as Gate C, you may not
   have known it at the time? - A. My recollection is that
   one camera was focusing on Gate C.
Q. Did you see any of the other gates actually opening? -
   A. No, I can't say that I did, sir.
Q. Did you see any of the other gates open as opposed to
   opening? - A. No, sir, not at all.
Q. Whilst you were taking   the decision in saying, "Open
   the gates", of course,   various other things were going
   on in the Control Room   by other people, that would be
   right, would it not? -   A. Yes, sir.
Q. Did you yourself give any directions or instructions
   with regard to putting serials of Officers in specific
   locations? - A. The situation, sir, was such that I was
   totally consumed by the decision that there was. As I
   said earlier, it was totally unprecedented and outside
   my experience and I was totally focused on that at that
   stage.
Q. This question is clearly one which may tend to
   incriminate you. I am not saying that the others have
   not been as well but this one is very specifically
   so. - A. Yes.
               f
                                                              58
                                               D. G. DUCKENFTKT.n


Q. When the order was given to open the gates what
   thoughts went through your mind at that point as to
   what would happen to the people who would enter through
   the gates? As I say, you do not have to answer this
   question if you do not wish to. - A. My recollection,
   sir, is that there was space in the concourse and if
   that gate was opened I could save people's lives.
Q. Did you appreciate at that time the geography of the
   ground and in particular the relationship of the gate
   to the tunnel? - A. No, sir.

Q. All these are prejudicial questions. Were you at that
   time in a position to visualise the entry points on to
   the terracing from the concourse area? - A. No, sir.
Q. You understand the question. Have you understood what
   I have asked? What I am asking you is, did you have a
   mental picture of the concourse area and the way that
   people would have to go if they were going to get
   either into the stands or on to the terracing? - A. At
   that stage, sir, I was totally consumed by the decision
   to save lives and my only thoughts were that people
   would go in the concourse. After that I didn't have a
   picture.

Q. Did you around that time when you gave the instruction
   look at the terracing as far as you now remember? - A.
   Thinking back, and it is difficult to judge obviously
   with so much that has passed, I think there was space
   on the terracing beneath the Control Box and there was
   space in the concourse.

Q. Again this is a prejudicial question. You did not, I
   take it, give any orders for serials to position
   themselves to direct the fans in any particular
   direction from the concourse area? - A. As I said, sir,
   I was totally consumed by the decision.

Q. Did you yourself give any directions for people to be
   positioned behind Gate A with a view to channelling
   people who might be coming through that gate? - A. No,
   sir, I didn't. Any decision of that nature must have
   been taken by somebody else and I can't add to that.
Q. What about positioning serials both within the North
   Stand and outside the North Stand? Did that at some
   point occur and again this is a prejudicial question? -
   A. That is right. I do not know what the situation was
   exactly but action was taken to alert serials who were
   on standby and directions were given to go to the North
   Stand and or> to the perimeter track as a result of the
   situation that had developed.
                                                                 59
                                               D . G . DIlCKEMFTKT.n




Q. Were you anticipating that people would be going into
   that stand when you gave that particular direction? -
   A. Yes, because of that I thought people may go into
   that stand who probably had not tickets.
Q. Was that your concern, that it might be ticketless
   people who might be going into the stands as opposed to
   terracing people. Terracing is not the right word but
   you know what I mean, people who would normally be
   standing going into the stands? - A. I suppose with
   hindsight I don't really know what I thought at that
   particular time.
Q. Did you at that time, and it is very difficult of
   course because such a lot of time has passed, realise
   which was the gate that led to the North Stand? - A.
   No, sir, I don't think I did. I think some
   conversation may have been in the Control Box but I
   don't think I did. It is difficult with the passage of
   time.

Q. What I am interested in is that when the second request
   came through from some unknown person to you? - A. Yes,
   I think my recollection there is that somebody might
   have said, "Where is that?” or "Where does that lead
   to?" or something like that and that is what might have
   developed. As to whether that was said in the Control
   Box or somebody related it subsequently I am unsure.
Q. Were you throughout this period still standing on that
   ledge at the back of the Control Box or had you moved
   down, can you remember? - A. I can't remember, sir.

Q. Can you recollect whether you were ever seated in the
   front row of the Control Box? - A. No, I don’t think I
   was, sir.

Q. At this point prior to the match kicking off? - A. No,
   my recollection is that I was never sat down that day.

Q. From where you were standing how much of the Leppings
   Lane terraces were you actually able to see? Never
   mind what you saw but how much of it could you see from
   where you were standing? - A. In general terms you have
   a view of the terrace from the side on, as it were. I
   suppose it may be restricted because of me standing up
   at the back and the roof coming into play or the
   window, TV cameras, if my memory serves me correctly
   but I could see the terracing.

              r
                                                          60

                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. Had you noticed any marked disparity between the centre
   and the wings - I use the word "marked". - A. I would
   say, sir, that what I saw - and what time are you
   referring to, sir, can I ask?

Q. This is after the gate had been opened, sorry. - A. No,
   I didn't, sir. I saw what I believed to be, I can only
   best describe it as normality.

Q. Did you, after the gate was opened, notice any increase
   in crowd density or crowd movement into the centre
   pens, pens 3 and 4 we are talking about? - A. No, I
   didn t, sir.

Q. Did you see from where you were - you may not have done
   - but were you able to see Superintendent Greenwood on
   the field? - A. Yes. If I take you back in time, the
   first time I saw him was when some fans started to come
   onto the pitch. I might have taken you on a little bit
   in time, but the first time I recall seeing him was
   when some fans started to come through one of the
   perimeter gates onto the track, and I turned and said,
    'Where's Superintendent Greenwood?", and I saw him
   coming from the players' tunnel and he was hurriedly
   walking round the perimeter track to go to that
   location. That is when I first saw him.

Q. Did he come up to the Control Box at all as far as you
   remember? - A. I don't recall Superintendent Greenwood
   ever coming to the Control Box.

Q. You had not noticed any marked disparity when you
   looked. Did you see match kick-off at all? - A. No,
   it's remarkable but I don't recall the match kicking
   off.

Q. When do you first recollect seeing something which
   attracted your attention to the Leppings Lane
   terracing, as being not normal? - A. I have a
   recollection of looking out of the Control Box window
   and seeing some people coming out of a gate. I don't
   know which one. Obviously with the events as they are
   I presume 3 or 4, but I can't be accurate as to which
   one. I saw some people coming out of a gate and they
   were walking onto the perimeter track and that is when
   I first saw something other than one would expect.

Q. It was at that point that you said, "Where is
   Superintendent Greenwood?", and you saw him walk
   across, or hurry across? - A. I think probably I looked
   at it first of all because I was uncertain as to what
   the situation was. I mean I wouldn't ordinarily send a
   Superintendent to deal with a fan who has just come out
             f
                                                        61
                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD


   of a gate. It was probably a slower process than that,
   but in due course, yes.

Q. What you are saying is you noticed at first, you didn't
   necessarily think this is a task for the
   Superintendent, but something then happened - as it
   developed you are saying you realised .... - A. Yes. I
   think that what I recall is that, as I said earlier,
   things go through your mind of, 'What's happening
   here?" and then you watch the situation, watch it
   develop, and as it develops with more coming out, then
   obviously you trigger off in your mind, "Let's do
   something about this".

Q. Did you from where you were notice a difference in
   density? Superintendent Greenwood described it as a
   longitudinal split - I don't know if you were here when
   he said that? - A. No, I don't recall that.

Q. He said that it was more dense towards the fence than
   it was further back. Did you notice that? - A. No, I
   didn't notice anything like that at all, sir.

Q. You did notice, I think, a lady Police Officer at gate
   1, is that right? - A. Yes. What was happening is that
   fans were walking along the perimeter track, I would
   say aimlessly really, and making their way towards the
   corner flag and I think gate 1, beneath the Control
   Box, and she was totally oblivious to what was going
   off. Someone tried to get in touch with her on the
   radio to say, "Direct these fans into this pen", or
   through a gate, I should say actually, and that is when
   I saw the Policewoman.

Q. Was it then that you arranged to send somebody down to
   try and assist this young lady? - A. Yes. What
   happened was that she either did not have a radio or
   she had one and could not hear, I don't know, and as a
   result of that Chief Inspector McRobbie, who was in the
   Control Room with me purely as an observer that day, I
   don't know whether I said it to him or he volunteered,
   but the only way to get in touch with her was to send
   someone down onto the touchline to speak to the Police
   Officer.

Q. Had you by then formulated any views as to what was
   going on, and again remember this is a potentially
   incriminating question. - A. No, sir, I had not formed
   any views at all.

Q. Chief Inspector McRobbie went out of the Box? - A. Yes,
   sir.

             ?
                                                          62

                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. And we have seen pictures of him - you probably saw
   them this morning? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you then continue to watch the terracing and the
   area around it? - A. Yes, I was watching the events
   behind the goal.

Q. What was it that you were noticing at that point? - A.
   That more people were coming out of the pen, more
   people were coming onto the pitch and at that stage, I
   think by that stage the next event that I recall was
   that Superintendent Greenwood had moved round to that
   end of the Ground. I think that in a sequence of
   events I have got a picture of him standing on a
   hoarding at that end, somewhere in the region of the
   goal - I am not too specific about that but somewhere
   there - waving his arms, and Superintendent Murray
   saying in the Control Box words to the effect, "He
   wants the game stopped. Stop the game".

  Now, that is the next incident there, then from then
  there was some problem with regard to stopping the
  game, because as I understand it we had an established
  practice where we would get in touch with the Inspector
  on the touchline, but as to why we departed from that
  or whether or not an effort was made to contact that
  Inspector I don't know, but Mr. Murray left the Control
  Box, I don't know why - I mean I don't know if he was
  instructed or whether I said something - Mr. Murray
  left the Control Box and went down towards the
  touchline to speak to the linesman, to override the
  system and get the linesman to stop the game.

  Now, the next thing I recall is seeing a Superintendent
  - no, I think to be honest seeing a Police Officer who
  I later discovered was a Superintendent - running
  across the football pitch into the middle of the pitch
  while the game was going on and stopping the referee,
  and as you can imagine that is quite a remarkable
  thing, and the game was stopped. At that stage I think
  I then saw that people were coming onto the pitch who
  were injured, and then immediately I took a course of
  action to alert all the emergency services.




          /Q. Did Superintendent Murray
             r
                                                           63

                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q.   Did Superintendent Murray come back, as far as you can
     remember? You may not, but I just want to find out
     what you remember, after having run down? - A. I have
     got a vision of him coming back for some reason, to
     convey a message, but I can't think what he did. I
     think he came back into the Control Box for some
     reason and immediately left to return to the pitch to
     assist Superintendent Greenwood.

Q.   Then he has told us that, in fact, he did not come
     back for quite some time. Does that fit in with your
     recollection? - A. Yes, my recollection is he did not
     come back for some time until I had left to go
     elsewhere.

Q.   Had Mr. Jackson turned up before you realised that the
     match would have to be stopped, or did he come after?
     - A. The timing is difficult, in that I have got a
     recollection of standing in the Control Box watching
     the events unfold, that is the people coming onto the
     perimeter track or edge of the pitch, and being intent
     on looking at what was going off before me, and then
     Mr. Jackson came into the Control Box, and standing
     alongside me.

Q.   When the match was stopped, and I think you said it
     was about that time you realised there were some
     injuries? - A. Yes.

Q.   At that point were these injuries which you became
     aware of people on the pitch or in the terracing, can
     you remember? - A. I never recall people on the
     terracing from my position - and it sounds awful this
     - being injured or seeing anything untoward there.
     The thing that struck me, I have got a vision of a
     young man who started hobbling and to some extent
     dragging his leg and flopping down by the Leppings
     Lane goal.

Q.   Because there was a substantial crowd already outside
     by this time? - A. That is right, but I have got a
     vision of that is what triggered the urgency in my
     mind.

Q.   You may have heard, but certainly if you did not I can
     tell you, Superintendent Murray was saying that when
     he got back down onto the pitch he realised that
     ambulances were needed and he radioed in a fleet of
     ambulances would be required. Do you recollect that
     coming through? - A. I remember the message because I
     had called for assistance on the Major Incident Plan,
     and I remember some conversation about an ambulance
     and someone speaking in contradictory terms, and I do
     not know who, the conversation being something like,
                                                         64

                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD


     "You don't want one ambulance, you want a fleet of
     ambulances down here”, and that's the recollection I
     have.

Q.   In fact, we have heard from Mr. Jackson that what was
     requested and what he authorised was I think it is
     called Operation Support, is that right? - A. Yes,
     that is right, sir.

Q.   That is not necessarily the same thing as a Major
     Incident Plan, or is it, I do not know? - A. No. If I.
     can explain the situation, generally speaking if we
     have a situation where we require manpower above and
     beyond that that is, shall we say, normal in our
     locality, if I call Operation Support that means that
     we have some crisis situation of the magnitude of,
     dare I say it, a riot in a city centre sometimes, or a
     disaster situation, and because I say riot first,
     please do not think that ---

Q.   No. - A. It is the fastest way of getting every
     available Officer on duty from all over the County to
     a particular location. So looking at the situation
     and knowing that things were beginning to get
     difficult there with injuries on the pitch, I called
     Operation Support, which was to get every available
     Officer in the County that could be spared to the
     football ground.

Q.   Then I think Mr. Jackson had to confirm that, did he
     not, because of Standing Orders, or whatever? - A.
     That was it. I was starting to give instructions and
     I remember it distinctly. Having started off a process
     of giving instructions, the order Operation Support
     cannot be given unless it is by Assistant Chief
     Constable, and someone came back from the Headquarters
     Operations Room saying, "You can't have that unless
     you have got ACC's approval", and of course I said,
     "He's stood alongside me, it is approved”. That was
     the gist of it.

Q.   Do you know what time that was done, what time the
      Operation Support was approved by ACC? - A. No. In
      telling you the story, sir, I can only tell you it as
      it is. I know that there are times available, but
      those times were told to me afterwards. My timings
      after this event are such that I issue instructions
      and I have no sense of timing.

Q.   Would it be right to say that you stayed up in the
     Control Box until you actually left at about 3.30, or
     perhapsfeven later, to go towards the Directors' Room?
     - A. That is right, sir.
                                                            65

                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q.   Do you remember at what point a suggestion was made
     that bolt croppers should be made available? Did that
     come from you, or was it a request in? - A. That was a
     request in, sir. Bearing in mind by now it was a hive
     of activity, quite intense and messages were flowing,
     I think the way to describe it is thick and fast, I
     was issuing instructions and messages were coming in
     and I just recall someone mentioning bolt croppers and
     I can't say who or where it came from.

Q.   Do you remember giving any orders around this time for
     tannoy messages to go out? - A. Yes, among other
     things, I remember saying to PC Ryan, I would think it
     is, "Ask the crowd to ease back" and it would be wrong
     of me to say not to push forward, but the gist of it
     was, "Ask the crowd to ease back", and that was the
     gist of it.

Q.   It is very difficult I realise with the passage of
      time, but do you recollect was this after the match
      had finished or before, or can you not remember? - A.
      I think that at this time, sir, there were so many
      things that we were doing, for want of a better term,
      that it is difficult to recollect.

Q.   This is an incriminating question. Did you give any
      instructions for anybody to go round the back to see
     what was going on at the back of the terracing? - A.
      The difficulty is, sir, at that time I have difficulty
      recollecting what instructions were given and what was
      taking place.

Q.   Do you recollect utilising the emergency evacuation
     message? - A. No sir.

Q.   Again this is a question which you can think about
     before you answer: can you tell me why you did not do
     that?   I am not saying it would have made any
     difference;  I am just interested to know why you did
     not do that? - A. My main intention at that time, and
     bearing in mind I am sort of thinking back over two
     years, was to do something about the injuries and to
     get people to hospital, and I had a concern that if I
     did something about the evacuation - now I did not
     specifically consider that at that stage but I am
     talking generally - then it was distinctly possible
     that people might leave the ground. Now if people
     left the ground, then I was going to be in extreme
     difficulty.

            r
                               /Q.   I think you have ...
                                                             66

                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. I think you have misunderstood the question.    I was not
   asking you whether you made any public address
   announcement to the crowd about the incident, but whether
   you put out the coded message? - A . No, I did not do that
   at all.

Q. Because that would not have been understood, assuming it
   worked, by the crowd I mean? - A. Yes, I misunderstood
   you, I thought you were talking about evacuation.

Q. What I meant was did you put out the coded message? - A.
   No, not at all.

Q. Which one would have used as a preliminary to evacuation?
   - A. No.

Q. Can I now repeat it?   Did you think about it at the time
   or have you got any reason why you did not do it? - A.
   Sir, I think the honest answer is I did not think about
   it because in the heat of the moment and the crisis, with
   so much going on and so much to think about, it is
   something I did not think about.

Q. When was it that you actually found out there were
   fatalities, as opposed to injuries? - A. My own view is
   when I came back from the directors' box because I saw
   bodies lined up outside the gate beneath the Police
   Control Box.

                Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNEt

Q. Mr. Duckenfield, just go back to the planning stage,
   please.   You mentioned to the Coroner that you were
   aware there was a Safety Certificate in force for the
   ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And that the Safety Certificate contained a schedule
   giving the certified capacities of various parts of the
   ground? - A. I think the accuracy, sir, is that I was
   aware of the Safety Certificate and the detail it
   normally contained.   I am not being evasive, but
   specifics...

Q. Right, be accurate.   Were you aware that the Safety
   Certificate did include figures for the safe capacity of
   various parts of the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Now that is the background.   Here is the question: what
   was the significance of that in your mind as you
   approached the match? - A. The significance, sir, was
   that experts in their particular field had examined the
   ground and decided upon a capacity which was safe for a
   particular area and it was safe to operate within those
   limits.     .
                                                             67

                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q» Did you in fact, before the disaster, did you believe the
   ground was safe to be used up to the capacities which had
   been worked out? - A, Yes, sir,

Q. Now come to the event itself, and I have just got two
   questions about that.    They relate to the time at which
   you gave the order to open the gates.    First of all, at
   that time was it obvious to you that there was a risk of
   injury to people in pens 3 and 4 as a result of opening
   the gates? - A. No, sir.

Q. The second question is this:   wereyou indifferent to the
   risk of injury to people in those pens? -A. No, sir.

        MR. MANNING:   I have no questions of the Chief
   Superintendent, thank you.

        THE CORONER:   I   think, Mr. King, you willhave some
   questions, so it might be easier if we pause now so we do
   not interrupt you.   We will stop for ten minutes.

                       (Short adjournment)

        THE CORONER:   Before Mr. King starts    - ofcourse, I
   don't know what the questionsare going     to be but I
   suspect some of them will be questions of the type for
   which you would be entitled to exercise your privilege,
   so I am reminding you of thisat this stage and I will do
   the same as I did with Mr. Murray.     From time to time I
   will give you a refresher, so to speak. Is that
   satisfactory?   Do you understand that?

        THE WITNESS:    Yes, sir.

        THE CORONER:    Mr. King.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Duckenfield, would you accept now that 95 people lost
   their lives because of overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on
   the 15th of April, 1989? - A. That is a very difficult
   one, sir, but yes, people did die because of that.

Q. Well, it is not difficult, is it, after the event? - A.
   No, sir, I think you misunderstand me.   It is just
   difficult because of the circumstances.

Q. I see.   So the starting point in our investigation as to
   how these deaths came about is the starting point of how
   did it come about there was overcrowding in pens 3 and 4?
   - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were the Officer in overall command? - A. Yes, sir.
               r
                                                              68

                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q» You have told us quite a bit of what you did not know.
   I just want to check that I have got my evidence
   correctly down.   You told us that you did not know of
   the precise contents of the Safety Certificate, is that
   right? - A. As I think I said earlier, sir, it is
   difficult to recollect after such a long period.

Q.    Before the game had you been supplied with a   copy of the
     Certificate? - A. I cannot recollect, sir.

Q.   Did you call for one? - A. I recall asking about it, sir.

Q.   You say that your knowledge of the geography of the
     ground was limited? -A. Yes, sir.

Q. Based on how many journeys round the ground prior to the
   15th of April? - A. I cannot answer vith any accuracy,
   sir.
Q. How many roughly? - A. I would be guessing, sir, and I
   cannot give you an accurate answer.
Q. You told us this morning, your evidence is you did not
   have any detailed knowledge of the signings at the
   Leppings Lane end of the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Before the game began did you have any knowledge as to
   who would have the responsibility for the directing of
   spectators and the controlling of numbers going on to the
   Leppings Lane terraces? - A. For the directing of
   spectators I assumed that was a joint responsibility
   between the Police Service and the club.

Q. Did you ever make any investigation yourself before the
   15th of April, 1989, as to who had that specific
   responsibility? - A. I did not ask a specific question,
   as far as I recollect, but you are asking me about
   matters over two years ago now, sir.

Q. Before the 15th of April, 1989, did you have a copy of
   what is known as the ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at
   Sporting Events Guide to Policing Football? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. Had you read it? - A. Yes, sir.
Q. Had you read also the standing instructions for the
   policing of football matches? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Therefore you would know that the standing instructions
   for the policing of football matches included a
   recommendation that the stewards should be distributed
   throughout the ground in accordance with a detailed pre-
                 t
                                                         69

                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD


   arranged schedule agreed between the Police and
   management? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you know whether there was this detailed pre-arranged
   schedule between Police and management before the 15th of
   April, 1989? - A. I personally had not seen a detailed
   pre-arranged schedule, sir.

Q. Did you ask the question whether there was one to anybody
   at any of the planning meetings? - A. Sir, when taking
   over a Police Division there are many things to consider
   and I am sure I asked many questions.

Q. Well, I am asking you, therefore, was there to your
   knowledge a detailed pre-arranged schedule agreed between
   Police and management with regard to the distribution of
   stewards at the Hillsborough ground? - A. Sir, my
   recollection is that I had not seen a detailed pre­
   arranged schedule.   Having said that, other Officers
   were in day to day contact with footballing and I have no
   wish to pass the buck, and that is not my intention.
   There may have been one but I do not recall having seen
   it.
Q. Did you know before the 15th of April, 1989 semi-final
   there was to be no stewarding by the club as regards the
   Leppings Lane terraces?   Did you know that? - A. I don't
   think I knew that.   I am uncertain about that particular
   question, or that aspect that you ask me about.

Q. In the light of that which you say you were ignorant of
   on the 15th of April, 1989, can you seriously say to
   these Inquests that you felt yourself competent to be in
   overall command of the Hillsborough ground?

        THE CORONER:   That is definitely an incriminating
   question and you should think hard.

       THE WITNESS:    The way I would answer the question
  is this.    I had been promoted to the rank of Chief
  Superintendent to take over the responsibility of the
  running of the Hammerton Road Division.    As I said
  earlier today, I was something of a generalist as opposed
  to a specialist.    I consider that overall, as aPolice
  Officer, with many years' service, that as a Police
  Officer I was competent and capable of carrying out my
  duties.   Having said that, you are well aware that by
  comparison to Chief Superintendent Mole I did not have
  his experience of running capacity football games of the
  semi-final type at the Hillsborough football stadium.

Q. In the light of that total inexperience, because it was
   total inexperience, wasn't it, how can you seriously say
   that you hadfanything - and I am sorry to put it as
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD


bluntly as this - to commend the proposition that
yourself should be in overall command in the Control Box
on the 15th of April? -A. Sir, it is my view that as a
senior Police Officer I was not, as I have already said,
as experienced as Chief Superintendent Mole, but I had
with me a very experienced handpicked specially selected
team of Officers who were chosen by Chief Superintendent
Mole and they were there to support me.

Were they to support you or - and I have to put this to
you in the light of your stated ignorance - simply to
fulfil your role leaving you really with very little you
could offer by way of command? - A. Sir, I had the
ability overall as a Chief Superintendent and I had a
contribution to make.




           Q. Let me try and discover
                                                                   71
                                                  D. G.   DUCKTNPTKT.n



Q. Let me try and discover what you did know if I may.
   First of all, had you been supplied with a copy of the
   Green Guide to safety at sports grounds? - A. Sir,
   there was one at the Chief Superintendent's office at
   Hammerton Road Police Station.

Q. There may well have been one at the Police Station.
   Had you personally been given one? - A. Sir, no one had
   walked up to me and handed me a copy of the document.

Q. When did you first see a copy of the Green Guide to
   safety at sports grounds, given that you were being
   appointed as overall Commander at the Hillsborough
   game? - A. I cannot accurately tell you that, sir.

Q. Was it before the game? - A. I do not know the answer,
   sir. The answer to the question is that when taking
   over command at a Police Station there are many
   documents. There are documents that appertain to that
   particular Police Station. As far as I am aware that
   was a document along with the other documents that you
   have described.

Q. You have told us that you were particularly concerned
   for the safety of the public at the Hillsborough Semi
   Final. That is what you have told us. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. How could you assess safety first of all if you did not
   make yourself fully acquainted with the layout of the
   ground? - A. Sir, let us examine the situation.  I had
   been in command 21 days I think before the Semi Final.
   There is only so much that one can do in so short a
   period.

Q. How could you assess safety at the Hillsborough ground
   without even having made sure that you have looked at
   documents which have been supplied to the Police
   specifically directed to safety at sports grounds? - A.
   Sir, I didn't say that I hadn't looked at them.

Q. Let me see in a bit more detail about what you did know
   even on the limited walk round the ground that you had.
   Could we have C.267 first please? That is a view of
   the Leppings Lane terraces, is it not? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    It is a view which I am sure you had already taken on
     board when walking round the ground on the
     opportunities you chose to take? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    If we can just look at another photograph, C.268, that
     is a view looking down on to the Leppings Lane
     terraces? -      Yes, sir.
                                                                   72
                                               D.   G.   DUCiraMFTKr.n



        THE CORONER: Mr. King, I do not think that is a
   proper view to put to this witness because that was
   almost certainly taken off a gantry. Now unless you
   wish to ask him whether he climbed up the gantry to
   look at it—

         MR. KING: So be it, sir. I am quite content to
   go on the earlier photographs.  If Mr. Griffiths will
   put back the other photograph I am quite content with
   that.

        THE CORONER:   Yes.

        MR. KING: Believe it or not, sir, I was only
   trying to be helpful at this stage.

        THE WITNESS:   Are we on 267, sir?

Q. Yes. You would be aware, would you not, that the
   Leppings Lane terraces were divided into pens? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. You would be aware of that before the Semi Final on
   15th April by just even walking round the ground? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. You would be aware, just by looking, that the fences
   between the pens were broken, the radial fences, only
   at one point and that was at the back where one sees a
   radial gate? - A. I was aware that there were gates at
   the back, sir.

Q. It does not take long expertise simply to see that by
   just walking and looking, does it? You would also
   notice no doubt the central entry point on to the
   terraces via an entry which is bounded by two walls
   which run down on to the terrace. You can see that? -
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. You would be aware, would you not, and I mean before
   the Semi Final, that that entry point led from a
   tunnel? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. If I can show you another photograph, an aerial
   photograph, C.255, and it is not trying to be unhelpful
   but it is the only one I can find of a complete view of
   it.

       THE CORONER: I do not actually mind you using
  that other photograph so long as it is understood that
  he could not have had that view unless he climbed the
  gantry.
                                                                  73
                                                  D . G . DUCKENFIELD


          MR. KING: I do not think I am going to suggest,
     sir, in 255 that Mr. Duckenfield took an aerial flight
     in order to see the ground. That was not meant to be
     facetious.

Q. You can see there, can you not, Mr. Duckenfield, a
   general view of the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. One can see the block of turnstiles and there is a
   dividing wall on the concourse behind the two sets of
   turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You would have been aware from your walk round the
   ground that that was the position, would you not? - A.
   That the dividing wall was in that area?

Q.   Yes.- A. I knew of the dividing wall, yes.

Q.    If I can take you a bit further you would also know,
     would you not, that the block of turnstiles which is on
     the right hand side, which we know are turnstiles A to
     G, they lead into the area of the concourse where one
     finds the tunnel entrance? You would know that just by
     looking. - A. I knew that the turnstiles went into the
     concourse area.

Q. You would know through just walking passed, would you
   not, of the existence of the tunnel entrance? - A. I
   had seen the tunnel, sir.

Q.    If I can just take you to another photograph,C.263? -
     A. Yes.

Q. That is a clear view of the tunnel leading down to the
   centre of the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. As overall Commander in charge of the game you are not
   saying seriously, are you, that you were ignorant of
   the existence of that tunnel leading down into the
   centre area of the terrace? You are not suggesting
   that, are you? - A. No, I knew at that particular point
   there was a tunnel.

Q. Tell me, before the game began you would know, wouldn't
   you, that the spectators had tickets for different
   parts of the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You would know, because no doubt you had looked at the
   Operational Order, that certain turnstiles were
   allotted to the Liverpool spectators at the Leppings
   Lane end? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                                 74
                                               D . G . DUCKEWPTPnr.n


Q. The whole of the turnstiles at that end were for the
   Leppings Lane fans? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You would be aware, would you not, that the ticket
   holders for the terrace were going to go through what
   are called turnstiles A to G? You would know that? -
   A. I knew that the Liverpool fans were going at that
   end, sir. Whether I knew exactly that A to G was for
   the terrace, I am not sure at that time.

Q. Did you at any stage acquaint yourself with the details
   of the arrangements for the ticketing and the
   turnstiles being used by the spectators? - A. My
   understanding of the situation was that the ticketing
   arrangements were a matter for the Club and that
   discussions in relation to the organisation of the game
   and the appropriate ends and matters of that order were
   discussed prior to my arrival and ticketing
   arrangements were made by the Club as apart of their
   responsibility.

Q. Were you not aware of the fact that the Leppings Lane
   terraces were to be used by people who had come - and
   if could ask Mr. Griffiths to point it out - through
   turnstiles A to G or are you saying you just did not
   know that at all? - A. I was assured that the
   arrangements had been made. Tickets were colour coded.
   Tickets were allocated for areas at that end.

Q. Were you aware just by looking round the ground that
   anybody who came through turnstiles A to G would have
   in front of them the tunnel? - A. No, sir.

Q. Leave aside the lettering A to G for a moment just
   walking round the ground you could not have been in
   ignorance, could you, that anybody coming through the
   turnstiles with the dividing wall on the left, which
   you told us you knew about, would have the tunnel in
   front of them? - A. Sir, you are now speaking with
   hindsight. Can I take you back to the 14th April and
   not the 15th April? You are referring to my experience
   around the ground. I gained as much experience as I
   could in looking round the ground. With hindsight and
   you drawing attention to particular issues, you do
   raise those issues but at the time I wasn't aware of
   the situation.

Q. Were you aware of anything of importance in relation to
   the method of entry of spectators into the Leppings
   Lane end of the ground? - A. Can you explain that, sir?

Q. Let me ask you this; you told us, did you not, that at
   some stage you remember a conversation that fans would
                                                               75
                                              D . G . DUCKKWFTRT.n


  find their own level on the Leppings Lane terraces? -
  A. Yes, sir.

Q. You have also told us that you were concerned for
   safety? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were also saying to us that you were satisfied that
   the arrangements as to safety were proper ones? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. First of all, what did you understand was the means for
   the filling of the Leppings Lane terraces by the
   expression 'fans will find their own level'? - A. My
   understanding of that was, sir, that people would enter
   the ground in an orderly fashion and having entered the
   ground decide for themselves their viewing location and
   find their own location and take up a position of their
   choice.




                            /Q. Would there be.

              r
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Would there be any provision made with a view to
preventing overcrowding in that situation? - A. Sir,
with regard to overcrowding, Officers were positioned
in the West Stand, Officers were positioned on the
perimeter track, and as a result of that they had an
excellent view of the West Terrace.

Are you saying that there was any provision for the
prevention of overcrowding by the method of the fans
finding their own level? - A. Sir, what I am saying is
this, that that part of the Ground had been examined by
experts who had determined it was safe, and it was safe
to a level of 10,100 people. With that knowledge, sir,
there should not be overcrowding on that terrace.

Did you understand that there would be any intervention
by the Police as regards the filling of the Leppings
Lane Terraces at any stage? - A. Can you be more
specific, sir?

Yes. When did you understand, if at all, that the
Police would intervene in the course of the filling of
the Leppings Lane Terrace when the system of "find your
own level" was in operation? - A. Sir, it is my view
that when a Ground is safe with a capacity of 10,100
then there should be no need for the Police or anyone
else to intervene - save of course for extreme
circumstances - where people arrive normally and have
the choice, and choose their own spot.

So when would you envisage, on your view, when did you
envisage on your view, that there would be intervention
by the Police, if at all? - A. Well obviously if there
were signs of distress or discomfort.

So in other words, your understanding of the system on
15th April on the Leppings Lane Terrace was that unless
there were signs of discomfort from the fans there
would be no active intervention by the Police, is that
right? - A. No, not exactly. Let's take it stage by
stage. What you have said indicates that we are not a
caring organisation. My view is this, that this is a
partnership from all sides and that partnership exists
between the responsible bodies who are running the
match, that is the Police and other parties, and also
the fans. Now I don't put the onus on the fans in
their entirety to tell us if they are in distress. We
would also be looking and caring for them.

But as regards safety, and I mean prevention against
overcrowding at the Leppings Lane end on 15th April,
the system you describe as the one you were expecting
was taking place effectively meant that the spectators
were being fleft to monitor their own safety, weren't
                                                        77

                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD


   they, because you would only intervene when it had
   become so unsafe that they were showing signs of
   distress? - A. I think, sir, that my last answer
   checked my former answer. I think my last answer to
   you, and if it was not clear I shall repeat it, is that
   the Police would act on their own initiative if they
   saw signs of distress or discomfort.

Q. But you would agree if you wait until signs of distress
   before you intervene on terraces such as the Leppings
   Lane Terraces divided with those radial fences, you are
   intervening at a time when something has already gone
   wrong? - A. No, sir. I think that you are taking
   things far too far down the line. My view is this,
   that Police Officers who are experienced and have been
   properly briefed are looking at the situation and they
   know when situations are, shall we say, developing.

Q. You say when Officers have been properly briefed? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. You yourself told us that your briefing simply
   contained the references to safety which you have told
   us about? - A. No, sir, I didn't say that my briefing
   notes contained simply safety, but what I did say was
   that they were a broad brush picture.

Q. I agree. I just want to investigate .... - A. In
   accordance with the ACPO Guidelines.

Q. I will come back to the ACPO Guidelines later. Can I
   just deal with your briefing, given your evidence of
   the need to make sure Officers are properly briefed on
   these matters? Your briefing as to safety was
   completely general, wasn't it? - A. Sir, when you are
   dealing with 800 Police Officers for the whole of a
   Ground then I can do no more.

Q. Your briefing, whether there was any more you could do
   is a different question, but your briefing was
   completely general, wasn't it? - A. It was a general
   briefing, sir.

Q. To your knowledge, first of all did you give any
   instructions to the Officers immediately below you that
   they should brief particular serials in relation to the
   need to monitor the Leppings Lane Terraces for
   overcrowding? - A. No, sir.

Q. Do you know anybody yourself, from what you know - I
   accept yours is only a limited range of knowledge, but
   from your knowledge - do you know of any briefing prior
   to 15th April, 1989, which contained provision as to
   the monitoifing of the Leppings Lane Terraces for
                                                       78

                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD


  overcrowding? - A. Bearing in mind, sir, that I briefed
  the Officers, and other senior Officers covering their
  respective areas carried out their own briefings, they
  may have done but I have no knowledge of the details of
  their briefings.

Q. Does it surprise you that so far there has been no
   evidence of any briefing to Officers in relation to a
   specific duty of monitoring the Leppings Lane Terraces
   for overcrowding? Does that surprise you? - A. Sir, my
   answer is that, and I draw attention to earlier
   evidence, those Officers who were policing the
   perimeter track and in specific locations, had policed
   those areas before, as I understood it were well versed
   in policing those areas, and knew the situation.

Q. Knew what situation? - A. Knew the situation that
   existed with regard to a complete terrace and what to
   expect on those terraces.

Q. What did you understand, would you expect them to
   understand, as regards the Leppings Lane Terrace, given
   that it was divided up by those perimeter fences? - A.
   My understanding, sir, was this, that that terrace was
   safe, that the system of "find your own level" had
   worked previously, it had worked well and there was no
   reason to believe it would not work again.

Q. That wasn't my question quite. I wanted you to tell me
   what you understood and expected those people you have
   identified, those serials you have identified, the ones
   on the perimeter track, the ones in the West Stand,
   what you would have expected them to know about the
   situation on the Leppings Lane Terraces as regards
   overcrowding, given it is divided up by radial fences?
   - A. Sir, would you mind just repeating that again, a
   little more slowly please?

Q. I am trying to discover what you understood would be
   known by serials as regards the Leppings Lane Terraces
   and the situation which they should look out for on the
   Leppings Lane Terraces, given it was divided up into
   radial fences? - A. I am not sure, sir, of the
   specifics that individuals will be looking out for any
   more than the rest of the Ground. The rest of the
   Ground was policed by Officers who would bear in mind
   my general briefing, and they would carry out their
   duties as normal on that area and any other area.

Q. So are you saying as overall Commander that you did not
   regard the Leppings Lane Terraces with the radial
   fences, divided up in the way we can see, as having a
   particular area of concern which ought to be drawn to
   serials, a& regards monitoring it for overcrowding? -
                                                        79

                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD


   A. Let me take you back to what I said earlier, and I
   think the Coroner asked me this morning, nothing was
   drawn to my attention in the handing over of
   responsibilities, and in particular with regard to
   football, that I should look at the Leppings Lane
   Terraces in particular, and furthermore, as I have
   stated, the Safety Certificate indicated that terrace
   was safe.

Q. So it comes down to this, doesn't it, Mr. Duckenfield,
   that as regards the Leppings Lane Terraces you had not
   in any way turned your mind to the fact that it was
   divided up into individual pens with radial fences? -
   A. Sir, I was aware of the radial fences but nothing
   came to mind that indicated that it was anything other
   than safe.

Q. And on your evidence there was no specific briefing, to
   your knowledge, to any serial to monitor those pens for
   signs of overcrowding, that is right, isn't it? - A.
   Sir, I can only speak of my personal briefing, and as
   you know my personal briefing did not contain any
   specifics.

Q. Equally, and I need not take you through it but we all
   know it very well, there is not a jot of instruction in
   the Operational Order with regard to the problem or the
   concern for overcrowding on any part of the Ground, but
   the Leppings Lane Terraces in particular? There is
   just not a word about it, is there? - A. Sir, can I
   refer you to my comments earlier this morning, and I
   think I must draw your attention to the opening words -
   or I think they were the opening words - in my
   briefing? Basically I said something to the orderof
   an Operational Order of this nature cannot possibly
   cover every eventuality, and that was part of the
   reason for my briefing.

Q. I agree not every eventuality but do you not think that
   ensuring as best one can there is no overcrowding at a
   capacity game on a terrace such as the Leppings Lane
   Terrace merits something other than the label, "another
   eventuality"? - A. Sir, I don't wish to appear
   unconcerned. I can see the situation, but truthfully
   Police Officers are trained Officers, their primary aim
   is the protection of life and property and they act on
   initiative, and they take due account of the
   circumstances around them.
                                                          80

                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Q.   But if you only wait for Officers to act on
     initiative, then in fact do you not have in operation
     simply a casual system that if on the off-chance, if
     by luck and fortune, something is noticed in the crowd
     by way of distress, only then will something be done
     about a potential overcrowding on the terraces? That
     is what you are left with as regards the system, is it
     not? - A. No, I think you have there related a series
     of things - and I cannot think of a better word - and
     minimised the responsibility of Police Officers and
     their concern and their actions, and our concern for
     the welfare of people.

Q.   I will not pursue this particular matter any further
     save this: you told us earlier about the need for
     proper briefing. Do you still stand by your evidence
     that you regard the briefings, which were given to
     your knowledge on 15th April, were sound and
     sufficient as regards protecting spectators on the
     Leppings Lane terrace from the risk of overcrowding? -
     A. Sir, if I was not present at each individual
     briefing, then it is unfair to ask me to comment upon
     them.

Q*   If it be the case that not one jot was said in any
     briefing to any Officer about ensuring and taking
     steps to ensure that overcrowding did not happen on
     the Leppings Lane terraces, if no jot was said to that
     effect, are you still saying that you would be
     satisfied that proper briefings had been given? - A.
     Sir, I have no wish to be impertinent, do you know
     that that didn't occur? Do you know the contents of
     the other briefings? - A.

Q.   It is a very fair comment.   I can only go on the
     evidence we have heard.

          MR. CATCHPOLE: I apologise, I hesitate to rise,
     but I would just remind my learned friend of the
     evidence given by Mr. Creaser on this point. It may
     be he would want to have a quick look at it before he
     continues. It is not exactly a specific briefing, but
     Mr. Creaser did give evidence that he spoke to
     Inspector White about the briefings.  I just remind
     him of that.

          MR. ISAACS: Sir, I am very grateful to my
     learned friend Mr. Catchpole. Certainly I was not
     present during Chief Inspector Creaser's evidence,
     otherwise I may have picked it up and I am very


          THE CORONER: This may be an opportune moment to
     break for 10 minutes while you look this up. I cannot
                                                            81

                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD


     help you because I cannot remember the point without
     looking it up.

          MR. KING: Sir, I am quite happy just to deal
     quickly with Inspector Creaser because I do remember
     his evidence, sir.

          THE CORONER: Excellent.

          MR. KING: But I am in your hands entirely.      So
     be it, let us rise.

          THE CORONER: Let us stop for a few minutes.     Have
     you got a page number?

          MR. KING:   We will deal with it.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:  I have got a passage here which I
     can show to my learned friend. He will understand the
     reason why I have risen.

          THE CORONER:   If you give me the page number I
     can look it up as well.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:  It is page 37E. I am unsure of
     the day.    I think he gave an example of it a bit
     later on, I think it was on page 40, and possibly on
     page 41.

          THE CORONER: Thank you.

                      (Short Adjournment)

Q*        MR. KING: Mr. Duckenfield, is it your evidence
     that you would have expected the individual track
     Officers in the serials in the West Stand to be
     specifically briefed as to a. duty and role for the
     monitoring of the terraces for overcrowding? - A. When
     you use the word "overcrowding" in that manner it
     tends to flag up probably a previous knowledge of
     overcrowding, and I have some difficulty with that.
     But having said that, not wishing to be difficult,
     what I would say is that I would expect them with
     their knowledge to brief with regards to safety.

Q.   It is quite right that Chief Inspector Creaser
     undoubtedly said, and I have not in fact taken that
     out of my mind, that at an informal briefing he
     claims, and I accept that is his evidence, that there
     would be mention made of a need to monitor
     overcrowding, but it is certainly also the evidence,
     so that(the picture is complete to you, that any
     individual track Officer who we have had giving
     evidence, who has been asked about his briefing, his
                                                           82

                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD


     evidence always is that he received no specific
     briefing, and that would be a fair summary of the
     position. So with that background, can I ask you does
     it surprise you, given your view of safety at the
     ground, that no track Officer so far has given
     evidence that he received such a briefing? - A. It
     does, sir.
Q.   Because in fact, on the system which was being
     operated on the day where you were simply allowing
     fans to find their own level, careful monitoring of
     individual pens on the Leppings Lane terrace was
     crucial to the safety of the fans, was it not? - A.
     Certainly not so much in the pens, but the whole of
     the ground, monitoring of safety and levels was
     crucial.

Q.   Mr. Duckenfield you were able to see, and I showed you
     the photograph, that the terrace was divided up into
     pens with radial gates at the back, were you not? - A.
     Yes sir.

Q.   You do not need to have much more knowledge than that,
     or any more knowledge than that, to appreciate, do
     you, that anybody going into, shall we say, the centre
     pen, if he wants to move sideways, having entered, has
     to go through the radial gate at the back other than
     going out of the tunnel and going round the back
     again, that is just common sense, is it not? - A. Yes
     sir.
Q.   Just looking at it one can see, can one not, that if,
     in fact, that pen becomes crowded at a capacity game,
     there is an obvious risk - it may not happen but there
     is an obvious risk - that access to that gate at the
     back will become blocked, that is obvious, is it not?
     - A. I am not happy with the word "obvious", sir. I
     go back to the situation and I can only repeat experts
     have looked at that end of the ground and experts have
     made an assessment of the situation knowing full well
     all the circumstances and have come to the conclusion
     it is safe.

Q.   Mr. Duckenfield, those experts included the Police,
     did they not? - A. There were representatives on the
     Officer Working Party, yes sir.

Q.   Tell me, because you are the man who was in overall
     command, imagine I was a spectator coming down the
     tunnel onto the centre pens - all right - at a time
     when the pens were filling up? - A. Yes sir.
           f
Q.   Imagine that I get myself in a position near the front
     - all right? - A. Yes.
                                                            83

                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Q.   Imagine then that it becomes more full so I would like
      to get out - all right? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   How do you understand that spectator would get out,
     shall we say to go into a side pen? - A. He would move
     towards the back and take his choice of which way to
     go.

Q.   How would he know that there was a means of access at
      the back? - A. Because there are gates at the back of
      the pen and he would move towards the back, which he
     would probably have knowledge of because Liverpool had
     played there on two occasions previously.

Q.   Ah!   So what you are saying is you have got to be a
     spectator, are you, who had prior knowledge of the
     ground in order to know of the existence of the radial
     gates at the back, is that what you are saying? - A.
     No, I am not saying that at all.

Q.   Putyourself, therefore, again in the picture of
     somebody who is a spectator who has not been to the
     ground before. He is in the centre pen and he has got
     in there at a time when it was, say, half-empty and it
     is filling up, and it is filling up to a point where
     he wants to get out and go to a side pen which he can
     see has spaces in it. How does he know, and how could
     you expect him to know, of the existence of the radial
     gate right at the back? - A. I would say that he is a
     reasonably intelligent individual and immediately
     would retrace his steps.

Q.   But if he retraces his steps he simply gets to the
     tunnel entrance, that is not the radial gate? - A. He
     gets to the back of the wall and then he would do what
     I presume any other football supporter would do - he
     would look around him and find where he would want to
     go.

Q.   How would he know that there was a radial gate at the
     back? - A. Sir, I can do no better than say what was
     said by someone else. When people come into this Town
     Hall they make enquiries and find their way. When
     football supporters go to a ground, I would suggest
     they make enquiries and find their way.

Q.   So in other words, as far as the safety of the
     spectator going onto the Leppings Lane central pens
     was concerned, it was up to them, without any
     assistance from anybody, to find out their means of
     escape to a side pen, is that what you are saying? -
     A. What I am saying is this, that football fans are
     individuals who have a choice. They have exercised
     their right and they go into that pen, and if they
                                                         84

                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD


     wish to exercise their right to leave, then they do so
     by using sound common sense.

Q.   So is that your approach to safety as regards the
     spectators in the centre pens, that it is up to their
     common sense to show them how to escape the situation?
     - A. Sir, if I can choose words rather differently,
     as I have said earlier, the care and safety of
     spectators is a partnership, and if people choose to
     leave those pens under normal circumstances then that
     is what I described earlier.

Q.   But in normal circumstances when --

          MR. ISAACS: Sir, I am sorry to interrupt my
     learned friend, but I do recollect now, perhaps a week
     or so ago, exactly the same points being made with the
     author of the plan that is now being discussed, namely
     Chief Superintendent Mole. Chief Superintendent
     Duckenfield has said now on a number of occasions,
     "When I took over this game I was informed, and I
     understood, that the terrace would be safe", and he
     has given his reasons why he understood that to be the
     case.

          These matters really relate very clearly to the
     plan and the operational nature of the plan and I do
     not know how far my learned friend now wishes to take
     it, but we are going over very, very old ground and
     this, with respect, is not the man who should be
     answering these questions. The man who should be
     answering these questions has already had these
     questions asked of him. I make this point now perhaps
     to try and save some time and to relieve the Jury of
     this burden.

          MR. KING:Sir, with respect, I    submit this is
     the man to ask   the questions to. He was in overall
     command. He has given evidence to us that he was
     satisfied as to safety. I am entitled to investigate
     with him what was obvious not from what Mr. Mole may
     have said to him, or what anybody else said to him,
     but what was obvious from just looking at the layout
     of the ground, and that is what I am investigating
     with this witness who was in overall command on the
     day. All my questions have arisen through looking at
     and putting to   thewitness the sheer layout of the
     ground, the radial fences, the pens, the position of
     the radial gate at the back. I am entitled to ask
     this witness those matters.

          MRl ISAACS: Sir, there is a world of difference,
     this disaster having taken place, certain aspects
     having been identified as being causative and saying
                                                   85

                                     D. G. DUCKENFIELD


what is the situation now when one looks at it, and
the situation that was in any man’s mind, or any
woman's mind, at that time. Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield has said, "When I took over in the time
that I had, I had this experienced team and
effectively I was told, and indeed the Safety
Certificate told me as much, that the terrace was
safe". However much one wants to identify the tunnel,
the radial gates, the imaginary fan who comes when he
has not been there before and how is he going to get
out, it is something we have heard time and time
again. It is just a bouncing around exercise. I do
not know how far it gets us.

     MR. KING: Sir, I do not regard it as a bouncing
around exercise. I am entitled to investigate, with
the overall Commander of the game on 15th April, what
he appreciated and what was or was not obvious to him
as to the conditions on the Leppings Laneterrace,
given that he was in overall command inthe Control
Box, sir.

     THE CORONER: Mr. King, I think that is right, but
on the other hand (a) we have traversed the ground
with others and (b) we have traversed the ground with
this witness twice already, and I have not stopped you
- at least I have not stopped you yet - because you
want to find out what was known to this witness, but
once we have got his answer we do not need to repeat
it.

     MR. KING: I agree, sir, but what I am trying to
establish with the witness is what was obvious to him
and I am bound to say - and I say it openly - what
could have been obvious to him from the sheer looking
at the ground and taking him through it, and his
answers, and investigating whether his answers, in
fact, ring true, given what he has asserted. I am
entitled to do that, sir.

     THE CORONER: To a degree.

     MR. ISAACS: There is a world of difference, with
respect, between saying, "Was it not obvious to you?"
and saying, "Is it not obvious to everybody now
looking back? What is the situation with the
imaginary hypothetical fan?" Sir, that is not, with
respect, what this Inquest with this witness should be
about. I echo my previous remarks.

     MR. KING: Sir, with respect I have not once put
to this'witness, "Looking back do you not think that
...." Not once have I put that, and my learned friend
makes a very good crie de coeur on behalf of his
                                                     86

                                     D. G. DUCKENFIELD

client. I do not object to that because he is entitled
to but, sir, one cannot escape the fact that we are
dealing with the overall Commander of the game on 15th
April and I am entitled to investigate what his state
of knowledge was on the layout of the ground and what
his expectations were and should have been in the
sense of what could have been obvious to him, to see
whether he will agree or will not agree, given the
layout of the ground.




                           /THE CORONER:   I think
                                                                 87

                                                D. G. DUCKENFIELD


          THE CORONER:      I think you have got to accept his
     answers.

          MR. KING:   I agree, but I am entitled to
     investigate the basis for his answer to see whether it
     has a basis.

          THE CORONER:      Press on.

          MR. KING:      I am obliged, sir:

Q. Mr. Duckenfield, take it at the moment at this position,
   you have conceded or agreed with me that you would expect
   those who were delegated to have the responsibility,
   whoever they be, to be instructed and briefed as to the
   need to monitor the crowd at the Leppings Lane end, you
   have agreed with that? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You have agreed with me that you knew the Leppings Lane
   terrace was divided by radial fences? - A. Yes.

Q. You have agreed with me that you knew it was divided into
   pens by those radial fences? - A. Yes, but on the semi­
   final day, those pens - the gates were open.

Q. Yes, and the sole means of moving sideways at the back
   was by radial gates at the back? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Just looking at the ground, those radial gates were
   positioned at the back, whereas people who enter the
   terrace enter not at the back but at a point further down
   when they come through the tunnel?   That is right? - A.
   Are you suggesting because of the buttress walls, for
   want of a better description?

Q.   Yes. - A. People do arrive, and this is said with
     hindsight now, of course, people do arrive a yard or two
     on to the terrace.

Q. Let me just leave those basic facts and I will not take
   the matter any further with you at this staga as to the
   obviousness of the patent difficulties I put to you any
   spectators would find themselves in once those centre
   pens became any sort of full, to escape sideways.   I put
   it to you, that obviousness, that difficulty, is based on
   just looking at the layout of the ground, not any other
   sort of knowledge?   You don't agree? - A. Sir, you say
   it is obvious.   To me it was not obvious.   To the
   experts it was not obvious and to everyone else it was
   not obvious.

Q. Would it be obvious to you to this extent that if you
   were to see on the centre pens a fullness - whatever we
   call by fullpess - and if you were to see obvious large
                                                         88

                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD


  spaces in the side pens, that that picture would indicate
  that there had not been by spectators a "finding of their
  own level" across the terrace? - A. Can I just qualify
  what you are saying?   Are you referring to a disparity
  in the centre pens?

Q. I am referring to a position whereby one has two centre
   pens which on any view are full, whatever we mean by that
   for the moment - I will not quibble with you about words,
   particularly - and you have side pens which are obviously
   empty in the sense of clear, empty spaces.   If you see
   that situation, and if you see that situation shall we
   say a quarter of an hour before kick-off at a capacity
   game, are you saying that of itself would not give you
   any indication as to whether or not fans were being able
   to find their own level? - A. Sir, accepting at a quarter
   to three a disparity as you suggest, then disparity is
   not of itself unusual on football terraces.

Q. Even with a capacity game with only a quarter of an hour
   to go? - A. There is one point I must make here, sir. I
   do not know what a capacity terrace at Leppings Lane
   looks like with 10,100 people on it.

Q. You are not suggesting, are you, Mr. Duckenfield, that
   you believed that 10,000 people on the Leppings Lane
   terrace when distributed in a way which was safe, would
   give rise to a picture whereby you would have two pens
   which were full and side pens which had clear, wide open
   spaces in them?   You are not really suggesting that, are
   you? - A. I did not say that at all, sir.   Sir, my view
   is this, I am just drawing attention to a particular
   point.   However, going back to the original question,
   disparity of itself is not significant.

Q. When, in your judgment, would disparity be of
   significance? - A. When Police Officers, or stewards, or
   possibly fans, drew matters to my attention or Officers'
   attention.

Q. Do I take that answer to mean only until you see some
   sort of overt sign of distress would you be worried about
   disparity, is that what you are saying? - A. Sir, I have
   a thought that about twenty minutes ago I answered
   something in a similar vein where I said I would not
   arrive at a crisis situation.   I said I thought there
   was a situation where we were proceeding to a situation.
   I thought I had dealt with that a short time ago.

Q. Your answer does come back to this, that you are saying
   to us that disparity would only be a matter of concern
   for you if somebody complained about it in the sense of
   saying, "There is something wrong here"? - A. No, sir.
              r
                                                             89

                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD


   Your interpretation, I believe, of what I am saying is
   incorrect and if that is my fault then I apologise.

Q. It is probably all my fault.   Tell me when you would
   regard disparity, obvious disparity on the terraces at
   the Leppings Lane end, that is to say, centre pens on any
   view full, side pens clear, open spaces, at a capacity
   game?   When would that disparity give rise to concern to
   you? - A. I think I have said earlier, sir, I can do no
   better than to say that disparity causes me concern when
   many factors come into play.   I think you are suggesting
   that the Police Service doesn't care and doesn't take an
   interest, and we do.

Q. What I am suggesting and trying to discover is what, if
   anything, you understood the system was for coping with
   overcrowding, and anticipating overcrowding, on the
   Leppings Lane terraces.   That is what I am
   investigating.   You agree with me that the Operational
   Order contains in itself the operational instructions to
   Serials, but contains absolutely nothing about the safety
   of spectators in terms of their being protected from
   overcrowding on the terraces? - A. Sir, can I take you
   back?

Q. Do you accept that? - A. Sir, I have lost track of what
   you said.

Q. Do you accept that in the Operational Order there is no
   mention to any of the Serials in their duties about the
   need to protect spectators and to look after their safety
   and to protect them from overcrowding on the Leppings
   Lane terraces? - A. Sir, there are general references in
   the Operational Order, and this has been said before, in
   the intention.   I made reference in my briefing to
   safety and there are Police Officers who are delegated to
   that area, who have responsibilities, so the Police as a
   whole accept their responsibility for safety on those
   terraces.

Q. If, from the Control Box, one is able to see that there
   is a disparity in the sense that centre pens are full,
   whatever we mean by that term, and there are blatant
   obvious spaces on the side pens, would you agree with me
   this much as to what is obvious, because I appreciate you
   don't agree with much of what I say is obvious, but it is
   obvious that you as the Police looking after those
   terraces would not want any greater number of people to
   enter the centre pens as opposed to the side pens?    You
   would not want that to happen for their safety, would
   you? - A. If we have got to a difficult level, then I
   agree with you.

              r
                                                             90

                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. What do you mean by a "difficult level"? - A. Sir, there
   are many factors and I think we are now getting into the
   hypothetical situation where I am finding some difficulty
   in answering your questions.

Q.    It is not meant to be a difficult question.  It is meant
     to be a view from the Control Box of someone in your
     position, observing, if one did, a marked disparity
     between the centre pens and side pens, seeing the centre
     pens on any view of the term were full - there may be
     spaces, but full.   Plenty of spaces in the side pens.
     You would not, would you, if you are concerned for the
     safety of spectators, want any greater number of people
     to enter the full area as opposed to the side area?    You
     would want to ensure that the people coming in would now
     go to the side area, would not you? - A. If the centre
     pens were full then we would take action.

Q.    What action would you take? - A. Sir, I am sure there are
     many options opento the Police Service and depending on
     the circumstances we would consider each case on its
     merits.

Q. Before the 15th of April, 1989, had you had any
   contingency planning, which you are aware of, as to what
   you would do if the centre pens became full, the side
   pens obviously had space in them and you did not want any
   more people in the centre pens and you wanted to divert
   people to the side pens?   Had you had any contingency
   planning on that issue at all? - A. Sir, I think, as has
   been made plain through this particular Inquiry, the
   Police Service are not casual in their approach to
   things. Having said that, they do not always have a
   written down contingency plan for every eventuality.
   That is just not possible.

Q. Was there any contingency planning, to your knowledge, to
   deal with that situation? - A. There was no written down
   contingency plan to my knowledge.

Q. Leave aside what is written down.   To your knowledge was
   there any contingency planning for that situation? - A.
   Sir, I can do no better than say that in the Police
   Service we act according to circumstances as they present
   themselves, and that is not a casual, unprofessional,
   uncaring approach.

Q. I understand that answer.    You have repeated it a number
   of times.   I am just asking whether or not, apart from
   anything written down and you said there wasn't, was
   there to your knowledge any contingency planning to deal
   with that situation?    As I understand your answer the
   answer is there was not, is that right? - A. There was no
   contingency £>lan to my knowledge.
                                                             91

                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. Thank you.   Were you aware of any arrangements made by
   anybody - I do not necessarily mean an individual, but by
   any body in the terms of either the club or the Police,
   any arrangements made prior to the 15th April, 1989, to
   encourage the even distribution of spectators on the
   Leppings Lane terraces?   Were you aware of any
   arrangements? - A. Can you advise me as to who you
   include in that, sir?

Q. I leave it open to you completely.   Were you aware
   yourself, as overall Commander, of any arrangements which
   had been made to encourage the even distribution of
   spectators across the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. I
   think I have already answered that, sir, in that it was a
   "find your own level" situation.

Q. That would not encourage the even distribution, would it?
   - A. Not in terms of people actually participating.

Q.    It is nothing active, it is a totallypassive system of
     leaving the fans to their own devices, isn't it? - A.
     Sir, we go back to the original situation, and I am sorry
     to repeat myself, but this system had worked before.    It
     was an accepted system and that was the system in
     operation.

Q.    So the answer to my question is there were not
     arrangements, to your knowledge, made to encourage even
     distribution of the crowd on the terraces? - A. No, sir.




           Q. That is correct
                                                                   92
                                                  D . G . DUCKENPIET.D


Q. That iscorrect? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In the round then, Mr. Duckenfield, apart from the fact
   that you repeat the whole time that from what you had
   been told nothing had gone wrong before, can you help
   us with any specific planning which existed to your
   knowledge which was designed to prevent overcrowding on
   the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Sir, the system as a
   whole, that is Police Officers and possibly stewards
   who were overseeing the Leppings Lane terrace, I would
   suggest that they had a responsibility in keeping with
   many other people to monitor for difficulties on the
   Leppings Lane terrace.

Q.    Only ifthey saw difficulties - and I leave it atthis
     point - under your system would there be any
     intervention. You have got to have a difficulty before
     there is any intervention. That is your system, is it
     not? - A. No, sir, it is not.
Q. So be it.    I cannot take that any further.

Q.       THE CORONER:     I think Mr. Duckenfield was going
     to add something.   Were you? - A. Yes, may I?
Q. Yes, indeed. - A. Mr. King, we have a situation where
   my view is that you say the word 'difficulty' which
   introduces in some people's minds a finality as though
   we have got a long way down the road and I find that
   unfair. I think, as I have said earlier. Police
   Officers would respond to a developing situation and
   would see a situation before it got to the word you use
   of 'difficulty'.

Q.       MR. KING: If that is your evidence, give me an
     example of a developing situation where you would
     expect intervention which had not yet reached overt
     signs of distress in the crowd? - A. Mr. King, I don't
     wish to take the matter further because we seem to be
     disagreeing about a word. I can do no better than the
     answer I have given, sir.

Q. I am sorry. You fairly disagreed with me when I
   suggested that the system which you understood was
   operating was one where there would only be
   intervention as regards overcrowding on the terraces if
   there was signs of distress. You disagreed with that
   and so what I want to know is, when would you say a
   developing situation would arise? What is that
   developing situation which you would expect
   intervention in regard to even if we had not reached
   the signs of^ overt signs of distress? What is the
                                                                      93
                                                     D . G . DUCKENFTEr.n


     developing situation which you say would be spotted and
     dealt with?

          THE CORONER: This will be the last question on
     this topic I think because we have got hisaccount.
         THE WITNESS: The situation is one which in the
     peace and tranquillity of this Courtroom is one which
     is difficult to answer. All I would say to you is that
     when you stand on the perimeter track at a football
     ground or anywhere else you develop an intuition and I
     can take it no further than that.

Q.       MR. KING: Your answer to me is that it is all down
     to intuition, hoping something is spotted and hoping,
     therefore, if something is spotted action will be
     taken. That is what the system comes down to, pure
     good luck and fortune? - A. I am sorry, sir. We shall
     disagree.

Q. Were you aware and ever informed that in the__

          THE CORONER:     Are you moving on to something else?
          MR. KING:   Yes, sir.
          THE CORONER:     I think we   will stop.
Q. Mr. Duckenfield, tomorrow morning please at ten
   o'clock. The same thing as lunchtime. You are on Oath
   and in the witness box overnight, so to speak. Do not
   discuss the evidence. See you then. All right? - A.
   Yes, sir.

          THE CORONER:     Ladies and gentlemen, ten o'clock
     tomorrow.

                  (The Jury retired from       Court)

          THE CORONER: Mr. King, let me      ask howlong            you
     might because I trying to gauge fortomorrow and I
     would like an estimate of times?

          MR. KING: It is always difficult. I would hope
     to be no more than an hour or so I would have thought,
     sir.

          THE CORONER: I am not going to hold you to the
     minute but it gives us a rough estimate.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:    At present I have got no
     questions. .
                                                               94
                                               D . G . DUCKENFIELD


     MRS. McBRIEN: Sir, I am not sure at all but I
wouldn't think I will be long.

     THE CORONER:     Are you going to do some work
overnight?
     MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER: Do not stay up until one o'clock
because it is not worth it.

     MRS. McBRIEN: I want to get this right because I
will not have another opportunity.
     THE CORONER:     No, that is true.
     MISS ADDLEMAN:     I will have no questions.
     MR. RUSSELL:     I will probably be in the same
situation.

     THE CORONER: It looks then as if we shall
conclude with Mr. Duckenfield tomorrow. There will be
yourself, of course, I had forgotten about you, Mr.
Isaacs. What would you say?

     MR. ISAACS: I say that we should finish Mr.
Duckenfield easily tomorrow, all being well, a fair
wind and all the other things that go with it.
     THE CORONER: We will do that. That is
encouraging, I must say. Is there anything else
anybody wanted to raise? No, that is good. Good
night.

     (The Inquests were adjourned until ten o'clock
                 the following morning)
