                                                                                            M I R . 15



    OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and tim e raised                                 Number


    T itle                      ^                 /V   ~l~
              /
    (Include source and any document number i f relevant)


\   Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                      Indexer
    Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
    Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                      Indexer
    Indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised

    Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                  SIO




    Further action No(s)                                                                                              Indexer


    When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
   HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                       (WEST D I S T R I C T )



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


               JAMES ROBERT HENNESSY




                         Before

DR. S.L.   POPPER,   LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                             At

             The Medico-Legal Centre,
                  Watery Street,
                    Sheffield.

                             On

             Friday,    27th April.    1990.




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, L t d . ,-
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER              H i ll sbo rou gh Solicitors'   Group
                              S te eri ng Committee

MR.    S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                              Sc otland (Representing D r . A .
                              Forrest)

MR.         CALLAGHAN         Trent Regional Health A u th ori ty and
                              South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                              Ambula nce Service

MR.         GREGORY           Sheffield City Council

MISS         THORPE           Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN              Poli ce Federation of England and
                              Wales

MR.    P.    ISAACS           Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS.    B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,     South Yorkshire
MR.    P. METCALF             Consta bul ary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                            INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER


   DR.    S. SIVALOGANATHAN Called

          By The Coroner


   G.E.    EVANS Called

           By The Coroner


   M. LAYTON Called

           By The Coroner
           Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole


CLOSING REMARKS BY THE CORONER
                    ^ ; >7th April,   1990

                                  INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF JAMES ROBERT HENNESSY

                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, the next evidence you will hear relates
                       :o James Hennessy.   James' mum and his sister are in Court with
                      ■;he Social Workers.   Sir, there is, I suppose inevitably, bound
                       :o be a break down in my communications system at some stage.    We
                    R a r e perhaps lucky to have got this far without me hitting it.   I
                      have not in fact had instructions from James' mum's solicitors to
                      act through the agency of the Committee, but I certainly don't
                      propose to stand on that ceremony.    They would like me to look
                      after their interest this morning, and I am perfectly content to
                      do so, with your leave, sir.

                           THE CORONER:  I am very happy if you would, and I am sure
                     tau will be able to sort it out with the instructing solicitors
                     :.n due course.

                            MR.   FRASER:    I am sure we will,   sir.

                        THE CORONER:   Good morning.  Mrs. Hennessy, before I start
                   : want to describe to you the procedure so that you can follow it
                  nore easily, and also so that you know the order in which the
                D evidence will be given.
                            What we are going to do is first of all I am going to read
                     -;o you what was said on 19th April, 1989, which is when I dealt
                       jith the release of the body of your lad.  Then when that is done
                         will correct any errors which I may have noted in that opening,
                      and in one or two cases we have a few mistakes which need
                    E and when that Then
                      correcting.        I will tell you what the alcohol levels were,
                                     is done Dr. Siva, who is the pathologist, will come
                      down and he will explain to us the pathological finding.   Dr.
                      :3iva has agreed to see families if they want to see him privately
                        f you found it difficult to understand, just to make sure you
                       enow what we are talking about.  Are you seeing th£ first family?
                      I^hen he has given his evidence I am going to let him go to speak
                       :o the first family, and then if you do want to take advantage of
                        hat tell Mr. Fraser and he will organise it for you.

                            When that is completed the presenting Officer for the West
                      Midlands Police will present the summary of the evidence, and we
                      ■Jill listen to that.  Finally, Inspector Layton will get up and
                      le will describe the visual evidence that he has been able to
                      find, and he will mention various plans and things, and then he
                      Jill come over here and show us on the big plans what is shown on
                      :he little ones, so to speak, and then we will conclude.

                           This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on the
                      L9th April, 1989.  Identification:  Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting
                       oroner's Officer, said:

                                   "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                   identified to DC Kinsella of the South Yorkshire Police
                H                  as that of James Robert Hennessy by Karen Margaret
                                   Turner, his sister".


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        1
                                                                                 THE CORONER


                        s that you?

                             MRS.   TURNER:       Yes

                             THE CORONER:

                                    "He was 29 years of age, having been born on
                                    24th September, 1959, aJ: L iv e rpoo l . H e was a single
                    B               man and he lived at
                                    Ellesmere Port.  He was a plasterer by occupation.
                                    He died at Hillsborough Football Ground following an
                                    incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.                PC 6
                                    Pashley caused the body to be removed to the Medico-
                                    Legal Centre and there he identified it to Detective
                                    Constable Simon Weigold, who subsequently identified
                                    the same body to Dr. S i v a l o g a n a t h a n . It is the
                                    family wish that the body should be b u r i e d ” .

                               There is one error at least that I know of in this opening,
                        dind that is that Constable Weigold did not identify to Dr.
                        Sivaloganathan.    Dr. Siva will deal with that.  We usually refer
                        1 :o Dr. Siva in the shortened form, and he very kindly agrees to
                        i:hat.   In fact, we have a correcting statement from Simon Weigold
                           n which he sorts that out.
                    D
                                I then, if you remember, Mrs. Turner, I wrote to you and
                      4ent you a form and asked you to check if we had everything
                       'ight, in particular the spellings of the names and so on, and
                      ^ou signed it on 27th April saying as far as I could see we had
                      everything right.            I will make absolutely sure that "Hen nes sy” is
                      correctly spelled.            " H - E - N - N - E - S - S - Y " . And he was born at
                    ^ L i v e r p o o l , I think.

                               Now, Dr. Forrest did blood alcohols on everybody, and he
                        £ave evidence - nearly everybody;    there is one person he did not
                            and he gave evidence on the first day, and in the case of James
                        ijie said that the level was 35mg/100ml.

                             Dr.    Siva?

                                            DR. SOMASUNDRUM SIVALOGANATHAN Called

                                                         Bv THE CORONER

                                THE WITNESS:   Dr. Sivaloganathan, I am a lecturer in
                           Forensic Medicine at the University of Leeds and a Home Office
                           Pathologist for West Yorkshire, sir.

                                At your request, sir, I carried out a post mortem
                           examination on the body of James Robert Hennessy, which was
                           marked body No. 7 on 16th April, 1989.  The body was actually
                           identified to me by Detective Inspector Timms to whom I gather
                           DC Weigold had identified at an earlier date.  At that stage
                           the name was given to me as James Robert, and subsequently I
                           was told that the surname was Hennessy, sir.
                H
                                   THE CORONER;         But can I just check this with you.         Apart


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                               2
                                                                            DR.   S. SIVALOGANATHAN


                           from anything that was said to you b y any officers, Timms or
                           what have you, what else did you do to look at the body? - A.
                           I checked with the body and the body number and photographed
                           the body with the number on it.

                     <J. And it had the right number?           A.    It had the right number,
                         that is right, sir.

                    B4.    And it looks as if you had it identified or at least you
                           recorded it as just the two Christian names? - A. That is
                           right.

                     <j. And you have given me a supplemental statement saying you now
                         know his surname is Hennessy? - A. That is quite right, sir.
                         On examination he had features consistent with traumatic
                         asphyxia, sir, which is as a result of prevention of breathing
                         due to crushing.  Also he had numerous grazes on his face,
                         arms and body, which were all the result of impacts with the
                         ground or similar objects.  There were no significant internal
                         disease or injuries to cause or contribute towards the death,
                         sir.

                      <J). These grazes which you have mentioned, they were all, I
                           believe, quite superficial.  Is that right? - A. They were all
                    D      very superficial, and they were all, I believe, sustained
                           probably when he was unconscious, sir.

                     ( J ) . So what you say is he would not have suffered any pain with
                           those? - A. That is right.

                     0. And we have already established in other cases, in your view
                        loss of consciousness occurs in about 10 to 15 seconds in that
                        situation? - A. That is right, yes.

                     o .   And most, if you like, the damage which you describe, the
                           injuries, will have occurred in your view after the loss of
                           consciousness? - A. After the loss of consciousness, that is
                           right, sir.

                                THE CORONER:   Have you understood the point about that,
                           because that is very important for you, I think.

                                MR.   FRASER:     No questions,      sir.

                                MR.   LIMB:     No thank you,   sir.

                     (5.        THE CORONER:   Dr. Siva, before you leave us, I think
                           this is your last appearance in the Hillsborough cases? - A.
                           That is quite right, sir.

                     Q. And I think I have seen you in five cases?                      Six,   sir,

                     Q.    Is it six?   Bit five or six, it does not matter.  May I just
                           take the opportunity of thanking you for (a) coming along, (b)
                           being willing to talk to the families, those who need this
                H          help, and (c) perhaps most importantly, being willing to come
                           on that day from Leeds to help us so that we were able to get


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                        G.E.   EVANS


 the post mortems done speedily and enable the bodies to be
 released very, very quickly, which, of course, was a great,
 great boon to the families at the time.  We forget that now,
 but at the time it was very important.  So thank you very much
 indeed for all your help. - A. Thank you, sir.

. Dr. Siva, if you want to leave us so you can go and see the
  other families please feel free to do so.   If you hold on to
  the end of this Inquest in case this family to talk to you.

              GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called

                       Bv THE CORONER

      THE WITNESS:   My name is Geraldine Elizabeth Evans of
 the West Midlands Police.

      At about 1030 hours on Saturday 15th April, 1989, Mrs.
 Margaret Hennessy saw her son James Robert Hennessy, board a
 coach in Sutton Way, Great Sutton, with the intention of
 travelling to Sheffield.

      Brian Peter Bickerstaff travelled on the same coach with
 James and James Philip Delaney, who also died at the
 Hillsborough Stadium.  They arrived in the Leppings Lane area
 of Sheffield at 1400 hours.  Mr. Bickerstaff went to the
 turnstiles at Leppings Lane at about 1440 hours, and was
 separated from James and Mr. Delaney due to the crowd.

      Following the severe crushing in the West Stand terracing
 PC Maltravers went onto the pitch area and at the rear of the
 goal at Leppings Lane he saw a man he now knows to be James
 Robert Hennessy lying on the ground.  The officer attempted
 resuscitation with the assistance of a St. Johns Ambulanceman,
 but this was unsuccessful.

      PC Maltravers was assisted to carry James across the
 pitch on a stretcher to the gymnasium where a temporary
 mortuary had been set up.  The officer's collar number 91 was
 written on the hand of James and the officer returned to the
 pitch area.

      PC Pashley went into the gymnasium and was given
 responsibility for James.

      At 1609 hours Dr. Andrew Byrne examined Mr. Hennessy in
 the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

      PC Pashley later escorted the body of James to the
 Medico-Legal Centre and at 1700 hours on Sunday, 16th April,
 1989, Mrs. Karen Margaret Turner identified the body of her
 brother to Det. Constable Kinsella at the Medico-Legal Centre.

      On Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Dr. Siva carried out an
 autopsy and submitted a report giving the cause of death.

      Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the blood


                              4
                                                                                        M. LAYTON


                          sample from James, where the presence of ethanol was detected.
                          The witnesses proving continuity of the blood sample are
                          Philip Harvey Rich, Detective Sergeants Turner and Fletcher
                          and Dr. Alexander Robert Walker Forrest, who carried out the
                          analysis.

                               Found in the personal effects of James was a ticket
                          counterfoil for the match, but in the circumstances it cannot
                    B     be established exactly how or when he entered the stadium.

                               That concludes my summary,             sir.

                               MR.   FRASER:      No questions,         sir,    thank you.

                               MR.   LIMB:     No questions,         thank you,      sir.

                                       PET.    INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                       Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                               THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                          West Midlands Police.  An examination has been made of the
                          video film and photographic evidence, and James has been
                          identified as being in enclosure No. 3.
                    D
                               Mrs. Karen Turner has identified James on a BBC video
                          tape which has been given the reference number MAP 1, and I
                          believe that is timed at 1456:31:03.  I think, sir, it is
                          three lines down.  On a further photograph which has been
                          given a reference number PR2/A, again James is shown, and this
                          photograph is timed at 1506.
                    E          Sir, PC Maltravers has signed a plan of the pitch area
                          indicating the point at which he found James, and that, sir,
                          has been reference CM 1.

                               Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been given the
                          reference number MWJL10, and that is a plan of the terraces.

                    Fq.        THE CORONER:   Yes, that will be C 1-31                    -A.   Do you wish
                          to refer to CM 1, sir, PC Maltravers?

                          Yes, I think so, please.  That will be C 132. - A. If we can.
                          Sir, can we deal with the terrace plan?  This is enclosure No.
                          3, and specifically in relation to the video identification,
                          the point at which we believe James is shown is in this
                          position here approximately.  In respect of the photograph,
                    G     sir, that is actually in this location here.

                               THE CORONER:        Can you see,         Mr.     Limb?

                               MR.   LIMB:      Sir,   I can,       thank you,     yes.

                               THE WITNESS:   There is reference on that plan, sir, to
                          another identification which as is the case in many cases it
                H         is an unconfirmed identification.  It is actually shown just a
                          little bit further to the right, approximately h e r e , but


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                5
                                                                                    M. LAYTON


                          certainly the other two          I have indicated are confirmed.

                               THE CORONER:   And you are quite happy with those? - A. i
                          am, sir, yes.  In respect of the pitch plan, CM 1, the point
                          at which James is shown there is in this position here on the
                          pitch.  That refers to the plan by PC Maltravers.

                          In fact in this particular instance you don't have any video
                    B     of him being taken across the pitch? - A. That is right, sir.
                          The officer has viewed the visual evidence but is unable to
                          find him, sir.

                               MR.    FRASER:      No questions,       sir,    thank you.

                               MR.    LIMB:      No questions,      sir.

                               MR. CATCHPOLE:             Just one question.

                                          Cross-Examined by MR.            CATCHPOLE:

                    G .   Again, it is difficult to answer.  Is itpossible to tell from
                          the video whether James is alive at that point, please? - A.
                          Certainly on the video identification on MAP 1, which is at
                          1456, James is certainly alive at that stage.
                    D
                               THE CORONER:   That is on the terraces we are talking
                          about? - A. That is on the terraces.

                               MR. CATCHPOLE:            I am very grateful,       thank you.

                               MR.    FRASER:      No,    thank you,    sir.
                    E
                               THE CORONER:   Can I just check one thing.  I think you
                          are Karen Margaret Turner, and you are Margaret Hennessy?  Is
                          that right?

                               MRS.    TURNER:      Yes

                               MRS.    HENNESSY:         Yes.

                               THE CORONER:         I just want to be sure your names are
                          right as well.

                               Mrs. Hennessy and Karen, I am very, very sorry that this
                          terrible tragedy has occurred in your family, because for you
                          this young man was very special, I am quite sure, and it does
                          not matter how many other people are involved you have had a
                    G     very personal loss, and I want you to know that although we
                          are dealing with facts and who saw him when and where, I try
                          to remember for at least a moment that we are dealing with
                          somebody who is special to you.  So thank you for coming and
                          thank you for listening.  Thank you for your help with the
                          identification and so on.  If you want any help from Dr. Siva
                          Mr. Fraser will organise that for you.

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                               6
                                                                   M. LAYTON


                             Ladies and gentlemen, what we will do now is rise,  The
                        next Inquest is scheduled for 11, so we will have tea or
                        coffee or whatever is available.


                           (The Inquest into the death of JAMES ROBERT HENNESSY
                                   was adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )

                    B




                    C




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G
j




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    7
