r


                                                                                               M I R . 15




      OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and tim e raised   '     Q                       Num ber
                                                                                                                                   1^0            .

         J— os>^r
       Title
    ,xQ^ndpde source and any document number if relevant)
                                                                                                            fV’R v a N ^ U ^ t     o   Z jc .s ^ O -

      ^ ^ © iv e r 's instructions — urgent action — Yes/N o   __________
                                                                                                                                       Receiver




                                                                                                                                       Indexer
       Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

       No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                                 Statem ent Reader
       Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                       Indexer
       Indexed as indicated

       No(s) o f actions raised

       Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                                 S IO




      Further action No(s)                                                                                                             Indexer



      When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER
          ON THE 15th OF APRIL 1989


           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                  DAVID HAWLEY




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

               The Memorial Hall,
                   City H a l l ,
                   Sheffield.

                        On

          Thursday,   19th April,     1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER             Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                          Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH              Medical and Dental Union of
                          Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                          Forrest)

MR,    CALLAGHAN          Trent Regional Health Authority and
                          South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                          Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                          INDEX


                        PROF. JOHN STEPHEN PHILLIPS JONES - Called

                    B    Ey THE C O R O N E R ............................................2


                        POLICE CONSTABLE GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS- Called

                          By THE C O R O N E R ............................................4

                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                          Ey THE C O R O N E R ............................................ 6




                                                       — OO   OO-
                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        19th April   1990

                                      INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF DAVID HAWLEY

                               MR. FRASER:    Sir, if it assists, the latest
                          information I have is that the parents   of Mr. Hawley will
                          not be here but somebody on behalf of Mr. Wild may be
                          although I understand they are not in the precincts of the
                          building as y e t .
                    B
                                THE CORONER:    That is fine.     What time have we got
                           Mr. Wild listed for?

                                MR. FRASER:    Mr. Wild is listed for 3.30, sir.

                                THE CORONER: We obviously won't        want to start early,
                           not before 3.30 I mean.

                                Ladies and gentlemen, this is a resumed Inquest which
                           was opened on the 18th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil
                           Anthony Parkin - and you will notice he appears in every
                           single one of these Inquests and he was, if you like, my
                           informant - the Acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                “The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                    D           identified to PC 2233 Levitt of South Yorkshire Police
                                as that of David Hawley by Paul Owens, his nephew.         He
                                was 39 years of age having been born on the 26th
                                January 1950 at Liverpool.    He was a married man and he
                                1ived at      _                              S t . H e 1e n s .
                                He was a Diesel Fitter by occupation.    He died at
                                Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
                    E           there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.    PC 2233 Levitt
                                caused the body to be to be removed to the Medico-Legal
                                Centre and there he identified it to Detective
                                Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently identified the
                                same body to Prof. Jones.   It is the family wish that
                                the body should be buried.“

                           The Inquest was then adjourned.   We had the statement signed
                           on 26th April.   It was actually signed by Mrs. O'Neill who
                           is Mrs. Hawley's sister and she confirmed the name of Da v id
                           Hawley and the address)______            ^                St *
                           Helens, Merseyside, and the date of birth 22.6.51, place of
                           birth Liverpool and the occupation as Diesel Fitter, and
                           that he was a married man.

                                Dr- Forrest did the blood alcohols and they were
                           negative in this case-  We have heard about those already.
                           I am now going to ask Prof. Stephen Jones if he would be
                           good enough to come forward.  Prof. Jones, I am going to ask
                           you to take the oath in a moment.  You will see that it is a
                           slightly modified version, the intention being that once you



                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                     P R OF .   J.   S.   P.   JONES

                            have sworn it once, so to speak,   it will cover all the other
                            cases.

                             PROF. JOHN STEPHEN PHILLIPS JONES was called and took,
                             the following o a t h i

                                 “I swear by Almighty God that the evidence I shall give
                    B            shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
                                 truth in respect of each of the bodies on which I
                                 performed a post mortem examination as a result of an
                                 incident which occurred at the Hillsborough Football
                                 Stadium on 15th April 1989."

                                                 By THE CORO NE R;

                        Q. Prof  Jones, if you will be kind enough to give me your ful 1
                           name in the first instance? - A. John Stephen Phillips
                           Jones.

                        Q   If you could give me your qualifications and your position
                            and location? - A. Yes, I am Doctor of Medicine, Bachelor of
                            Surgery, Member of the Royal College of Surgeons, a
                            Licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, a Fellow of
                    D       the Royal College of Pathologists and I hold a Diploma in
                            Medical Jurisprudence.  I am a Consultant and Home Office
                            pathologist based at the City Hospital, Nottingham, and I am
                            Professor of Forensic Medicine at the University of
                            Nottingham.

                        Q  You undertook the post mortem in the case of this young man
                    E      and, in fact, he was identified to you by DC Weigold? -
                        A. Yes, he was indeed.

                        Q. He was documented as David Hawley, Case No. 8? - A. No. 8,
                           yes.

                        Q   Prof. Jones, if you would give me the cause of death and any
                            other relevant findings in your post mortem in relation to
                            this young man? - A. Yes, the cause of death was traumatic
                            asphyxia.   I found that there were a number of fairly minor
                            injuries to Mr. Hawley.   There were, for example, minor
                            abrasions on the forehead, on both sides of the forehead.
                            There were small bruises on the arms and there were bruises
                            and abrasions on the toes of the feet which had obviously
                            been trodden on at some stage.   The various injuries were
                            minor in themselves and did not in any way contribute to
                            death at all.   There were no internal injuries, apart from a
                            fracture of the left seventh rib.   Apart from that, there
                            were no internal injuries present.

                                 My reasons for coming to the conclusion that he had
                            died of traumatic asphyxia were that there was very marked


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                        P ROF .   J-   S.   P.   JONES

  cyanosis, that is a blue colouration of the face, neck and
  shoulders and of the fingers.  There was generalised
  cyanosis and there were multiple small haemorrhages piesent
  on the skin surface, particularly of the face and of the
  eyes and internally present on the surface of the heart and
  lungs and these are all indicative of an asphyxial death.

Q. Can I just ask you about one or two other of your findings.
   I notice that there were one or two gastic erosions you
   mentioned.   I believe you can get erosions when you are
   stressed but do you think these could have had anything to
   do with this incident? - A. I think that probably they were
   associated with the incident.   They have obviously occurred
   very quickly, very rapidly, and I would imagine that it is a
   similar mechanism to the petechial haemorrhages that one saw
   on other organs that caused these to happen.

Q. So their presence doesn't necessarily mean there was a
   prolonged agonal phase?’ - A. No, no.

Q. And you also mention a haemorrhage in the right petrous
   temporal bone, which is at the back here of the head, isn^t
   it? - A. Yes, that again was rather unusual in that that is
   not the site where one would normally expect a haemorrhage
   to occur under these circumstances but it is a finding that
   one sometimes finds when there is a fracture of the skull.
   In fact, I looked extremely carefully because of this and
   there was no evidence of any fracture whatsoever and I again
   assumed that it was a question of the changes due to
   traumatic asphyxia causing the rupture of some blood vessels
   in this region.




        THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.          Hr. Fraser,
   any questions of Prof. Jones?

        MR. FRASER:   David's family have no questions of
   Prof. Jones, thank you.
                                                                     P .c.   G.   E   EVANS

                                   THE CORONER:   Any questions from any of you? Ladies
                             and gentlemen, was it all clear to you?    Prof. Jones, I am
                             very grateful to you.   You are appearing in the next case as
                             well.   Could we have the presenting Officer please?

                               POLICE CONSTABLE GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS - Call ed ;
                    B                             Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q.   I know who you are but would you repeat your name for the
                             record please? - A. I am Geraldine Elizabeth Evans, a
                             Constable with the West Midlands Police.

                        Q. You have the report    in front of you'      A. Yes. sir.

                        Q. Can you take me through it in the usual way please? - A. At
                           about 1130 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989, Mrs. Ann
                           Patricia Hawley drove her husband David to meet other
                           persons with whom he intended to travel to Sheffield.   David
                           had a ticket for the Semi Final football match at
                           Hillsborough Stadium.

                    D             Mr. Kevin O'Neill travelled to Sheffield by private car
                             with Paul Owens, David Chambers, David Hawley and Stephen
                             Francis O'Neill.  They arrived in Sheffield at about 1430
                             hours and outside the stadium they separated as David and
                             Stephen O'Neill had tickets for the terraces whilst the
                             others had tickets for other parts of the stadium.

                                  Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                    E        terracing, Paul Winston Turner, a spectator, was on the
                             pitch by the perimeter fence at the Leppings Lane end when
                             he helped to carry a man whom he subsequently identified as
                             David Hawley on to the pitch.  David had been passed to him
                             from the terraces.  His evidence would support the view
                             that David Hawley was in Enclosure 3 but other evidence
                             referred to later would tend to contradict this.  Mr. Turner
                             left David on the pitch.

                                  Police Constable Fiona Richardson saw David Hawley
                             lying on the pitch and attempted resuscitation but without
                             success.  She saw a number of spectators carry David Hawley
                             down the pitch on a hoarding.  These spectators have not
                             been identified.

                                  Police Constable Levitt found David Hawley lying
                             unattended between the North Stand and the gymnasium.  The
                             Officer was assisted to carry David into the gymnasium where
                             a temporary mortuary had been set up.

                                  Between 1550 hours and 1615 hours, Dr. Matthew Bull
                             examined a number of persons, including David Hawley, in the

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    P .C.   G.    E.    EVANS

                             temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.   At 0135
                             hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr- Paul Owens identified
                             the body of David Hawley to Police Constable Levitt in the
                             temporary mortuary.  The Officer later escorted the body of
                             David Hawley to the Medico-Legal Centre where he confirmed
                             the identification to Detective Constable Tdeigold.
                    B
                                  On Sunday, 16th April 1989, following identification by
                             Detective Constable Weigold, Prof. Stephen Jones carried out
                             an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                                  Found in David's personal effects was a full ticket for
                             the match but in the circumstances it cannot be established
                             exactly how or when he entered the stadium,  This concludes
                             my summary, sir.

                        Q    They arrived in Sheffield at 1430 I think you said, that is
                             paragraph two of the summary.  I think you said but I
                             couldn't remember? - A. Yes, sir, 1430 hours.

                        Q.   Is it right   that Kevin O'Neill on page five of his statement
                             says they arrived at the ground at about ten to five minutes
                    D        to three? - A. Yes, sir.   1430 refers to the time of arrival
                             in Sheffield.

                        Q. Yes, and the 1450 to 1455 is when they got to the ground?
                        A. That is correct, sir, yes.

                        Q.   I think we had a bit of problems with summarising paragraph
                             three, that is right, isn't it, because of the difficulty of
                    E        reconciling  Mr. Turner's evidence from that in the visual
                             part? That    is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, sir-

                        Q. The only other thing I think I just want to get you to
                           confirm for me, in paragraph five, Mr. Levitt says he found
                           David unattended near the North Stand? - A. Yes, sir,
                           between the North Stand and the gymnasium.

                        Q  Well, if you turn to page 31 he describes him as being ashen
                           grey and he appeared to be dead at that point in time?
                        A. That is correct, sir, yes.
                                  THE CORONER:   Any questions for this Officer?

                                  MR. FRASER:    There   are no questions,       sir,   for this
                             Officer, thank you.

                                  THE CORONER:  Anybody else any questions?              (no
                             response) Thank you so much-




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       D. I . M.   LAYTON


                                      DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called;

                                                     Bv THE CORONER;

                    B           Yes. - A. Yes, sir.   Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                                West Midlands Police-   An examination of video material and
                                photographic evidence has been made and David has been
                                identified by his sister-in-law, Mrs- Margaret Owens,
                                located in the area of Pen 4.   This is on a photograph
                                referenced PR1/32A.   Mrs. Owens is, in fact, the lady
                                previously referred to in the Inquest of Stephen 0 ‘Neill and
                                perhaps I should say in respect of this particular person
                                the identification is perhaps that much stronger.

                                It is stronger? - A. Yes, sir.

                                Stephen O'Neill was the young man who we had really very
                                little evidence on? - A. That is right, sir, yes.  In this
                                instance the photograph that Mrs. Owens has picked out was
                    D           long distance, is facial and she is more happy that she is
                                cor re c t.

                                     Paul Winston Turner has viewed visual evidence and from
                                mortuary and clothing photographs he identifies David Hawley
                                as being one of the persons whom he assisted from the pen on
                                to the pitch.

                    E                Woman Police Constable Richardson identified herself
                                rendering first aid to David Hawley and she has seen herself
                                on a BBC video tape, the reference for this being Map 7,
                                1528:46:01.  The Officer has signed a plan of the pitch area
                                indicating the approximate location at which she found
                                David.  She is also shown on a photograph treating David
                                Hawley actually on the pitch and this is referenced MW1/2.

                        3. The problem in this case is that if Mrs. Owens is right
                           about the identification in Pen 4 then Mr. Turner cannot be
                           right? - A. Yes, there is a conflict, sir, and it is one
                           which unfortunately we can't really resolve.

                                     Sir, could I draw your attention to a plan, in fact two
                                plans? The first one is referenced MWJL12 which is a plan
                                of the terraces.

                        q   . Let me just give it a number.   C19. - A. And the second
                              plan, sir, is referenced MWJL11 and this is a plan of the
                              pitch.  Both these plans were prepared by me on the basis
                              of the photographs referred to.

                        Q   •
                                That will be C 2 0 . The MWJL12 that is, in fact      M r s . Owens 1
                                                                                     It is based
                H               identification? - A. Yes, that is right, sir.
                                on that identification.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                            6
                                                                      n.I.   PI • L A Y T O N

                              Could you    show us where they are please.-  A. If I
                    Q
                              refer you to the terrace plan.   This is actually   Enclosure 4
                              and the area where Mrs. Owens made the identification is
                              this particular area here.    That photograph Is actually
                    B         timed and    if I can give you the time, sir, it is         y
                              timed at    1505-   Perhaps if I can move on to the other- now.

                              Yes please. - A. The plan referred to is HWJL11. The video
                    Q         reference I have previously referred to in Hap 7 indicates
                              r p ”     i = n V  Which Is almost directly In front of Gate
                              3.
                                                                                                sir
                              It is very close to Gate that , isn 't it? - A. It is

                              Can you    just come back? There is one other matter I want to
                              ask you because this is a good   case for illustrating some
                              the problems which everybody has had with trying to ea
                              with the identifications.    I think I am right ^ s a y i n g that
                              Mrs. Owens made a statement on the 19th Augu s t, is t
                              right? - A. I believe so, sir.    She has been seen on two
                    D         occasions, sir, that is right.
                              Yes she did make a statement, page 52, if you turn » that?
                        <!■
                              This incidentally is no criticism of Mrs. Owen*=.       Thl®
                              Jui?    a convenient case to illustrate it because Mrs. Owens
                              is actually the sister of Mr. Hawley and so she is a very
                              close relation.       I want to just use it to show the
                              difficulty which everybody has with these thing •
                    E         on this particular statement she identifies David on a
                              photographic reference which we haven't yet                   bUt
                              it is DIR2/9 I think, that is right, isn t it.        A. Yes
                              sir.      If I can assist you, basically I am aware the tami y
                              themselves actually saw.       This Phot°fraPh,            family
                              newspaper photograph that was actually published and family
                              members       did see the photograph in the newspaper and were all
                              of the       view that it did, in fact, show both David and
                              partially Stephen-       Mrs- Owens volunteered to actually vie
                              the evidence as such and obviously she subsequent y made a
                              statement but during the course of further enquiries we
                              actually visited a witness who it subsequently transpired
                              was      in fact the person that Mrs. Owens had indicated on
                              t h e 'newspaper photograph.    So, in other words, it had to be
                              wrong and it was on that basis we revisited Mrs. Owens in an
                              effort to clarify that and to possibly see it we could take
                              the matter further and it was on the second visit that
                               then obtained the further identification.

                               in fact, she agreed on the second visit that she Jad mad. a
                         Q     mistake with the earlier identification? - A. ™ at is quite
                               so sir.   I should perhaps just mention that one of the
                               difficulties in any event has been that there is evidence of
                    H          a transfer in the aftermath from one pen to another and,



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                             7
                    A
                                                                 D. I.   PI. L A Y T O N

                          therefore, whilst someone may have been in Pen 3 alive they
                          may subsequently have gone to Pen 2 or indeed Pen 4 or
                          indeed, as you have heard, back through the tunnel and not
                          necessarily on to the pitch.  It is that degree of t ransfer
                    B     which has at times caused some difficulties.

                        Q. The point I really wanted to elicit is that here was a very
                           close relative who looked at photographs and made a
                           m is~ ident if icat ion which is subsequently corrected.’1
                        A. That is right, sir.

                                THE CORONER:    I only wanted to draw this to your
                           attention, Members of the Jury.   Please don't think this is
                           a criticism of Mrs- Owens-   On the contrary, it is a
                           compliment to Mrs. Owens that she was trying so hard but you
                           can see how difficult it is in some cases to get it right.
                           A lot of work has been done and great effort has been made
                           but we have to accept that it is very, very difficult
                           indeed.   Mr. Fraser, any questions?
                    D             MR. FRASER:   No questions for the Officer, sir, thank
                           you.

                                THE CORONER:  Anything from anybody else?             (no
                           response) Thank you very much indeed -

                                 That concludes the evidence which I am going to take in
                    E      this case.   The Hawleys aren't here but it doesn't mean to
                           say that we don't feel for them as we do for everybody else.
                           We are going to adjourn for a few minutes and we will have
                           time for a cup of tea or something and we will be back at
                           3.30.

                                    (The Inquest into the death of DAVID HAWLEY
                                       was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                         8
      HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                   (WEST DISTRICT)



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

               ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                    DAVID HAWLEY
                     (Addendum)




                       Before

DR.    S.L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                         At

              The Medico-Legal Centre.
                   Watery S t r e e t ,
                     Sheffield.

                         On

                    2nd May 1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




        From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
             Official Shorthand Writers,
         55, Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                    A




                    B

                                                     INDEX


                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                         By THE CORONER..........................




                    D



                                                  OO--O O --OO



                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   D .I . M I C H A E L L A Y T O N




                        2nd May 1990

                            ADDENDUM TO THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF DAVID HAWLEY

                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, I understand it is your intention to
                           take an addendum to the evidence in relation to David Hawley
                           which was given previously.

                                THE CORONER:   Yes.
                    B
                                HR. FRASER:   Sir, I have had the benefit of seeing the
                           addendum and your records will show that David's parents and
                           family were not present in Court.. I am certain there would
                           be no objection by the family to that addendum being taken
                           in at this stage by whatever means you feel appropriate.

                                  DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called
                    C
                                                Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Inspector Layton, I think we have managed to get some more
                           information since - I have forgotten the date now? - A . 24th
                           Apr i1 -

                        Q. Well into these hearings.   Can you tell rne what it is you
                    D      have ascertained? - A. Yes, sir.   Mr. Michael Thomas
                           Hoi 1inghurst, an off-duty nurse, was a spectator at the
                           match and was in Enclosure No. 4 at the Leppings Lane end of
                           the ground when he became aware of the increasing pressure
                           being exerted on him by the crowd.   After being subjected to
                           this pressure for approximately fifteen minutes
                           Mr. Hoi 1inghurst became aware of a space being created
                    E      around him and on looking down to the tloor of the terracing
                           he saw a man he now knows to be David Hawley.    In fact, we
                           have already heard evidence in respect of Mr. Hawley.

                                 Mr. Hoi 1inghurst saw that Mr. Hawley was blue in the
                           face and on not detecting a pulse he tried to resuscitate
                           Mr- Hawley by heart massage and rnouth to mouth
                           resuscitation.    Unfortunately Mr. Hawley failed to respond
                    F      to this treatment and it is also apparent that
                           Mi’. Holl inghurst tried to resuscitate another man about whom
                           the evidence will be heard tomorrow, sir, in respect of Paul
                           Carlile.

                        Q. Yes. - A. Mr. Hollinghurst has viewed photographs of
                           Mr. Hawley and confirmed from these that Mr. Hawley is one
                           of the persons he tried to revive.   He has signed a plan of
                    G      the terraces indicating the point at which he treated
                           Mr. Hawley and that is referenced M T H 2 .

                        Q. Can we give it the next number, C210. - A. I think it would
                           be right to say, sir, the previous evidence you have heard
                           also indicates that Mr. Hawley was in Enclosure No. 4.


                    H                                   1



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                        D .I . M I C H A E L   LAYTON




                           (moved to pl a n ) Sir, with reference to the plan the point
                           at which Mr. Hollinghurst believes he dealt with Mr. David
                           Hawley was in this position here (indicat- in.e;) very slightly
                           different to the other plans but it is from recollection.

                        Q. Yes, I think the point about is this that Mr. Hoi 1 inghuirst
                           was *an off-duty nurse and I think I am right we had his
                           original statement but with no identification.-’ ~ A. That is
                           quite right, sir.
                    B
                        Q. And we then thought it might be worth coming forward
                           because there were relatively few people in the pen - to t-ee
                           whether he could remember if he was challenged and he came
                           up with this identification? - A. Yes, sir, that is right.

                        Q. The important thing is that this was a man with some medical
                           knowledge, that is right, because he was an off-duty nurse?
                        A- He was, sir, yes-

                                THE CORONER:      Any questions,    Mr. Fraser.

                                            Cross-Examined bv MR. F R A SE R :

                        Q- Was I'lr. Holl inghurst able to put a. time to this incident,
                           approximate or otherwise? - A. Can I just go back to my
                    D      file? His original statement was made on 15th May 1989.
                           Sir, I think it says on page 57, a reference, four lines up,
                           "By now it was a few minutes to three o'clock1' but then on
                           page 58, the last paragraph, he says, "After about fifteen
                           minutes we were suddenly aware of a space being created
                           around me".

                    E   Q. So that I understand it, is that fifteen minutes after a few
                           minutes to three? - A. I think that is the inference but he
                           is not spec if ic .

                        Q. So ten past three or thereabouts?

                                THE CORONER:   Well, if you want to guess.               It is a
                           matter of construction, isn't it?

                                MR. FRASER:   With an emphasis on "thereabouts".  It is
                           just trying to put it into context in relation to the event,
                           sir.

                                THE WITNESS:   Certainly those are the only two times
                           at that point that are mentioned.

                                THE CORONER:       Any questions?

                                MR. LIMB:      No thank you, sir.

                                MR. CATCHPOLE:       No thank you, sir.



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                              THE CORONER:    I was glad in a sense that we found this
                        because there is such a lot of cases where it says a doctor
                        carne or a nurse carne and we haven't been able to find the
                        people-   This happens to be one where we have been fortunate
                        with somebody being able to help us a little bit.




                    B




                    C




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
