                                                                                             M IR .15



      OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and time raised   ^                       Number


      T itle   Tfr M <£3cz*?-S P '                 d-X-       M     ^ U -________l^TStofeJrl     V-OGr<ggS.       ‘’ZQ/’gfQ^n
      (Include source and any document number if relevant)                      ^ (^
**   ^ ^ c e iv e r's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                        Receiver




                                                                                                                        Indexer
      Document registered/indexed as indicated

      No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                 Statement Reader
      Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                        Indexer
      Indexed as indicated

      No(s) o f actions raised

      Examined - further action to be taken                                                                      0 /M         SIO




      Further action No(s)                                                                                              Indexer


      When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

              HENRY CHARLES ROGERS




                    Bef ore

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                       On

               20th April, 1990.



           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                       INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                A
                                                              Page


                        Opening Rexiiarks                        1

                    B
                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called
                           By THE CORONER                        2


                        PET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Called
                           By THE CORONER                            4
                           Cross-Examined by   MR. FRASER            5
                           Cross-Examined by   MR.CATCHPOLE          7


                        PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                           By THE CORONER                            9
                D
                        CLosinq Remarks                          12




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        20th April, 1990
                               INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF HENRY CHARLES ROGERS

                              THE CORONER:   Please sit down.   Mr. Fraser, yes.

                              MR. FRASER: Sir, for Mr. Rogers' Inquest I appear on
                        behalf of the family as a member of the Steering Committee.
                        Mr. Rogers' grandma, his aunt and a Social Worker are in
                    B   Court and the family's solicitor, Mr. Dawson, has travelled
                        from Chester. If there is any matter with which he can
                        assist I am sure he will, but I will actually present or I
                        will act through the Steering Committee.
                              THE CORONER: We are pleased to see you, Mr. Dawson,
                        and I am very happy to see you.

                    C         Can I say before I begin this Inquest that of course
                        Ihave heard about the   second tragedy which struck the
                        family and I was exceedingly exceedingly sorry that that
                        should have happened.
                              May I just mention to the jury so that they know what
                        I am talking about. This poor family lost the second son
                        within a very very short time, the same sort of age as the
                    D   lad we are talking about and in fact they had gone to
                        Australia and had to come back the day after they arrived
                        more or less because of the second death, so it was very
                        very sad.
                              Now you weren't here of course at the opening so I
                        will just very briefly describe to you what we are going
                        to do so that you can follow the proceedings a little bit
                    E   better.
                              What I am going to do in the first instance is to
                        read the evidence which I took on the 19th April 1989,
                        that was right at the beginning when I wanted to release
                        the bodies so that you could have the funeral.

                               There is at least one mistake that I know of in
                    F    this regard. I will read it as it is written. We will
                         then correct the raistakes as we go along. All right.
                         So don't worry if you hear something which you think is
                         not quite right.
                               Once we have done that we will deal, with any errors
                         that I have spotted and any others I haven't and then we
                    G    will listen to the Pathologist who will tell us what he
                         found and having heard the Pathologist we are going to
                         listen to the Police Officer from West Midlands who I think
                         you know anyway and she will tell me what she has summarised
                         in relation to this young man. Then we will listen to
                         another Police Officer and then v/e will close the Inquest
                         for the time being at that stage.

                H              You will hear the Officers give various references

                                               - 1 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                            THE CORONER


and numbers and plans and goodness knows what. You may take
them in if you wish, but I would ignore them if I were you.
They are needed so that we can find our way round all the ■
paperwork later on if we should ever have to do so. Is
that all clear to you?

     MEMBERS OF THE FAMILY:         Yes.
      THE CORONER: Then this is a resumed Inquest which
was opened on the 19th April 1989. On that occasion
Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer said:

      "The body which is the subject of this Inquest
      has been identified to P.C. 2916 Knights of
      the South Yorkshire Police as that of
      Henry Charles Rogers by Stephen Charles Rogers,
      his father. He was 17 years of age having been
      born on the 14th February 1972 at Hertford in
      Hampshire. He was a single man and he 1ived
      at r                                                   Chester.
      He w a s a s c h o o l b o y . H e d i e d at Hillsborough
      Football Ground following an incident there on
      Saturday, 15th April 1989. P.C. Knights caused
      the body to be removed to the Medico-Legal Centre
      and there he identified it to Detective Constable
      Simon Weigold who subsequently identified the
      same body to Dr. Slater. It is the family wish
      that the body should be buried.”

And then the Inquest was adjourned. Subsequently I wrote
to the family and I asked them to help me with the details
to make sure we had got all the names and so on right and
everything was correct except that the place of birth
should have been Hertford, H.E.R.T.F.O.R.D. That is in
Hampshire, is it?
      A MEMBER OF THE FAMILY:         Hertfordshire.

      THE CORONER: Yes, of course, but everything else
was correct, so it is Hertford in Hertfordshire.

      We had the blood alcohols estimated for everybody
that was involved in this and the evidence was given in
fact on the first day and in the case of this young man
the result was negative.
      Now if we turn to the Pathologist, if you would be
kind enough to come down.
      The Pathologist has already taken the oath in
respect of all the Inquests that he is involved in.


                    DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called
                            By THE CORONER:
                                    dr.   D .N . SLATER


It is Dr. David Slater, isn't it? - A. That is correct, sir.

This young man was identified to you as Henry Charles Rogers,
number 24, and you satisfied yourself by all the usual
methods that we are talking about the right person? - A.
Yes sir.
Dr. Slater, could you just then take me through the post­
mortem in the accustomed way please? - A. Certainly. My
examination of Mr. Rogers showed very severe blueness to
the face.
      Externally there were relatively few injuries but
there was a very substantial area of bruising measuring
approximately 10" in size to the lower side of the chest
on the right side and also the tummy area.
      Internal examination showed areas of haemorrhage
and bruising in the lungs.
      I formed an opinion that death was clearly due to
asphyxia. My findings were entirely consistent with
substantial blunt pressure having been applied to the
lower part of the chest and upper part of the abdomen
on the right side.
      My autopsy showed that Mr. Rogers was apparently
fit and healthy with no evidence of any natural disease
which could have contributed towards death and also in
my opinion I felt that Mr. Rogers would have had a
normal life expectancy and I submitted my final cause of
death, sir, as traumatic asphyxia.
And on the whole you thought that compression had been
applied certainly evidentially to tne lower chest and
abdomen? - A. Yes sir, on the right side sir, yes.
That does not mean to say it might not have been elsewhere
as well but there weren't any marks externally. That is
right, isn't it? - A. That is correct, yes.
       THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser, do you want to ask any
 questions?
       MR. FRASER: No sir. Mr. Rogers' family have
 no questions thank you, Dr. Slater.
       THE CORONER:   Any questions from any of you?
 (No response)
       Dr. Slater, it is perfectly in order for you to
 leave us and we will be seeing you again of course over
 the next few days, I expect. Have a good weekend.
                                                                        D.S. J.. APPLETON


                                              PET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Called
                                                       By THE CORONER;

                                      THE WITNESS: Julie Appleton, Detective Sergeant of
                                the West Midlands Police.
                        Q. And you have also taken the oath at an earlier occasion?
                    B      - A. I have, yes sir.
                        Q. If you would be kind enough. Now before you start I think
                           you have looked throughthe summary which we prepared and
                           you were not happy with   some of the phrasing and youthough^
                           we could produce something rather better? - A. Yes.

                        Q. So you have taken the trouble to recast it, so be prepared
                    C      for changes in wording.   Allright?

                                      MR. FRASER:   Very     goodsir.
                        q   .         THE CORONER: There should not be any change in
                                sense but Sergeant Appleton was not happy when she ....
                                A lot of effort has gone into these summaries and I think
                                you did it this morning, didn't you? - A. Last night, sir.
                    D           At 0830 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989, Mr. Stephen
                                Charles Rogers saw his sons Henry Charles Rogers and
                                Adam Giles Rogers leave the family home with the intention
                                of travelling to Sheffield to watch the Cup Semi-Final
                                football match at the Hillsborough Stadium.
                                      Henry and Adam travelled together with Carl Willis
                                and another friend. They travelled to Chester Railway
                    E           Station where they caught a train to Sheffield. It is
                                known that none of them were in possession of match
                                tickets but it was their intention to purchase tickets
                                in Sheffield from a ticket tout.
                                      They arrived in Sheffield at around midday and
                                they made their way to Hillsborough. They attempted to
                                purchase tickets but they were unsuccessful. At aboub
                    F           1420 hours Henry and the rest of his party made their
                                way to the Leppings Lane entrance of the ground. It was
                                still their intention to purchase tickets. They joined
                                the mass of people waiting to enter the ground. At about
                                1450 hours the group found themselves about 15 feet from
                                Gate C. The gate was opened and Henry and his friends
                                were carried through the gate with the crowd into the
                                Stadium.
                    G
                                       They were forced by the crowd through the tunnel
                                 and into Enclosure 3 at the Leppings Lane terrace.
                                 Adam and Henry Rogers became separated from the others.
                                 They were approximately midway down the terrace when
                                 Henry was forced by crowd pressure to the left and Adam
                                 lost sight of Henry.
                H
                                                           - 4 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  D.S. J. APPLETON
                                                                                     t




                                At 1510 hours, following the severe crushing in the
                          Leppings Lane terracing, Police Sergeant Karl Knights entered
                          Enclosure 3. Near to the front he found a young man he
                          now knows to be Henry. Henry showed no sign of life. The
                          Officer attempted to resuscitate Henry but this proved
                          unsuccessful. The Officer carried Henry onto the pitch
                          where he left him. He then went to assist other spectators.
                    B           Mr. John Henry Owen, a spectator at the match, went
                          onto the pitch, where near to the goalmouth at the Leppings
                          Lane end he found a young man now known to be Henry Charles
                          Rogers. Mr. Owen thought that Henry was alive when he first
                          saw him but as he lifted his head he saw that he had in
                          fact died. Mr. Owen, together with other spectators
                          including Ian George Johnston and Ian Richard Johnson,
                          carried Henry on an advertising hoarding to the Spion Kop
                    C     end of the ground.
                                Sergeant Knights again came into contact with Henry
                          at the Spion Kop end of the pitch. He carried him into
                          the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

                                At 1620 hours Dr. William Stewart Riddell examined
                    D     Henry Rogers in the temporary mortuary and certified life
                          extinct.
                                At 0310 hours, Sunday, 16th April 1989, in the
                          temporary mortuary, Mr. Stephen Charles Rogers identified
                          the body of his son to Sergeant Knights.

                                Sergeant Knights later escorted the body of Henry
                    E     to the Medico Legal Centre where he confirmed the
                          identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

                                On Monday, 17th April, 1989, Dr. David Slater carried
                          out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                                This concludes my evidence sir.

                    F   Q. The young man Adam Rogers whom you have mentioned, that is
                           the lad who has passed away, isn't it? - A. It is, yes sir.

                                THE CORONER:     It is a shame.   Mr. Fraser.

                                 MR. FRASER:    Sir, would you give me a minute?

                                 THE CORONER:    Of course.
                    G
                                 MR. FRASER:    Thank you for that sir.


                                         Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

                        Q. Officer, can you say whether from your conversations with
                           Henry's friends it is known whether it was his normal
                H
                                                   - 5 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   D.S. J. APPLETON


                             custom to visit away games having previously secured a
                             ticket and that this was an exception that he did not have
                             one? - A. I cannot tell you without looking. If you give
                             me time I can look at the statements.
                                   THE CORONER: What you are trying to say is was
                             this his normal practice or was it an exception?

                    ®              MR. FRASER: Yes. His family know that he used to
                             travel to away games and that he always had aticket but
                             on this occasion due to the popularity of the fixture and
                             his actual geographical position where his home was, he
                             had a little difficulty getting a ticket and they travelled
                             with money in the expectation that they v/ould be able to
                             buy one.
                                   Obviously there may be inferences drawn by other
                             parties by this young man being in the ground without a
                             ticket and the family are-very keen to belay that parti­
                             cular suspicion or inference if it is drawn.
                                    They know he always travelled with a ticket.      This
                              was an exception.
                D                   THE WITNESS: Certainly Mr. Willis states that they
                              had been trying for a couple of weeks to purchase tickets
                              for the match.
                        Q.          THE CORONER: Have a look at page 5. If you find
                              the second paragraph.   Adam Rogers, that is the lad of
                              course who has passed away now, but he says in the second
                    E         paragraph ... Perhaps you could read where it says:
                              "The other three lads were all Liverpool supporters ..
                              down to "I withdrew money from the bank"? - A. This is
                              taken from Adam Rogers' statement. It says:

                                    "The other three lads were all Liverpool
                                    supporters and had decided after the draw
                                    that they wanted to go to the match. The
                                    intention was to purchase tickets from
                                    friends or any other person but we did not
                                    consider going to Liverpool Football Club
                                    to buy the tickets.
                                    On the Friday night before the match I
                                    realised that we were not going to be able
                                    to travel to Sheffield with tickets for the
                                    football match. I, therefore, withdrew some
                                    cash from the bank with the intention of
                                    purchasing a ticket from a ticket tout outside
                                    the ground."
                        q   . perhaps   you could read the next sentence as well? — A.

                H
                                                       -   6



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 D.S. J. APPLETON


                                  "I know that the other three lads also
                                  intended to purchase tickets from a ticket
                                  tout on the day of the match."
                                   MR. FRASER: Thank you for that, sir.   I hope the
                             jury have the point.

                    B             A MEMBER OF THE JURY:   Yes.

                        Q.         THE CORONER: The statement is dated the   4th May 1989,
                             isn't it? - A. That is right sir, yes.
                                   THE CORONER: We can spend some more time looking
                             through the statements but I think the general tenor who
                             they were and what they were intending to do is clear.
                             Do you want to explore this point further to see if
                             there is anything else in the statements? I have not
                             considered it as an issue.
                                   MR. FRASER: No sir, I don't want to make more of
                             it than it is but the point was obviously liable, an
                             inference was liable to be drawn elsewhere ,by the evidence
                             that the Officer gave. I was very keen on behalf of the
                D            family to deal with that inference and I think the point
                             has been made to your jury sir. Thank you for the
                             opportunity.
                                   THE CORONER:   Do you want to raise anything?

                                   MR. CATCHPOLE: We would quite like to raise one
                             point. It is a point of clarification really.
                    E
                                   THE CORONER: Perhaps you should give your name
                             because the poor Shorthand Writer I don t think sne knows
                             who you are.
                                   MR. CATCHPOLE: It is Stuart Catchpole for Sheffield
                             Wednesday. We introduced ourselves earlier, I think.


                                          Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

                        Q. The impression given by paragraph 3 is that this group of
                           young men were caught up very close to Gate C immediately
                           before it was opened at 2.52 and that once that had
                           happened there was then a surge from the vast pressure of
                           the crowd that carried them forward into the concourse
                           behind that? - A. Certainly if you read the statements
                           you get the impression that they had no choice of where
                           they went once the gates were opened.
                         Q. So they were driven into the tunnel by the force of the
                            crowd. It was not a voluntary choice to go to the tunnel?
                            - A. From the statements that is the impression.
                H
                                                     - 7 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      D.S. J. APPLETON



                        Q.
                                   THE CORONER: Is it into the tunnel or into the
                             concourse. There is a difference? - A. Into the ground
                             through the gate.

                        Q.
                                       MR. CATCHPOLE: But it is right that the summary
                                 then goes on to say: "They were forced by the crowd through
                                 the tunnel" and I was wondering whether the impression
                                 in the statements is that they were driven towards the
                    B            tunnel by the crowd itself?
                        Q.             THE CORONER: Actually page 8   would give you ---
                                 This is again Adam Rogers, in fact   you were right, but if
                                 you look it says: "We entered the    tunnel as a group of
                                 four." That is the last paragraph    and then a few lines
                                 further on he says:
                                       "We were forced along the tunnel at a brisk
                                       pace and as we emerged from the tunnel I lost
                                       my grip on Carl and Philip."

                                 A. That is correct, yes.
                                       THE CORONER: He does not actually deal with the
                                 entry through Gate C. This is talking about the tunnel.
                    D
                        q    .         m r . CATCHPOLE: Is there anything in the statements
                                 that deals with the immediate entry through Gate C?

                                       THE CORONER:   Yes, it is on that same page.

                                       THE WITNESS: On page 7, sir, about three-quarters
                    E            of the way down. It starts off:
                                       "Our group of four were still together at this
                                       point and I still thought it would be possible
                                       for us to purchase tickets. As the crowd
                                       crush increased, however, thoughts of buying
                                       tickets were forgotten and I became more
                                       concerned for the safety of myself and my
                                       companions. The crowd built up to such an
                                       extent that it was not possible to move in
                                       any direction other than that of the crowd
                                       as a whole. We were moving alongside the
                                       turnstile towards the river and what I later
                                       saw was a large gate."
                         q   .          THE CORONER: Then if you turn over on the ninth
                                  line down it says: "I was within about 15 feet. - A.
                                  That is correct sir.

                         Q. That is the bit that you want actually.          Can you read that?
                            - A. Yes.
                                        "I was within about 15 feet of the gate when
                                        the crowd began to move forward. I did not
                H
                                                       -    8   -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      D.S. J. APPLETON


                                 realise why the crowd was moving but I have
                                 since realised that it was due to the opening
                                 of the large gate. At that time I did not
                                 know if it had given way or if it had been
                                 opened."

                              THE CORONER: That is all he says, basically, and
                        then the next relevant bit says: "having passed through
                    B   the large gate" he says "we moved with the crowd towards
                        the tunnel in the stand."

                                 MR. CATCHPOLE :     I am grateful.

                                 THE CORONER:    Poes it help you?

                                 M R . CATCHPOLE :   Thank you, yes.

                                 THE CORONER:    What about you?

                                 MS. NORCLIFFE :     I have no questions sir.

                                 THE CORONER:    Anybody else any questions?       Is it
                        clear?
                    D
                                 MEMBERS OF THE JURY:      Yes.

                                 THE CORONER:    Thank you.

                                 THE WITNESS:    Thank you.


                    E                    PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                                                     By THE CORONER:

                              THE WITNESS: Sir, Michael Layton, Petective Inspector,
                        West Midlands Police.
                              Sir, in respect of Henry I have made an examination
                        of the visual evidence available both by way of video
                        and photographs.
                              Henry has in fact been identified being carried across
                        the pitch.
                              Police Sergeant Knights has signed a plan of the
                        terraces indicating the approximate location at which he
                        found Henry and he has also signed a further plan of the
                        pitch indicating the approximate location where he carried
                        him to.

                                 Those two plans sir are referenced KFK/1 and KFK/2.

                              Mr. John Henry Owen has identified himself on a
                        South Yorkshire Police photograph which is referenced at
                H
                                                      - 9 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                D.I. M. LAYTON


                          PR5/30. At this stage he is engaged in carrying Henry
                          across the pitch and he confirms that the person being
                          carried is the same man that he had previously referred
                          to as finding on the pitch.
                                He signed a plan of the pitch indicating the
                          approximate location at which he found Henry and M r . Owen
                          has also identified himself on a further photograph which
                 B        has been given the reference NGNl/108 and at this stage
                          he is applying chest compressions to Henry on the pitch
                          at the Spion Kop end of the ground.
                                On a photograph referenced SS41 Henry is also shown
                          in the same location at this stage attended by M r . Owen
                          and other spectators and Mr. Ian Richard Johnson has
                          confirmed that he and Ian George Johnston/ who has just
                          previously been referred to, are shown on those photographs
                          carrying Henry across the pitch.
                                Sir, at this stage the family have not actually
                          viewed any visual evidence.
                                Sir, if I can draw your attention - perhaps I should
                          first of all deal with that photograph reference PR5/30.
             D            That photograph is in fact timed and it bears the time
                          1532. That is the photograph which shows Henry being
                          carried across the pitch.

                     Q.         THE CORONER:    PR5/30? - A. That is right sir, yes,

                     Q.   What time was it? - A. 1532 sir. And sir if I can refer
                 E        you then to an additional plan which has been given the
                          reference number MWJL/32. That plan shows a location on
                          the pitch at the Spion Kop end of the ground and refers
                          to the location as indicated by Mr. Owen. In fact in
                          the summary he refers to NGNl/108. The plan refers to
                          a photograph NGNl/94 but it is the same location.

                     Q. Can we call that C43. Shall we number the others while
                        we are about it. Have you got any more? - A. No sir.

                     Q. KFK/1, 44. KFK/2, 45. What is this one? - A. JHO/1,
                        the plan drawn up by John Henry Owen.

                     Q. That will be 46.       Now if you would show us? - A. Yes sir.

                                THE CORONER: What the Officer is now going to do,
                          we are not using the photographs, I forgot to tell you
                          that earlier, much easier and much less hurtful on the
                          whole to use plans. It is also much easier to understand
                          what we are doing, so what he is now going to do, he is
                          going to come over here and he is going to show us on these
                          big plans where all these various spots and positions are
                          so that you have got an idea of what people are recording.
             H
                                                   -   10   -



L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      D .I . M. LAYTON


                                      (The Officer moves to a visual display board)

                                      THE WITNESS: Sir, perhaps if I could refer first of
                                all to the plan reference KFK/1, which is a plan produced
                                by Sergeant Knights and it is a plan of the terraces, if
                                we refer to this larger scale of that plan the position
                                at which Sergeant Knights has shown Henry's location is
                                in this particular area     here; That is actually in
                    B           Enclosure number 3.
                                      Sir, perhaps if we could refer to the plan O j. the
                                pitch in relation to KFK/2. This is also a plan by
                                Sergeant Knights. The position he has indicated on the
                                pitch is in this location here.
                                      Then in relation to JHO/1, which is John Henry
                    C           Owen's plan, he has actually indicated a point here, so
                                there is a slight variation but they are both very close
                                to each other in that respect.
                        q   #         THE CORONER: So John Henry Owen's plan, if I can just
                                stop you there for a moment, you have got what I think is
                                a red marker but I think .... A. I think that is probably
                                an error sir. It is a matter of conjecture really. I think
                D               in fact as has already been stated, Mr. Owen was not sure
                                at that stage.
                        Q. The colours indicate what the Investigating Officer
                           thinks as to whether a person was dead or alive at the
                           particular point in time and if you remember Mr. Owen
                           said: "I thought he was alive but when I lifted his head
                           I realised he was dead" or that he had died, something
                    E      of that nature? - A. That is correct sir, yes.
                                      Then sir lastly in relation to the plan reference
                                MWJL/32, again on the pitch, the photograph that I have
                                referred to, on this plan as I say it actually refers
                                to NGN1/94 but it is the same photograph referred to in
                                the summary and that indicates a location here actually
                                at the Spion Kop end of the pitch, the other end of the
                    F
                                pitch.
                        O. It is quite common, in fact nearly everybody who did not
                           go out backward at some point or other finished up either
                           there in that sort of Spion Kop end or in the gymnasium
                           which is sort of c£fthe plan? - A. That is true sir, yes.

                    G       Q. So they all tended to be carried across the field? -
                               A. Very much in that direction.
                                       THE CORONER:   Any questions, Mr. Fraser?

                                       MR. FRASER:    No thank you sir.

                                       THE CORONER:    Thank you.
                H
                                                         -   11   -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      THE CORONER


                                  Now that is all the evidence which we are taking into


       •
                            the case of Henry. I know his mum and dad, at least I assume
                            they are still in Australia, is that right? Will you please
.                           convey to them when you are in touch with them how very very
                            sorry we are that they lost Henry at this tragic event and
                            also of course how sorry I am about the other boy as well.
                            I wish I could do more than just say that to you and I am.
                            sure my colleagues here, the jury, will join me in saying
                        B   that to you as well.

                                            (The Inquest into the death of
                                                 HENRY CHARLES ROGERS
                                         was adjourned to a date to be fixed)

                                  Ladies and gentlemen, that is all for today and it is
                        C   Friday so you don't have to come back tomorrow. I hope that
                            you have a good weekend. Have a rest. Forget all about
                            Hillsborough. Just lead normal ordinary lives, just*'what you
                            would normally do because it will be nice and good for you
                            to have a break but I do want you back on Monday morning,
                            same time, we start at 9.30
                                  You can see the pattern and although there is a pattern
                    D       I think you will see that there is a difference in fact.
                            Every one is different because we are dealing with individual
                            people and each one has got something which is unique. Well
                            they are all unique but even in the presentations there is
                            some uniqueness about it, so although there is obviously
                            some standard to it you have still got to listen and one
                            learns something new as one goes along.
                        E         Now I must remind you, because it is a weekend and
                            there will be all these temptations, please do not discuss
                            the evidence with people. It is hard as I said to you
                            in the beginning but just be firm both with yourself and
                            with others.
                                  Ladies and gentlemen, I am much obliged to you for
                            your attention, for your help and the way you have
                        F   conducted yourselves in these first few days. I expect
                            to see more of you probably next week and look forward
                            to seeing you then on Monday as well, those of you who are
                            coming. Thank you. Shorthand Writers, thank you too.



                        G
I




                    H                                    -   12   -




    J. L. Harpham Ltd
