                                                                                        M I R . 15


                                                                                                                  i n
 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised        O         o            Number
                                                                                                              __________
mny 'V fe -S = h V 5 c & i£ sT~            G z -
^U tclu d e saiurce and any document number i f relevant)

 \ 9>"'
 Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                      Indexer
 Document registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                               Statement Reader
 Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                      Indexer
 Indexed as indicated_______________________________ Q C ^

 No(s) of actions raised

 Examined - further action to be taken                                                                         0 /M         SIO
                                                                                                       jpr



 Further action No(s)                                                                                                 Indexer


 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FQR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                 ALAN JOHNSTON




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

                3rd May,   1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                              t jd 'o: tc   t r a n s c r ip t

                                                                                               tg e H o ,

                        PRC?. 1,1..AIT USHER Called

                              D y THE CORONER                                                    O
                                                                                                 J

                    B   DETECTIVE SIDRGSALTT GRAIIA1I JCHIT KcCOMBIS C a l l e d

                              ..jy                                               •   .......

                        POLICE INSPECTOR JECII/JSL LAYTON Called
                                      PO'^PT’Ti'T?                                               6




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
3 rd May,    1990


            INOtOSST INTO THE DEATH OF ALAN JOHNSTON
     IN?, FRASER:     Sir, you will now hear evidence relatin
to Alan Jolmston.     Sir, one of Alan’s brothers and his
fiancee are in Court this afternoon. Sir, I e.ct for the
famil3r on a, personal basis but I am here, of course,
this afternoon as a member of the Steering Committee in
the usual way,

     THE CORONER:       "Which is Alan's brother?   Yes,

      Mr, Johnston, very briefly I will outline for you
what wo are going to do so that you can follow the
procedure more easily. First of all, I am going to read
to you what- we did on the 13th April in this courtroom
and then, when I have done that, I will tell you what the
blood alcohol levels were and, when that has been done,
I will ask Prof, Usher to tell us something about the
pathology. Mien he has completed his evidence he \tfill
leave us but we will turn to the West Midlands Folice
Officers and they will tell us, in summary form, the
relevant evidence in respect of that part of the material
which we are dealing with, Ne do it in two parts,
Insj^ector Layton does the visual side of the evidence
and he describes it and when he has finished the
descriptions he comes over here and, on these big plans,
he shows us what he has been talking about, otherwise
it is a little bit difficult to follow. When that has
been completed we conclude the evidence in respect of
Alan.
     This then is a resumed Inquest which was opened on
the 18th. April, 1 9 8 9 , Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting
Coroner’s Officer, said:

            "The body which is the subject of this
            Inquest has been identified to DC I9 S 6
            Bower of the South Yorkshire Police as
            that of Alan Johnston by John Murphy,
            his friend. He was 29 years of age
            having been born on the 6th March, 10d0
            at Liverpool, lie was a single man and
            he lived at
            Liverpool, He was a trainee accountant
            by occupation, He died at Hillsborough
            Football Ground following an incident
            there on Saturday, 15 th April, 19'39«
            PC Bower caused the body to be removed
            to the Medico Legal Centre and there lie
            identified it to Detective Constable
            Simon TJeigold who subsequently identified
            the same body to Prof, Usher, It is the
            famil3^ wish that the body should be buried,"



                             - 1 -
                             And then I adjourned the Inquest at that point.
                        t forgot to urite it on the form but I did adjourn it.
                        I wrote to Charles     ■ is that you?

                             BROTHER;   My other brother.
                             THE CORONER:       And he signed a form which I sent
                        him on the k t h . June and I asked him to check that we
                    B   bad got all the details right - name and spelling and
                        so on. lie had except we added the word ’Liverpool’
                        to the address which we had left out. So it is
                                                   Liverpool. Can I just double-
                        check ’A-l-a-n’ and ’Johnston’ with a ’t ’ and no
                        other Christian names?

                             BROTHER:      No.

                             THE CORONER:        And he was born at Liverpool, I
                        think?

                             BROTHER:      Yes .

                             THE CORONER:   And the rest of the information is
                        correct as well, is it not?
                    D
                             BROTHER:      Yes.

                               THE CORONER:     The blood alcohols were estimated
                        b}?- Dr. Forrest and he gave us the evidence now just
                        over a fortnight ago and, in the case of Alan, the
                        level was 3 ^ rag/ 1 00 ml.
                    E
                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, before you deal with Prof.
                        Usher, just as a matter of record the next of kin of
                        Alan, on the summary the West Midlands Police have
                        prepared it is actually shown as John Joseph Thompson.
                        As a matter of record he is not, in fact, his next of
                        kin, sir. That is his stepfather and the three
                        brothers, Charles, George and Kenneth Johnston are, in
                        fact, next of kin.

                             THE CORONER;         So George, Charles and Kenneth

                             MR. FRASER:    .••• are the three brothers and they
                        are, of course, stricter speaking, the next of kin.
                        The other matter which has caused the family a little
                        concern is the occupation which is down as ’trainee
                    G   accountant’. In fact, his occupation was Senior
                        Accounts Assistant.

                             THE CORONER:   The family would be happier with
                        that as a description?

                             MR. FRASER:         Yes, please, sir.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    PROF. A. USHER



                                  THE CORO ITER: Yes, I think we probably made a
                             mistake in using the term 'next of kin’# I think we
                             were trying to think of some connection but I can
                             very happy to change this sheet so that we have got
                             it right. So we do not want *tra5.no e accountant',
                             we want 'Senior Accounts Assistant’. Yes, That is
                             satisfactory,

                    B             I-IR. FRASER:   Thankyou, sir,
                                              PROF. ALAN USHER Called;

                                                  By THE CORONER;

                        Q, Now, Prof. Usher, Alan Usher, is that right, a Horne
                           Office Pathologist and Prof. of Forensic Medicine
                    C      at Sheffield? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q, Prof, Usher, if you would just confirm that you are
                           going to ta3.1c to me about Alan Johnston? - A, Yes,
                           whose number was 3 0 .
                        Q, And I think you have actually spelt it with an 'e'
                           at the end but, in fact, his name is spelt without an
                    D      ’e'? - A, Yes, I will alter that, sir,

                                  THE CORONER:     That is right, is it not?

                                  THE FAMILY:     Yes,

                        Q.        THE CORONER:      Yes? - A, The body I examined was
                    E        that of a brown-haired, slimly-built young white male,
                             171 eras in height and weighing 60 kgs. Both externally
                             and interaT.a3.ly the appearances were typical of
                             traunatic asphyxia. That means that this young man
                             died because his chest was fixed by the crushing in
                             such a position he could not move his chest in or
                             out and, therefore, could not breathe, ¥hen that
                             happened, once the chest became absolutely fixed, he
                    F        would have 3.ost consciousness within a few seconds,
                             between 10 and 2 0 seconds and, subsequent^, ho would
                             not have been aware what was happening, though he,
                             in fact, would not have died for between four and six
                             minutes. He was healthy with an average expectation
                             of life for his age and I found no natural disease
                             which could, have caused or contributed to his death.
                             He died from traumatic asphyxia,
                    G
                        Q, And I think you said no natural disease at all which
                           played any pax’t? - A, No, his brain was swollen, sir,
                           but tha/fc is part of ,, ,,
                        Q, Yes, exactly,

                                  Mr, Fraser, any questions?
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    G. J. Me COMETS



                                MR, FRASER:      No, sir, thank you,

                                I-IR, LIMB:   No, thank you, sir,

                                MR. GATCHPOLS:      No, thank you, sir,

                              DETECTIVE SERGEANT GRAHAM JOHN McCOMBIS Called;

                    B                          Bv THE CORONER;

                        Q, Yes? - A, Sir, Graham John McCombie, Detective
                           Sergeant from the ¥est Midlands Police,

                           Sir, on Saturday, 15th April, 1989> Mr, Joseph Anthony
                           Hughes travelled from Liverpool to Sheffield in a hired
                           mini bus with a p;?.rty of friends, including Alan
                    C      Johnston, They visited a public house on the outskirts
                           of Sheffield and eventually arrived in Sheffield at
                           about 2,15 p»m. They walked to the ground and joined
                           the crowd in Leppings Lane at about 2,30 p 0m.
                          The part}^ split up on arrival at the stadium as they
                          had tickets for different parts of the ground, Mr,
                          Graham Ledson, Mr, Ian. Crawford and Alan Johnston had
                    D     tickets for the terracing and initially stood together
                          outside the ground in Leppings Lane, Due to the crowd
                          pressure they became separated and neither saw Alan
                          again,

                          Following the severe crushing in the TJest Stand
                          Police Constable Nigel Reeves found a man he knows now
                    E     to be Alan lying on the pitch in the penatly area, at
                          the Leppings Lane end. The officer was assisted by
                          PC Steven Ro^rle, Detective Constable ICevin Bttrrows
                          and a number of spectators. They carried Alan on a
                          hoarding to the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary
                          had been set up, PC Reeves temporarily?- left the
                          gymnasium and, when he returned, he found that
                          Police Constable David Bower was with Alan and
                    F     responsible for him. Sir, following a query from
                          the family this afternoon I have actually spoken to
                          PC Royle this afternoon and he informs me that he
                          recollects a St, John's Ambulanceman or'woman, or
                          certainly somebody in a ttniform, working on Alan
                          when he was taken to the temporal mortuary,

                        Q, That was not in his original statement? - A, That is
                    G      correct, sir.

                          Sir, at k minutes pa.st h Dr, Allan Redgrave examined
                          Alan in the temporary mortuary and certified life
                          extinct.

                          At 9,51 p.m. Mr, John Murphy identified the body of
                          Alan to Police Constable Bower at the temporary mortuary.
                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   _ /4 _
                                       G. J. KcCOKBTE



The officer later escorted Alan's body to the Medico
Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
Detective Inspector Timms who later confirmed the
identification to DC Ueigold.

At abotit h , h O a.m. on Sunday, 16 th April, IvIr. George
Hugh Johnston, the brother, confirmed the identification
of Alan to Detective Constable Christopher O'Brien
here at the Medico Legal Centre. Sir, one other thing
there — again having spoken to the family X am informed
that when George Johnston attended at the Medico Legal
Centre he was approached by a man who stated that he
was a Police officer. The officer stated that he had
just been home and got changed into a tracksviit and
he had come back to the Medico Legal Centre specifically
to hold on until the family of Alan arrived. He wanted
to tell them that he had actually tried to resuscitate
Alan for a length of time which appeared to be an hour
and, of course, this was not successful. Unfortunately,
we are unable to identify this officer, sir, at this
stage.

Sir, on Sunday, 16 th April, following identification
by DC Ueigold, Prof. Usher carried out an avitopsy and
submitted a report giving cause of death.

Sir, evidence is included regarding the analysis of
the blood sample from Alan where the presence of
ethanol was detected. The witnesses providing the
continuity of the blood sample are Dennis Chambers,
Detective Sergeant John Turner and Detective Sergeant
James Fletcher. Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest carried
out the analysis.

Sir, found in the personal effects of Alan was a
ticket counterfoil for the match but, in the
circvunstances, it cannot be established exactly how
or when he entered the stadium.

     That is the end of that evidence, sir.

TJliat yo^^ have told us about the Officer who waited
for the Johnston's, of course, we cannot pursue it
any further so there is nothing more we can do with
that. That is right, is it not? - A. There is a
slight possibilit3^ we might be able to identify him,
sir.

But if we d.o we will get a statement from him obviously*
At the moment there is nothing more that we can add? —
A. That is correct, sir.

Similarl}*-, the information which we have from, I
think, PC Royle, there is nothing more that we know
of with regard to this Ambulanceman or woman who might
have assisted, or who ho recollects? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                                  M. LAYTON


                               MR* FRASER:   No questions, sir, thank you,
                          but thank you for the enquiries you have made today,
                          Officer. They are appreciated.

                                   POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                               By THE CORONER:

                   B Q. Yes? - A. Sir, Michael La3^ton, Detective Inspector,
                          West Midlands Police. Sir, an examination ha.s been
                          made of video and photographic evidence but, at this
                          stage,, we are not in a position to present any posiii ve
                          visual identification on the terraces.

                          Sir, PC Reeves has signed a plan of the pitch area
                          indicating thepoint at which he first saw Alan and
                   C      that plan, sir, is referenced NR/1.

                          Mr. Kenneth Johnston, sir, who, as 37-ou have heard, is
                          in Court at the moment, has viewed visual evidence
                          and on photographs referenced DBI6 /2 9 , PR1/15-A. and PR1/19A
                          he has indicated a person that he believes may be his
                          brother, Alan. Sir, none of the photographs contain a
                   D      great d.eal of detail. In respect of the first
                          photograph, DB16/29, that actually shows a person in
                          Enclosure No. 2 and it is timed at 1445* The other
                          two photographs, sir, refer to an identification in
                          Enclosure No. 3 and, if you could bear with me a
                          moment, sir, perhaps I could give 3'-ou times for those.
                          Sir, both those photographs are timed, at 1504.

                   E Q. So DB16, 1445, Enclosure 2? - A. That is right, sir.
                       Q. And the others, PR1/1J5A and 1$)A, Enclosure 3, at a
                          later tine? - A. Yes, sir. I think it is fair to
                          say actually, and you will see from the plan, that
                          the position of the first possible identification
                          is quite close to the gates which I have shown on
                          the plans which divide 2 - 3 and there is, of course,
                   F      a time difference*

                       0. Hell, will you show me? - A* Yes, sir.

                       Q. But you were saying the identification, although I
                          am sure Mr. Johnston has done his very best, has to
                          be treated with an element of caution because of the
                          difficulty? - A. Yes, and Mr. Johnston does understand
                   G      that as well, sir. I think it is also fair to point
                          out that Alan’s fiancee equally has tried hard for us
                          but, again, we have not been able to get any further.
                          Can I refer you then to a plan, MWJL 54, which refers
                          to those photogrnphic identifications?

                       Q. That is C234. - A. And also, sir, NR/1, which is PC
                          Hooves’ plan.
               H


J. L Harpham Ltd
                                                                      M. LAYTON



                        P. That will be C235* "          I think those aro the only
                           two, sir,

                          sir. m respect of1 MWJL      that is the plan of the
                          terraces, the first photographic possible identification
                          is actually in a position about here. This is
                          Enclosure number 2 and the position referred to is
                          about the    and, in fact- this here is the   itg which
                    B     separates the two enclosures, the snail gate, Cn
                          the plan, sir, specifically referred to PRl/lOy
                          although, as you have heard, there are two photographs,
                          the3^ are both in the same place, and the location shown
                          there is about there in Enclosure number 3. Sir, in-
                          respect of PC Reeves’ plan, NR/1, the .location that
                          he has indicated Alan, on the pitch is hero, which is
                          at the Leppings Lane end of the ground,

                               THE CORONER:          Any questions, Mr, Fraser?

                               MR, FRASER:          No, sir, thank you,

                               MR, LIMB:      No, thank you, sir,

                               MR. CATCHPOLE:          No, thank you, sir.
                    D
                               THE CORONER;      Mr, Johnston, you must not feel
                          in any sense bad that 3^0 u have not been able to do
                          the identifications, I have seen some of the photographs,
                          I cannot say I have seen them all, but it is obviously
                          so difficult and one can only do the best one can and
                          it is better to be cautious than the other \rc^y round,
                          so to speak. Go I do not want 3rou to go away and. think
                    E     that 3^011 should have done better because —     in some
                          cases, the Jury know, we have had d o s e n s   that may
                          be an exaggeration but we have certainly had a lot
                          of photographic evidence and some of it lias been
                          really e a s y and then, in Alan's case, wo have got next
                          co no cning,            just how it happens to be. But.
                          in a sense, the photographic evidence is not the
                          important thing - the important thing is that you
                          have lost your brother and is it the young lady there
                          who is the fiancee? Yes, You have lost your fiance
                          and, of course, the rest of the members of the family
                          have lost somebody very loved and. we are all very,
                          very conscious of that fa.ct, We deal with the detail
                          because that is part of the job, if 37-011 like, but
                          for a moment I like to pause and remember that we are
                          dealing with your very own loved one, 1 would like you
                          to know that I recognise that.      Thank you.

                               Ladies and gentlemen, I am going to rise, We
                          have got one more Inquest, What would you prefer -
                          would y^ou prefer to have a tea break or would you
                          prefer to reassemble as soon as we can? It is entirely
                          up to you,
                H
                               TIIE JURY:     lie   will carry on,

J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                       -7-
J. L. Harpham Ltd
