                                                                                            M IR.15

                                                                                                                 6£f
     OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised      j           D *______    Number


     Title                         f* 1____C IE-             ^rO
                                                               U^k?
                                                                 c ? ______ ~Tvvo-M/Vc
                                                                             1tvcrt  5>
 •   (Include source and any document number i f relevant)      ^




^ Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                   Receiver




                                                                                                                   Indexer
     Document registered/indexed as indicated

     No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                               Statement Reader
     Statement reader's instructions




     Indexed as indicated                            V3             ~^ < P       C 3>0
                                                                                                                   Indexer


     No(s) of actions raised

     Examined - further action to be taken                                                                               SIO




     Further action No(s)                                                                                          Indexer


 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S COR ONE R FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST D I S T R I C T )



             INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

      VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                    STADIUM DISASTER

                ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



                INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                    THOMAS STEVEN FOX




                            Before

DR.   S.L.    POPPER,    LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

                 (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                                 At

                The Medico-Legal Centre,
                     Watery S t r e e t ,
                       Sheffield.

                                 On

                        25th April 1990




                TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




       From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
            Of ficial Shorthand Writers,
        55, Qu een Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER           Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.      CALLAGHAN         Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.      GREGORY           Sheffield City Council

MISS      THORPE           Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P.    ISAACS           Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                           INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                                                                                    Page No<

                        DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GAD SBY Called

                             Bv THE   C O R O N E R ...........................        2

                    B        Bv US. N O R C L I F F E ..........................       3

                        POLICE INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                             Bv THE   C O R O N E R ...........................        ^

                             Bv MS.   N O R C L I F F E .........................      ^

                        PROF. ALAN USHER Called

                             Bv THE   CORONER         ......................           2*




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        2 5th April. 1990

                               INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF THOMAS STEVEN FOX

                             THE CORONER:   This will be the last case this
                        evening.
                    B        MR. FRASER:    You are now going to hear evidence in
                        relation to Thomas Fox, sir. Thomas’ family have had
                        an opportunity of being appraised of the contents of the
                        summary and have decided that they do not want to be
                        present in your Court. There is a social worker present
                        who has had contact with the family throughout and he
                        is obviously here to report bade to them and I will
                        obviously deal with any problems that arise. I appear,
                    C   again, as an agent for their solicitors through the
                        agency of the Hillsborough Steering Committee.

                             THE CORONER:     Can somebody chase up Prof. Usher who,
                        I   think, is in this case. He may have overlooked it.

                             This is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
                    D   the 18th April, I9 S 9 . On that occasion Neil Anthony
                        Parkin, Acting Coroner’s Officer, said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this
                                Inquest has been identified to PC 2 5 1 7
                                Shelton of the South Yorkshire Police as
                                that of Thomas Steven Fox by John Michael
                                Pleavin, his friend# He was 21 years'of
                    E           age having been b o m on the 14th June,
                                1 9 6 7 at Birkenhead. He was a single man
                                and he lived at
                                Birkenhead, Merseyside. He was a
                                production worker by occupation. He died
                                at Hillsborough Football Ground following
                                an incident there on Saturday, 1 5 th April,
                                1939. PC Shelton caused the body to be
                    F           removed to the Medico Legal Centre and
                                there he identified it to Detective
                                Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                                identified the same body to Prof* Usher.
                                It is the family wish that the body should
                                be buried."

                             Then, as you have already discovered, in my
                    G   conventional way I wrote to the people and Mrs. B. Fox,
                        that is, mum, signed a form on the 26th April, 1 9 8 9
                        and she confirmed the name and the date of birth as
                        14.6.67 and the place of birth as Birkenhead and the
                        occupation and the fact that his young man was single.

                             Dr. Forrest did the alcohols and the alcohol in
                        the case of Thomas was 82 rag/100 ml.
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  . 1 -
                                                                   P. GADSBY



                                We cannot have Prof. Usher because he is not: here
                           so we will take the presenting officer and hope he
                           turns up shortly.

                              DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GADSBY Called;

                                           Bv THE CORONER;
                    B           THE WITNESS:  Peter Gadsby, Detective Constable
                           in the West Midlands Police, sir.

                        0. Yes? - A. On the morning of Saturday, 1 5 th April, 1 9 8 9»
                           Mr. Michael John Pleavin travelled from Liverpool to
                           Sheffield b}r car with a number of friends, including
                           Thomas Steven Fox and Raymond Chapman. They arrived
                           in Sheffield at about 13^5 hours and visited a public
                           house. They then travelled to Hillsborough Stadium
                           by taxi intending to watch the FA Cup Semi Final
                           football match. Again, Mr. Chapman also died that day.

                           At about Ut^O hours Mr. Fox and Mr. Chapman separated
                           from the others in the party as they had tickets for
                           the West Stand terracing, Mr. Pleavin did not see
                    D      the two men again.
                           Following the severe crushing in the West Stand terracing
                           Police Constable 2 9 9 3 William John Nugent entered the
                           tunnel beneath the West Stand. At the end of the tunnel
                           he assisted another Officer who has not been identified
                           to carry a man now known to be Thomas Fox to the
                           concourse at the rear of the West Stand. The officers
                    E      attempted to resuscitate Thomas but without success.
                           Police Constable Nugent was present when a man who
                           said he was a doctor checked Thomas and said he was
                           dead. This man has not been identified. Police
                           Constable Nugent left Mr..Fox with the other officer
                           and went to assist other persons.

                           Police Inspector Grace was in charge of a number of
                           officers who attended the stadium at about 1 5 2 5 hours
                           and went to the rear of the West Stand. Inspector
                           Grace saw a number of bodies in that area and, on
                           his instructions, the bodies were carried to an area
                           just outside the stadium near to Gate C. A number of
                           officers remained near the bodies.

                           Detective Constable 2 5 17 Anthony Shelton attended the
                           rear of the West Stand and was given responsibility
                           for Thomas Fox by the Inspector,

                           At 1627 hours Dr, John Richard Ashton examined Thomas
                           at the rear of the West Stand and certified life
                           extinct.

                H          Detective Constable Shelton later escorted the body
                           of Thomas to the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary
                           had been set up.
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   -2-
                                                                     P. GADSBY



                             At 2315 hours Mr# John Michael Pleavin identified
                             the body of Thomas to Detective Constable Shelton
                             at the temporary mortuary.
                             The officer later escorted the body of Thomas to the
                             Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification
                             to Detective Constable Weigold.

                    B        On Sunday, 16th April, 1989, following identification
                             by Detective Constable TJeigold, Prof. Alan Usher
                             carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
                             cause of death.
                             Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                             blood/sample from the deceased where the presence of
                             ethanol was detected. The witnesses proving continuity
                             of the blood sample are Dennis Chambers, Detective
                             Sergeant John Turner and Detective Sergeant James
                             Fletcher. Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest carried out
                             the analysis.

                             Found, in the personal effects of Thomas Fox was a full
                             ticket for the match but, in the circumstances, it
                             cannot be established exactly how or when he entered
                    D        the stadium.
                        Q. I do not think I have any questions, thank you. -
                           A. Thank you.

                                  MR. FRASER:      The family have no questions, sir,
                             thank you.
                    E
                                                Bv MS. HORCLIFFE

                        Q. Belinda Norcliffe, Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
                           Police.  Just one small point, Officer, Paragraph 2,
                           at 1440 hours this gentleman and Mr, Chapman separated
                           from the others. Is there evidence that the}*- separated
                           basically at the edge of the stadium as they approached?
                           A, Outside the gates. Page 1, sir. If I could read
                           the passage perhaps ,,,,?

                        Q.          THE CORONER:    Well, you do not need to read it
                             all.    It says:

                                       "At 2.40 p.m. we parted company with
                                       Steven and Raymond at the gates to the
                                       ground."

                             A. Yos.

                                  THE CORONER:   I do not know but I suspect that
                             that is the outer perimeter gates in that area. Are
                             you content?
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      -3-
                                                                      M. LAYTON
                                                                      PROF. A. USHER


                                 MS. NORCLIFFE:      Thank you.
                                  THE CORONER:     Any questions?     (No questions from
                             the Jury)
                                       POLICE INSP. inCITAEL LAYTON Called:

                                                  Bv THE CORO ITER:
                    B             THE TITTNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                             Inspector, T7est Midlands Police.

                        n    Yes? - A. Sir, an examination has been made of visual
                             evidence and Thomas has been identified alive in
                             Enclosure No. 3. Mrs. Brenda Fox, that is, Thomas1
                             mother, has viewed visual evidence and she has
                             identified her son on a photograph and specifically,
                             sir, if I can refer you to a photograph which has been
                             given the reference no. TH/1. This shows Thomas
                             apparently in some distress actually in Enclosure No.
                             3V  Sir, if I can refer you to a plan which has been
                             given the reference no. Ml.rJL 90, which is a plan of
                             the terraces, that, in fact, refers to that photograph
                             that I have just mentioned.
                    D
                        Q« Yes, C108. This is one of those cases where the
                           visual evidence is sparse, I think? - A. It is quite
                           limited, yes, sir. In fact, I think i*ithout the
                           family1s help we may not have had anything.

                        Q. Yes.  Can you show us? — A. Yes,sir. As I have said,
                           this refers to MWJL 90 and specifically in Enclosure
                    E      3 and we are looking at that location there.

                                  MR. FRASER:     No questions.

                                                 Bv MS. NORCLIFFE:

                        Q. Belinda Norcliffe for the Chief Constable, South
                           Yorkshire Police. I wonder if there is actually a
                           time for that photograph, please? - A. N0 , there is
                           no time. It is actually ....
                        Q.        THE CORONER:   It is a newspaper photograph? -
                             A. It is a newspaper photograph, yes, sir. The
                             other photographs referred to are also newspaper
                             photographs, sir.

                                             PROF. ALAN USHER Called:

                                                  Bv THE CORONER:

                        q. You have been sworn, Prof. Usher, I remind you.       Now,
                             we a r e 'dealing with the case of Thomas Steven Fox? —
                             A. Yes, sir, body no. 66?
                    H
                        q. That is right, yes, and can you tell me then .... -
                             A. Yes, the body I examined was that of a dark haired,

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 PROF.        TJ3I-IER



                          very heavily built young, white male, 182 eras in
                          height weighing 8 9 kgs. He had the fairly typical
                          appearances, both externally and internally, of
                          traumatic asphyxia. There was some swelling of the
                          ba an. a little inhaled vomitus and there were minor
                          cruises .nd rcraaes about the head and about the
                          abdomen.  One of the coronary arteries in the heart
                          was unusually small but I would not say that that
                    B     made him have a less expectation of life tha.r. normal
                          for his age. I think he had a normal expectation of
                          life for his ,ge. I did take a sample of blood for
                          alcohol. I do not personally know what the result
                          of that analysis was.

                          Fell, we have dealt with that.     It was 82 mgs.




                    D




                    E

                                I-IR. FRASER:   No questions, thank you,

                                THE CORONER:     Have you understood, members of
                           the Jury? Yes.

                        Q. Prof. Usher, I am most grateful to you. If you would
                           like to be excused please feel free to leave us? -
                           A. I am obliged, sir.

                                THE CORONER:   That is all the evidence we are
                          talcing in the case of Thomas. Would you please convey
                          to the family, we have had letters and we knew exactly
                          what was going on and it is perfectly proper for them
                          not to be here. Me do not want them to feel in any
                          way that they have not done the right thing. They
                          have done the right thing if that is what they wanted
                          to do. T/hichever way the family wishes, it is right.
                          It does not make any difference. But I would like you
                          to convey to them, because even if they are not here I
                          would like them to know, that we are very, very
                H         conscious that they have suffered a terrible loss in
                          the loss of this lad and it does not matter how many


J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                   -5-
other people die in the world, as far as they are
concerned, he is the only one that matters and it is
their lad. I try and understand that.

     Ladies and gentlemen, that is all we have to do
today. Enough I think, do you not?     So I hope you have
a good what is left of the afternoon and evening and
we need to see 3^ou again tomorrow at half—x>ast—nine.
It is cjTjdte hard doing this day after day but, by
tomorrow evening, we are past the halfway mark, so
that is good, is it not?

     Now, you will remember what we said about next
Monday.  Can I remind you just to make sure that we are
all clear about this. Next Monday we are starting at
quarter-past-nine. T/e are going to do the first two
cases and then we are going to adjourn until two and
we will allow you, imfortunately, to go to another sad
occasion, a personally sad one. If, for some reason,
the Inquest seems to overshoot I will adjourn xf
necessary so 3^011 can get away. Do not worry. Me will
not overrun so long that you cannot get to where y°u
have to go but perhaps you could tell the Jury Officer
precisely where you need to go and how much time — -
what your absolute minimum time is to get there. You
do not have to cut it tothe last second but so that
we do not overrun. I do not want you to be late.

     MEMBER OF THE   JURY:   Thank you.

     TITE CORONER:  Then we are going to adjourn until
two and then we are going to run on in the afternoon
later than this, I am afraid, so we can catch up with
the cases that we have had to postpone.

     Mr. Fraser, it will be the last three of the morning
that need to be adjourned.

     MR. FRASER:  Sir, so far as I presently know I have
agency instructions in relation to all three but I will
obviously fit in with any arrangements that you decide.

     THE CORONER:   It is just that I am concerned that
if the families know that there will be a delay as far
as their cases are concerned, if it was possible for you
or somebody in your office just to advise them (a) of
the reason, which is important - they should know that
this is being done ---- that there is a good reason for
it and (b) that it will cause us the minimum of delay
but there is bound to be sx>me because you cannot lose
two-and-a-half hours without having some delays
somewhere.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, would it be your intention to
do the three cases listed at the times listed or would
you take the two that are listed at 2 and 2 . 3 0 on time
and, as the final one in the afternoon appears to be a
case in which there will be no family present anyway ....
      TIIE CORONER; Well, let us c a n c e l in fact,       we




                                          -
have now liearc! tliat   there will be peoplehei’o i  n that
CclSO so • • • •

     MR. FRASER:   Will you take those three cases on
tine and put the morning cases back to beyond those, sir,
so that I can tell the families?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, that is what I would prefer to
do because otherwise we are messing six people about .0..

     MR. FRASER:  Disrupt only three families instead of
six. I understand that, sir.

     THE CORONER: So if i/ou could tell   the morning
families that they will come at the end.   \le have got to
make sure wo tell the pathologists but that is our
problem.
     MR. FRASER:     It certainly is, sir0    I have got
enough problems.
     TIIE CORONER:  Yes, we have got to do the odd thing
as well. I hope that will not inconvenience you or you.
Thank you very much indeed. Thank you, ladies and
gentlemen.
       (The proceedings were adjourned at h . 0 5 p.m.
                until the following day)
