                                                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                 MIR.15



         OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised                              Number


         Title                                                                           VW S^             Vn \
           dude source and any document number i f relevant)                   (r^ X ~ c~7>'p_

A        Receiver's instructions — uraent action — Yes/No
t . //                                                                                                                 Receiver
/                                                               ________________

                                                                                                                       Indexer
         Document registered/indexed as indicated

         No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                   Statement Reader
         Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                       Indexer
         Indexed as indicated

         No(s) of actions raised

         Examined - further action to be taken                                                                               SIO




         Further action No(s)                                                                                          Indexer


         When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

              GORDON RODNEY HORN




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                       On

                25th April 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                    A
                                                                   Papce N o .

                        PROF. STEPHEN JONES Called

                                                                       3

                        OFFTCER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called
                                                                       k


                             P/v M S . NORCLIFFE ......                6

                        POLICE INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                             Bv THE CORONER   ......                   6




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
2 5th April. 1990


         INQUEST INTO TUB DEATH OF GORDON RODNEY HORN

     MR. FRASER:    Would you wish to deal with the J u r y ’s
question?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, if I may.  Do you have anything
else other than that question which you raised?

     THE FOREMAN OF THE JURY:   Yes, would it be possible
for Inspector Layton to show us on the map the flow of
the crowd before the initial ....

     THE CORONER:    Let me deal with point no. 1, which
is the timing of the barrier.    That is actually an
exceedingly difficult problem.    I think it is probably
fair to say it is a contentious one because a lot turns
on it and I do not think it is a matter which I would
want to deal with at these hearings.    We have mentioned
that barrier because otherwise nobody knows what the
dots are and, secondly, there is no doubt whatever that
it broke.  The issue, of course, is precisely when it
broke and what, if any, effect that: had.   Now, we are
not going to deal with that today be cause that is an
interpretation, if you like, on the evidence.     Also
I feel it is right that before we give a time we actually
hear proper evidence, as far as one has it, as to
whatever evidence -Hi ere is in relation to that.   So you
are right, you have got a good point, but not at these
hearings.  It depends which scenario comes up but
assuming for a moment that we are resuming and proceeding
it may well be that we will need to deal with that point.

     The second point you have raised with regard to the
flow of the crowd, that is another point which, we
cannot actually deal with.   You are very astute, let me
say.  You are smart.   Because you have listened to the
evidence and you have picked quite a lot up, but I do
not think it is practical for us to deal with that now.
That is a very important point but I think it is when
we come together again to deal with the details so
listen, note whatever in your head what you wish, but
we are not going to explain it because to explain that
is actually dealing with the ‘how*.   Is that clear?
I compliment you, if I may put it like that, on noting
it.  It was very good.

          comment on any of that? You are content wiiii
     K ir y
what I heave said and I take it you are as well? Well,
you may not be content but you accept it.

     MR. FRASER:     No, I will not make any comment,    sir.

        The next evidence that you will hear relates to a
young man, Gordon Horn.      His mum, his sister a n d her
husband are present in Court this morning and I represent
G o r do n’s family on the usual agency basis through the

                            - 1 -
                        Hillsborough Steering Committee, sir.

                             THE CORO ITER:    Yes, which is mum?

                             MR. FRASER:      This is Gordon’s muni, his sister and
                        her husband.
                               THE CORONER:   Let me explain to you the format of
                        the hearings at this stage.     I am going to read what
                    B   happened on the opening when I opened the Inquest about
                        a year ago approximately now, in fact it was the 18th
                        April, and then, if there are any errors in that, we
                        correct them.    Having done that I tell you what the
                        evidence is with regard to the alcohol levels which we
                        knoxir. Then the pathologist who, in this particular
                        instance, is Prof. Jones, will come and give us his
                    C   evidence and, if I may say now, Prof. Jones has
                        indicated if you wish to talk to him privately afterwards
                        he would be quite prepared to give you some time.
                        Having done that, we then listen to the presenting
                        Officers who present the rest of the evidence as far
                        as we are talcing it and then we finish at this stage,
                        li/hat happens after that depends on various other factors
                        which have not yet been decided but we will, of course,
                    D   your solicitors will be told as soon as we are in a
                        position to know.    Everybody, including me, wants to
                        know what we are going to be doing.     Is that clear?
                        It is just so you know what happens.     You will hear
                         the Officers referring to plan numbers and picture
                         references and goodness knows what.    Try not to allow
                         that to distract you.    You will also see that he will
                         come along and he will show you these big plans and
                    E   various things so you can see what he is talking about.

                             This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened
                        on the 18th April, 1 9 8 9 . On that occasion Neil Anthony
                        Parkin, Acting Coroner’s Officer said:

                                 "The body which is the subject of this
                    F            Inquest has been identified to PC 339 O ’Shea
                                 of the South Yorkshire Police as that of
                                 Gordon Rodney Horn by Douglas Ilardalcer, his
                                 friend.   He was 20 years of age having been
                                 bora on the 26th March, 196 9 at Bootle in
                                 Liverpool.   He was a single man and he lived
                                 at                                  Liverpool.
                                 He was unemployed.    He died at Hillsborough
                    G            Football Ground following an incident there
                                 on Saturday, 1 5 th April, 1 9 8 9 * PC 339
                                 O ’Shea caused the body to be removed to the
                                 Medico Legal Centre and there he identified
                                 it to Detective Constable Simon Weigold who
                                 subsequently identified the same body to
                                 Prof. Jones.   It is the family wish that the
                                 body should be cremated."
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                   -   2-
                                           PROF. S. JONES



     Then I did what I did with all cases - I wrote and
asked you to confirm the details andj in fact, I think
mum signed it, did you not?

     MRS. HORN:     Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. H o r n ’s mum signed it.   Is the
surname different for Mrs. Horn?

     MR. FRASER:     Yes, she is now Mrs. Doyle.

      TIIS CORONER:   That is right.    That is what it says
down here.    You signed on the 2 7 th April, 1989._ You
confirmed all the details except the place of birth
we had shown just as Liverpool and you agreed with
that.
     Now, the alcohol which was estimated by Dr. Forrest
and that was given to me as evidence on the first day
of these hearings, and in the case of Gordon the level
was 55 mg/100 ml.

     Professor Jones?

                  PROF. STEFHEN JONES Called:

                       By THE CORONER:

Q. Professor Stephen Jones, that is right, is it not? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Can you just confirm the post-mortem that we are
   talking about and then give me the facts? - A. Yes.
   The body was identified to me as being Gordon Horn
   and designated the no. 59 by Detective Constable
   Weigold at the Medico Legal Centre.    I found that
   the body was that of a well-built young adult male.
   There was very marked c3/-anosis of the skin.    That
   means a blue discolouration of the skin, of the face,
   ears, neck, upper part of the chest and the fingertip
   There were multiple small haemorrhages present in
   the skin, the forehead and around the eyes.      These
   petechial haemorrhages, which is what we call them,
   are symptomatic of asphyxial changes.      There were
   several minor injuries present on the external
   examination of the body and I would like to make
   just a slight amendment to the description of one
   of the injuries that I need to amend in my original
   report.    This injury concerns bruises to the right
   cheek.    In my report I describe it as a single bruise
   1.2 cms. diameter.    This should be amended.    There
   \>rere two bruises to the right cheek, 1 . 2 cms. in
   diameter.    There was also an abrasion underneath
   the chin, namely on the right side, and there wore




                            -   3-
                                                                      PROF. S. JONES
                                                                      G. ID. EVANS

                             various abrasions and bruises present to the arms and
                             elbows of the Deceased. These were all of a minor
                             nature, including the bruises to the right cheek.
                             Further examination showed these little petechial
                             haemorrhages to be present on various organs of the
                             body, particularly on tlie surface of the heart and
                             lungs, and these haemorrhages, as I have said, are
                             indicative of asphyxial changes and so I give as
                    B        the cause of death of Gordon Horn as being traumatic
                             asphyxia.

                        Q. You have already said it but I will just go over it
                           again. The marks on the outer part of the body,
                           these bruises, were all of a superficial nature? -
                           A. Yes, they were indeed.

                        Q. And, irrespective of how they were caused, in
                           themselves would not have led to his death? — A. They
                           would not have caused or contributed to his death in
                           any way.

                                  MR. FRASER:       The family have no questions, sir,
                             thank you.
                    D   Q.        THE CORONER:   Mr. Jones, are you seeing the
                             other family? - A. If it is their wish, I will ....

                        Q. No, I do not mean this family but the previous one? -
                           A. I have seen the previous families.

                                     THE CORONER:    Then if you would just like to sit
                             down.
                    E
                                  Your clients know that Prof. Jones is happy to
                             see them afterwards privately?

                                     MR. FRASER:    Yes .

                                      OFFICER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called:

                                                    Bv THE CORONER:
                        q. Will you give your name, please? — A. I am Geraldine
                           Elizabeth Evans, an Officer with the West Midlands Police.

                        Q. And if you would be good enough to take us through the
                           summary, please? - A. On Saturday, 15th April, 1989*
                           Mrs. Marie Elizabeth Doyle states that her son,
                           Gordon Rodney Horn, left home with the intention of
                           travelling to Sheffield to watch the FA Cup Semi
                           Final match to be played at the Hillsborough Stadium.

                             At 0815 hours the same date, Gordon called at the
                             home address of Andrew Michael Dodd and together they
                             walked to the Beaconsfield Social Club at Bootle
                H            where they had arranged to meet a number of people
                             to travo3_ to the match in a minibus. The party left
                             Bootle at approximately 1100 hours. They stopped en
                             route at the Silver Fox public house for about an hour.
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                        -   4-
                                       G. E. EVANS



At about 1420 hours Gordon and the remainder of the
party were dropped off at the Hillsborough Stadium
whilst the driver of the minibus went to park the
vehicle. Andrew Dodd and Gordon joined the mass
of people outside the turnstiles at the Leppings
Lane end of the stadium. At 1^50 hours Andrew
and Gordon were still outside the turnstiles. A
short time later Gate C wa.s opened and they entered
the stadium via this gate. They walked down the
tunnel under the T/est Stand and were forced, by
the pressure of the crowd, to a central position
behind the goals in Enclosure h . The game had not
started although the teams were on the pitch.
Within a short time Mr. Dodd became separated from
Gordon and did not see him again.

Following the severe crushing on the terraces Mr.
Dodd was dragged out of Gate h and lay on the pitch
to recover.

Following the severe crushing on the West Stand
terraces Police Constables Agar and Southwell went
onto the pitch at the Leppings Lane end of the
stadium and, in the goal area, Constable Agar saw
the body of a man on a hoarding.   He now knows the
man to be Gordon Horn. The officers assisted fans
to carry Gordon across the pitch to an area outside
the gymnasium at the rear of the North Stand and he
was placed on the ground. The officers then left
to assist other casualties.

Shortly after 1550 hours PC O ’Shea was at the corner
of the North Stand adjacent to the police room when
he recalls seeing a group of youths carrying an
apparently unconscious man who he now knows to be
Gordon Horn. PC O ’Shea, together with PC Young,
assisted to carry Gordon into the gymnasium where
a temporary mortuary had been set up. PC O ’Shea
remained with the body of Gordon Horn.

At 1602 hours the same day Dr. Andrew Byrne examined
Gordon Rodney Horn in the temporary mortuary at the
gymnasium and certified life extinct.

At 0010 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1 9 8 9 Mr. Douglas
Ilardaker identified the body of his friend, Gordon
Rodney Horn, to Police Constable O ’Shea in the
temporary mortuary in the gymnasium.

Later that morning PC O ’Shea escorted the body to
the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the
identification to Dotoctive Constable Weigold.

On Sunday, 16th April, 19S9» following identification
by DC Weigbld, Prof. Stephen Jones carried out an
autopsy and submitted a report giving the cause of
death.
                                                                   ,G. E. EVANS
                                                                   M. LAYTON


                          Evidence is. included regarding the analysis of the
                          blood sample from the Deceased where the presence
                          of ethanol was detected.   The witnesses proving
                          continuity of the blood sample are Philip Rich,
                          Detective Sergeants Turner and Fletcher and Dr.
                          Alexander Robert Forrest carried out the a n a ^ s i s .

                          Found in the personal effects of Gordon was a full
                    B     match ticket which confirms his entry to the stadium
                          via Gate C.

                          That concludes the summary, sir.

                        Q. Just bear with me one moment.     Mr. Fraser?

                                MR. FRASER:   Gordon*s family have no questions
                           of the Officer, thank you.

                                        By MS. NORCLIFFE

                        Q. Belinda Norcliffe for the Chief Constable of the
                           South Yorkshire Police.

                    D           MS. NORCLIFFE:   I am not sure, sir, whether the
                           Officer will be able to help with this particular
                           point:

                        Q. I simply query that there appears to bo a positive
                           identification of this young man in Pen 4 at 1 k k 5
                           hours ....

                    E            THE CORONER: Yes, leave that for a moment.
                           You are quite right but I think, hopefully, we will
                           be cibltt to sort that out.

                                THE WITNESS:   It is a typographical error which
                           I think Mr. Layton will probably enlighten you on.

                                     POLICE INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                               Bv TIIE CORONER:

                        Q. Yes? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector*
                           West Midlands Police.
                           An examination of video film and photographic evidence
                           has been made, sir, in respect of Gordon and he has
                           been identified both outside the ground and
                           subsequently shown alive in Enclosure No. h .

                           Andrew Michael Dodd has viewed visual evidence and
                           identifies himself and Gordon outside the ground
                           shown on a BBC video tape which is referenced
                           MAP 9 and the reference no., sir, is 00:1226:13*
                           As I have previously mentioned, that is not a time
                H          as such but it is believed that this film was taken
                           at some time between 1^37 and 1^50*  Mr. Dodd has
                           also signed a plan of Enclosure No. h indicating
J. L. Harpham Ltd          the location at which he believes he last saw Gordon

                                                   -6-
                                                                M. LAYTON




  •
                          and that is referenced AMD/1.
                    A     Denise Hough, xrtio is in Court, has viewed visual
                          evidence and she has identified her brother, Gordon,
                          alive in Enclosure No. 4 on a photograph which xs
                          r e f e r e n c e d PR1/24A. In fact, sir, as has been
                          pointed out, there is a typing error there and that
                          photograph is actually timed at 1504.
                    B
                          Detective Constable Day has viewed photographs and
                          states that Gordon bears a strong resemblance to
                          a male that he gave mouth to mouth resuscitation
                          to at the base of the perimeter fence in Enclosure
                          No. 4. Following the crushing on the West Stand
                          terraces DC Day entered Enclosure 4 via the tunnel
                          under the West Stand.  He saw several bodies by the
                    C     perimeter fence and, together with other officers
                          as yet unidentified, they began resuscitation and
                          then, in fact, moved the man that he believes to be
                          Gordon onto the pitch through the broken fencing
                          where he was placed by the side of the goalposts.
                          The officer at this stage left to assist others.
                          He has signed plans of Enclosure No. 4 indicating
                          where he first saw Gordon and also a plan of the
                    D     pitch indicating the point at which he placed him.
                          Those plans, sir, are referenced RCD/3 and RCD/4.

                          Sir, the evidence of DC Day is inconclusive but it
                          has been included for information purposes.

                        Q. In other words, his identification is not as strong
                    E      as we would like? — A. That is right, sir, yes.

                          PC Agar has viewed photographic evidence and on a
                          photograph referenced CS1/30 he has identified himself
                          and PC Southwell carrying Gordon Horn on a hoarding
                          across the pitch to\ra.rds the Spion Kop end of the
                          stadium.  Sir, if I could pause for a moment, 1^
                          might be able to assist x^ith the time there.   Sir,
                    F     in respect of that photograph there is a stadium
                          clock in the background which shows a time of 1533*

                           Sir, PC Agar has signed a plan of the pitch area
                           indicating the point at which he first came across
                           Gordon and his reference for that plan is AMA/1.

                           PC Young has signed a plan of the pitch indicating
                    G      the approximate location at which he first came
                           into contact with Gordon and that plan, sir, is
                           referenced GAY/1.

                           Sir, can I, first of all, refer you to a plan which
                           I have given the reference no. MWJL 144 to?

                        Q. 092. - A. I have also completed another plan, sir,
                H          which has been given the reference no. MWJL 122.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                 -   7-
                                                                          M. LAYTON



                        Q. That will be C93. - A. That is a plan of the terraces,
                           sir, and a further plan by myself which is covered
                           by 144 so we do not need to refer to that.  Sir,
                           do you wish to refer to AMD/ 1 ?

                        Q. Yes, I think we do actually.          09*1. - A. AMD/1.

                        Q. There are quite a lot of plans but I think they all
                    B      show different positions? - A. They do, sir.

                        Q. The next one, I think, is RCD/3? - A. That is correct,
                           a pla.n submitted by PC D a .y .

                        Q, That will be C95. - A. RCD/4, sir, which is also a
                           plan submitted by PC Day.

                        Q. And that will be C 9 6 .       1/hilst we are on these plans,
                           just so that we do not         put too much value on these,
                           RCD/3, that is the one         we are particularly doubtful
                           about, is it not? - A.         That is right, sir, yes.

                                  THE CORONER:   You will see what these are in a
                             moment.  It will be much clearer in two minutes.
                             In fact, less than two minutes.
                    D
                        Q. Yes? - A. Sir, if we can deal, first of all, with
                           MWJL 144 which deals with this plan, it refers to
                           the identification of Gordon outside the ground.
                           That is shown on the BBC tape HAP 9«   The location
                           that I believe lie is shown in is in this particular
                           area here in Leppings Lane.
                    E   Q. Outside the outside perimeter gates? - A. That is
                           right, yes.      Sir, perhaps I could deal with AMD/1
                           next which is the plan by Andrew Dodd.      Sir, that
                           refers to Enclosure no. 4, which is this enclosure
                           here and the point at which he has indicated Gordon’s
                           position is here in Enclosure no. 4. That is the
                           last time at which he believes he saw him.      MWJL 122
                           which is the photographic identification, he is
                           actually again in Enclosure no. 4 and in this
                           location h e r e . That is the timed photograph.

                        Q. That is the one we had the conclusion on about the
                           time? - A. That is right.

                        Q.   1 5 0 3 I think you said? - A.     1504, I   believe, sir.

                        Q.    Well, whatever? - A. It      was 1504, sir. Sir,in
                             respect of RCD/3, which is the plan you have
                             mentioned, DC D a y ’s, he indicates a location h e r e .

                        Q. So, in other words, locationally that fits in well
                           with the one that we have just discussed, does it
                           not, because it is not quite identical but very close?
                H          A. That is right.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                      -   8-
                                                                      M. LAYTON



                        Q. It is just that he cannot quite remember, he is not
                           entirely certain, about the visual identification? -
                           A. That is right, yes.    Sir, if I then go to RCD/4,
                           which is a plan of the pitch, again submitted by
                           PC Day, the location he has indicated on the pitch
                           is in this spot h e r e .

                        Q. There is, in fact, another plan by PC Agar which
                    B      actually gives the identical position to DC Day,
                           does he not? - A. That is right.

                        Q,    I do not think we need to include     it as an exhibit
                             but, in fact, that is so? - A. It      is identical, sir,
                             yes.

                        0. So those two points overlap? - A. Yes.

                        Q.   So that gives us a certain degree of confidence that
                             that might be accurate? - A. I think so, yes.  I
                             think, sir, that does cover the plans you have
                             referred to.

                                    MR. FRASER:   No questions, thank you.
                    D             THE CORONER:  I had the impression that one of
                             the people there was not quite happy with one of
                             the plans.  Do you want to just check?

                                  MR. FRASER:   It is clear enough, sir.       I think
                             we can resolve the problem without ....

                    £               THE CORONER:   Yes.  Any questions from any of
                             you?    (No questions from the J u r y )

                                  Ntjw, that is all the evidence we are talcing in
                             relation to Gordon.      I am most grateful to you for
                             coming and for listening and hearing what the
                             evidence is that we are able to deal with at the
                             moment.   I want to s a y to you how very sorry I am
                             indeed that 3^ou have lost your lad.       It is sad,
                             of course, for e v e ^ b o d y but this lad, in particular,
                             it is sad for you.     Thank you for coming.

                                  17e will rise for a moment and then we will start
                             the next one.




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     -   9-
