                                            l          CCS             2.
Oath for Jury.

 I swear by Almighty God that I will diligently inquire on behalf of
our Sovereign Lady the Queen into the deaths of the 95 persons whose
names have been read out in my presence and hearing by Her Majesty's
Coroner and give a true verdict according to the evidence.

Affirmation for Jury (if needed).

I do solemnly and sincerely and truly declare and affirm that
I will diligently inquire on behalf of our Sovereign Lady the Queen
into the deaths of the 95 persons whose names have been read out in my
presence and hearing by Her Majesty's Coroner and give a true verdict
according to the evidence.

Oath of presenting officers.

I swear by Almighty God that the evidence that I shall give shall be
the truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth in relation to
each of the 95 persons whose names have been read out by the H.M.
Coroner in my presence and hearing touching whom I am called upon
to give evidence.

Affirmation of presenting officers.

I do solemnly and sincerely and truly declare and affirm that the
evidence that I shall give shall be the truth the whole truth and
nothing but the truth in relation to each of the 95 persons whose
names have been read out by the H.M. Coroner in my presence and
hearing touching whom I am called upon to give evidence.


Normal form of Oath.

I swear by Almighty God that the evidence that I shall give shall be
the truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth.

Normal form of affirmation.

I do solemnly and sincerely and truly declare and affirm that the
evidence that I shall give shall be the truth the whole truth and
nothing but the truth.

Form of oath for Pathologists.                                         ^

I swear by Almighty God that the evidence   that I shall give shall be
the truth the whole truth and nothing but   the truth in respect of
each of the bodies on which I performed a   post mortem examination
as a result of an incident which occurred   at the Hillsborough football
stadium on 15th April 1989.

Form of affirmation for Pathologists.

I do solemnly and sincerely and truly declare and affirm that the
evidence that I shall give shall be the truth the whole truth and
nothing but the truth in respect of each of the bodies on which I
performed a post mortem examination as a result of an incident which
occurred at the Hillsborough football stadium on 15th April 1989.
PRE/INQ/REV                      dated 6th March 1990

Notes of ground to be covered at Pre Inquest Review on 6th March
1990 at 2 pm at the Medico Legal Centre Water St. Sheffield.


1. Refer to Previous meeting on 28.02.90 with Mr. Kennedy,
 Hammond Suddards, Solicitors for SYP and Mr. Frazer of the
Hillsborough Steering Committee Mr. M. Jones ACC WMP and SLP.


2. DPP.                a. Definitely No information as to DPP decision
                       b. in any case No decision yet taken
                       c. All papers not yet submitted and therefore not
                          possible for decision to be taken.
                       d. Present time scale would not permit DPP final
                          report to be submitted until after commencement
                          of proposed resumed limited inquests.

3.Possible Scenarios:
  a. Prosecution -                              Sec. 16 CA 1988.
  b. No Prosecution but Private Pros.    -      Sec. 16 CA 1988
  c. No Prosecution -                          Inquest

4. Pre Inq Rev. has arisen as a direct result of letter from Miss
Steel outlining certain difficulties, correspondence from Hammond
Suddard, previous thinking about matter natural anxiety for
information.

5. Resumed Inquest to be of limited scope. Under no circumstances will
we deal at this stage with How and even less with Why or Whom to
blame.

In particular no attack or criticism of any individual(s) or body(s)
Nothing that may be detrimaental to DPP enquiry.

This is necessary
a. DPP has only agreed to limited inquest at this stage
b. In the interests of justice not least that of the bereaved..

6. Scope of Inquest.

    Medical Evidence Alcholol levels will be revealed for each person
    for whom they are available.

    Evidence of movement of the deceased as far as possible.
    In particular we will try where that is possible to indicate
    where the deceased was seen in a particular pen.

    Identifications are more satisfactory for some than others
    ofcourse.

    At the end of the hearing bereaved should hopefully know where
    it has been possible to establish it the when and where of death.

7.Method of producing the evidence.

    a. Post Mortem Reports, subject to representations I think
       it may be possible to deal with many of these without
       calling the Pathologist.
                                   Page   1
     b.  We will not call Dr. Forrest to each inquest to prove
        alcohol levels but will have him present at the beginning
        to deal with his findings. In any individual case where
        I think it necessary I will ofcourse call him.
     c. We will not call any SYP officers of any rank
     d. In each case a VJMP officer will have prepared a summary
        of each individual file which together with the file
        will be submitted to me. The officer will present his
        summary. It will to the best of ability be factually correct
        but will be non adverserial in tone and content.
     i. I will have seen the summaries and the complete files before
        each inquest and it is my intention to have read each of the
        95 files before the inquest.
     ii. The summaries will be circulated to HSC and probably to
        Hammond Suddard before the hearing but not to others but
        not to others who will ofcourse hear it at the Inquest.
     iii. The purpose of early circulation is:
          1. to enable Sol to indicate
         whether they are content with summary or whether anything is
          not clear so that if it is possible that can be elaborated at
          the hearing.
          2. To enable solicitors to share information with families
          so as to give pre warning of the evidence and lessen if
          possible distress

     e. We will also have available Annacappa reports which are a
        different form of summary but it may not be possible to
        circulate these.

     f. I do not intend to use Video at this hearing.

     g. I will avoid using photographs or video stills whereever
        possible. Instead I intend to use either the summarising
        officer or other police officers to indicate on plans the
        positions where deceased where seen either alive or dead.

          Most families have already seen the photographs and confirmed
          the identifications.

          Relevant stills will be available if needs must.

     h. I may use other evidence from witnesses either viva voce or
        documentary if I think that it is necessary but do not expect
        to do so often as the summaries should give the information
        in adequate form.

8.   I intend on the opening day to take evidence from some witnesses
      eg Dr. Forrest, Prof Usher Insp. Layton which will help with
      understanding of the generality of the evidence and the method of
      presentation. It may also help with the length of the
      proceedings.

9. Listing. This is going to be difficult. We are starting off with
   pathologist order but we anticipate that there are many factors
   which will influence the order eg two deceased in one family.
   Listing will appear random but will in fact have had considerable
   thingking put into it. Whilst we would not wish to deliberately
   incovenience anyone the listing will be done by me/or undr my
   authority.

                                      Page   2
   We are aiming to do 8 Cases per day.

10. Jury. We will sit with one. Not much that they will be able to do
at these hearings but I think that it would be unwise to proceed
without them. It must be remembered that Inquest are by definition
non adversarial and these limited hearings even more so.

11. Location. Medico Legal Centre.

12. Transcripts. Will be available. Not next day service.   Will have
to be paid for.

13. Hillsborough Support group. Aware of the involvment of social
workers. We will endeavour to inform a liason person in the group of
the proposed listing but would expect that detailed liason will be
done through the bereaved family's solicitors or HSC. ie Communication
Coroner- HSC/Sol - Social workers etc and others.

14. We will endeavour to give as much warning as possible but it may
be difficult and there may have to be last minute changes.
We intend to notify solicitors who we expect will let their clients
know. We will also endeavour to warn at least one family member direct
either by post or viva voce.

15. Because of pressure on time if some one does not turn up on time
we will proceed without them.

16. We will endeavour to have coffee and biscuit facilities on site.

17. Press will be entitled to attend, but because of space constrains
press passes will probably have to be issued.

18. Comments from floor.

19. Representation of interested parties.

20 Any other business.

21. Date for resumed inquest.

22. Starting time of resumed inquests.
Interim meeting to discuss procedural matters connected with
the resumed inquests on 19th Nov. 1990. Meeting scheduled of
30th October 1990 at the Medico Legal Centre Sheffield at
2. pm.




1. Satus of this meeting . No reporting.

2. Venue.      Council chamber etc. Warn of possible movement to MLC

3. Time                           ^

   a.        10 - 12.45
              13.45 (14.00) - 16.00 approx

   b.        Pauses for coffee am and pm.

   c.        Times to be reviewed depending on how wecope.

4. Scope

  a.          "How"      remind

               i.    Not public inquiry

               ii. Not whom or why except as necessry for How
                   ie to enable jury to reach verdict

               iii. Not repeat of previous hearings

               iv.     Privileges of witnesses against self incrimination

               v.      Individual evidence already taken thereof these
                       hearings generic so to speak


5. Form of evidence

        a. Mainly viva voce but may need to take doc in some cases
            eg Mr. Magee

        b.   Groups:
                        1.    Supporters
                              i. relatives   may not be willing respect
                              ii. friends            "
                              iii. other contacts with deceased
                              iv. others

                         2. Local residents

                         3. shopkeepers etc

                         4. other independents eg
                             media
                             footballer
                             St John
                             SYMAS

                         5.   Turnstyle Operators
                              stewarts
                              other employees
                              club official
                    6.   Police

                    7.   PACE statements

                    Names not to be circulated in advance
                    but will consider giving some advance notice
                    on a day to day basis of the classes and perhaps
                    where appropriate the name of the witnesses
                    particularly of LJT witness

        c.          Copy statements not to be supplied but
                    witness to be allowed to refresh memory on day
                    rate of evidence will enable lawyers surely to keep
                    up

        d. Order    Outward In but NB overlap of witnesses eg supporters
                    Experts if any at end


6.    Documents     restrict as far as possible
                    Video to be shown not all
                    No facility for making copies of videos
                                                     pictures
                    Prefer if possible to read relevant section of doc
                    into transcript but ? consider having available
                    typed versions toease referral to these.

7.    Documents     if introduced by parties need about 20 copies at
                    least see above

8. Procedure        Order of asking questions sort out amongst
                    themselves

9. Transcripts       next day
                     normal charge per sheet
                     payable to City council
                     specify asap whether transcript going to be
                     required
                     Invoicing at end?

10.   LJT            Report not to be admitted per se nor conclusions
                     as this is function of jury in reaching verdict

                     may need to refer to it occassionally

                     transcripts not evidence in proceedings If all
                     parties agree in respect of any particular person
                     may be possible to include some of the evidence
                     as documentary but remember jury and therefore
                     would have to be read.

                    cross examination Cannot stop counsel preparing
                    using these but
                   not adversarial
                   not to be used oppressively
                   not to be used to try to introduce evidence in form
                   of questions.

11.   Length       difficult depends on lawyers etc
                   reserve the right to review need for particular
                   witnesses
12.    Experts     Not civil trial and therefore evidence must       be
                   restricted to relevance
                    and comprehension.

13    . Listing. This is going to bedifficult.

14.Press will be   entitled to attend, butbecause of space          constrains
    press passes will probably have to be issued.

15. Comments from floor.                                    .
16. Representation of interested parties.
                                                 S*.   If
17    Any other business.                              ^        ^

18. Accomodation    Not provided.                                          ^
                    coffee and tea facilities perhaps but at charge       (
                    ^tnrnsr rtil1-thinking
                         NOTES FOR OPENING REMARKS

1. WELCOME

2. SELECTION OF JURY
   EXCLUDE    A. Related or close friends of bereaved
              B. Related to or close friends Police officers involved
                 at H.
              C. Related toor close friends of stewards involved with
                 L.L. end or who directly involved with any deceased
              D. Any other reason of bias that you are aware of.
              E. Any personal reasons which might make you unrealiable
                 for attendance during the days of the inquest.

3. CONTINUE WITH SELECTION AS NECESSARY Reserve jurors who might be
suitable notwithstanding any of above because eg distant relationship.

4. CHECK WITH LEGA REP. re any other points to be put. No preremtory
challenge.

5. EXPLAIN   method of swearing in the jury.

6. READ NAMES    ALPHABETICAL ORDER

 "THESE ARERESUMED INQUESTS     TOUCHING THE DEATHS OF THE FOLLOWING”

7.    SGT. GRIFFITH TO SWEAR IN THE JURY

8. SGT GRIFFITH TO AFFIRM ANY MEMBER OF THE JURY WHO WISHED TO AFFIRM.

9. REPRESENTATIONS IE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES

10. SWEAR/AFFIRM PRESENTING OFFICERS       check with Legal Reps if happy

11. ? EXPALIN INTENTION OF SWEARING PATHOLOGIST IN RESPECT OF EACH OF
    THEIR PM'S AT ONE GO.

INTRODUCTION

12. HISTORY OF CORONER       ANCIENT OFFICE ABOUT 800 YEARS
                             COURT OF RECORD
                             INQUISITORIAL AND NOT ADVERSARIAL
                             LIMITED OBJECTIVES see below.

13. REASON FOR PROCEEDINGS

A. Duty to hold inquest. -     see sec. 8 (1) C. A. 1988.

B. Need for Jury.

     i. sec 8(4) C.A. 1988   May summons jury if he think appropriate

     ii. sec. 8 (3) (d) C.A. 1988 ie:

  if it appears to the coroner either befoe he he proceeds to hold an
inquest or in the course of an inquest begun without a jury that there
is reason to suspect (d) that the death occurred in circumstances the
continuance or possible recurrence of which is prejudicial to the
health and safety of the public or any section of the public
he shall proceed to summon a jury.......
In the circumstances   vide LJ. Taylor inquiry   jury summons

14. WHAT ARE THE OBJECTIVES OF A CORONER’S INQUEST,

summariesed in rule Rule 36     READ THIS RULE IN FULL.

15. ALL INQUESTS THREFORE LIMITED IN NATURE BUT SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
APPLY TO THE PRESENT PROCEEDINGS.

16. THERE IS AN ONGOING DPP INQUIRY. RESULT OF DELIBERATION OF DPP
 NOT KNOWN . Apart from any other considerations it is common sense
 and in the interest of justice not to impede the investigations of
the DPP.


17. However there are many items which could be dealt with and which
fall within the ambit of an inquest withoutimpeding the DPP
enquiries. After appropriate consultation I decide to resume these
inquests on a limited basis.

What we are going to listen to is evidence (as to form see below)
on who the deceased was
    where and when he died as far as it is possible to do so.
    and incidentally the registration particulars.

we will   not deal with HOW .

18. The extent of How is always a difficult question but
we will not deal with this problem today at all.

19 to avoid misunderstanding then :

 a. Present hearings limited in scope
 b. No criticism or attack of any person or corporations.
 c. Nothing detrimental to DPP inquiry

20. Whether or not I will deal with How and if so to waht extentwill
depend on the decision of the DPP.

I will outline two scenarios:

a. DPP decides NOt to prosecute in respect of offences within section
16 (1) (a) (i) of the Coroner Act 1988. In that event I will make
arrangements to resume the inquests after further consideration of the
evidence and will decide the extent of the inquiry that still requires
to be made. There is bound to be a gap between the DPP's decision and
the resumption of the inquests.

b. The DPP decides to prosecute any of the offences within the
aforementioned section and that someone or more persons orbodies    are
charged.

In that event I would expect the provisions of Section 16 (1) a and b
to apply and I would adjourn the inquest as provided in that section.
Bearing in mind the evidence which we are taking during these hearings
that adjournment would be a rather short and more or less formal
affair. If that were to happen once the inqust stand adjourned under
section 16 I would give approriate notice to the Registrar of birth
and eaths and the death certificates could be issued.

(I could also if I thought it right discharge the jury, (sec 16 (1)).)
                                   Page   2
I should also make it clear that section 16(3) provides that after the
conclusion of the relevant criminal proceedings the coroner may ...
resume the adjourned inquest if in his opinion there is sufficient
cause to do so.

I am not stating what decision I will in fact take but I can say that
it is Not normal practice to resume after criminal proceedings and
bearing in mind that there has already been a judicial inquiry and by
definition a prosecution it may be that I would folllow my normal
practice.

21. To return to today.

Because of the limitations which we are faced with regarding this
inquest at the present time I have decided that the evidence
which will be presented to you will consist of the following:

1. The opening evidence which was taken in order to enable me to
release the bodies for funeral purposes. It was realised that there
 might be some errors because of the speed with which I attempted to
deal with the matters as not unnaturally the families wanted to have
the bodies of their loved back with them at Liverpool or olsewhere
where they lived and also because they wanted to make funeral
arrangements. A standard form was prepared and the opening followed
a standard format. We have identified some cases were mistakes were
made and when we come to each individual inquest I will read the
opening as it is and then if I am aware of any error I will mention
it so that the record can be corrected. Families to listen carefully
and draw legal representatives attention to any inaccuracies such as
names and pace of birth etc as these are important when registration
is effected.

2. Post mortem evidence. Call Pathologists unless not required.

3. Summaries prepared by WMP officers these will be in two parts:

i. a resumee of the witness evidence and a
   b a resume of the visual evidence

ii. with regard to visual evidence I do not propose to use the video
or photograph directly. Instead I will use were appropriate plans
which have been prepared and which show by dots positions of the
deceased as far as can be established. The advantage of this is that
it is much easier to follow and more importantly much less stressful
for you the jury. The families have in many instances spent a
considerable time looking at the photgraphic and video evidence and
without their invaluable help it would not have been possible to
establish many of the identifications. Some families have not wished
to view visual evidence and obviously their wishes have been
respected.

There is one more aspect regarding these plans. Instead of passing
plans around the court I will ask the presenting officer to point out
on the model or the large plan the positions which we may be talking
about. This I think will be easier to follow for all of us. I hope
however that it will be possible to bind up within the transcripts
copies of the plans which are used as exhibits. Please note that not
every available plam etc will be used but only those which I consider
necessary.

22. Today will be a little different to normal. I am going to ask
                                   Page   3
a few witnesses to give evidence which either applies to all or
which can be more conveniently be given together.

23. Apart from the witnesses whom I have mentioned there will be
very few if any other live witnesses. In particular to avoid
misunderstanding no SYP officers   are being called to give evidence
viva voce at these hearings. Nor   for that matter any stewards or club
or other officials.

24.   I now want to turn to the Rules.

Rule 20. 1. b. the coroner shall disallow any question which in his
opinion is not relevant or is otherwise not a proper question.
For the purpose of these hearings questions which fall outside the
 defined scope of the hearings will be deemed irrelevant or improper
and disallowed. I do not anticipate any problems as the legal
representatives are well aware of the position and have indicated to
me that they are content.

Rule 20 2. lists certain persons who are entitled to examine witnesses
usually refered to as interested parties. It reads as follows:
READ FROM RULES
It is because of this rule that there are so many legal
representatives present today. It may well be that some of the
representatives may feel that they do not wish to be present at each
days sitting. That is a matter entirely for them. It would be helpful
though if they indicated either to me or to one of my officers if they
decide not to be present on any particular day/days.

Rule 22. Rule against self incrimination. Not likely to arise at this
stage.

Rule 24. READ. Represented anyway today but in view of the
limitations on the present hearings conduct not intended to be called
into question as this as this falls ifit falls any were into HOW.

RULE 26 AND 27 these rules deal with adjournements at the request
of DPP and chief officer of police in certain circumstances.and RULE
28 deals with the obligation of the coroner to adjourn in certain
circumstances in the light of the evidence adduced.

RULE 36. I have already drawn this rule to your attention. It must be
kept in mind as it defines the scope of the inquest. Please note that
there is no provision for the adding of Riders to verdicts. This was a
common practice at one time but is now no longer permitted.

RULE 37. documentary evidence. Because of the limitations on the scope
of these hearings it is not practical to seek to comply with the
detailed provisions. In particular it would not be possible to supply
copy statements at the present time as these in many case contain
references which might be contrued as being criticisms of others or
which go to the HOW rather than the matters with which we are dealing.

The summaries are ofcourse based on the statements but have been
prepared to give an accurate a picture as it is possible of the facts
relevant to the present inquiry. In some case I will ask the officers
to elaborate on the summaries where I think that it would be helpful.
In some cases it may seem appropriate to read a portion of a statement
as something of the humaness of the situation is lost by using only
the summaries. If that were to happen I will read the relevant parts
but it must be understood that my reading would be an edited version
                                   Page   4
designed to leave out criticism and attack and conversely praise and
credit. Anything that is read will ofcourse be in the transcript
and I hope that the legal representatives will be happy with this,
they insist on seeing the document than either they will have to
accept that at present they can only see the part that is read or
cannot readit at all.

Whether any part should be read is a difficult decision as the actual
words sometimes bring the situation much more poignantly home to one.

RULE 38. EXHIBITS. The rule provides that they should be numbered
consecutively and preceded with a letter C. I will endeavour to do
this when say a plan is in fact produced but in my view it is far
better in complex multiple inquest such as this to use the exhi it
numbers which have been assigned by WMP and when referring to exhibits
I will use those letters and numbers. I think every one will in the
end find this more convenient.

RULE 39. Notes of evidence. As is well known tape recording satisfies
this Rule. I have arranged because on the whole I think the quality of
the transcript is better to have the proceedings transcribed by
shorthand writers (who I understand use taperecording for back up).
These transcripts will constitute the note of the evidence in these
cases.

24. We will not be in a position to reach a verdict at the end of
these proceedings and therefore inquest will be again adjourned.
Because of this I do not propose at this stage to consider the
possible verdicts which you members of the jury may in due course
have to consider.

25. What then is your function. In a nutshell to listen to the
evidence so that if you are called upon to reach a verdict in due
course you may be able to do so according to the evidence. Of
course I will before you have to take that step sum up for you
and remind you of what you have heard a very necessary exercise in a
mammoth undertaking such as this.

26. You members of the Jury through no fault of your own have been
catapulted into a niche of history. You have both an arduous and
distressing task before you. For all people in caring professions
say nurses or doctors or indeed social workers a balance has to be
struck between detachment from the problem and emotional involvement
with the individual or case. If they are too detached they may appear
cold and indeed worry that they are to cold whilst if they are too
emotionally involved they cannot cope and indeed are unable to fulfil
there function. You too must strike the right balance. You have a
task to perform and must approach it with a strong degree of
detachment remembering that you have to bring in a verdict according
to the evidence. On the other hand I do not want yo to think that I
expect you to be automata without feelings and you must not let
the numbers or the evidence make you careless of the real hurt and
loss which the loss of each individual life has and will cause.
Because of your individual backgrounds and your own particular
circumstances some cases or some evidence may affect you more than
others. This is natural and do not be surprised at it.

 You may also find that you have some sleep disturbance and that you
 may possibly have dreams which are in some way related to the
 incident or jury service. Recognise this for what it is and do not
 be too concerned about it as I belej^getha^ it will pass.
Fortunately there are 11 of you and in a sense you are able to give
each other support.

If at any time during the hearing you feel that you wish to have a
short adjournment because of the way you feel please ask your
foreperson to make a request and I will do my best to grant it.

 27. I have to tell you that you are not to discuss the evidence
that you hear in this case outside the court room.
That is not as easy as it sounds as you will have many people
who will approach you expressing sympathy and making enquiries.
Thank them for their sympathy but refrain from discussion. You will
not be kept under lock and key and so the onus is on you.


I must confess I have worried about this restriction as it affects
you as obviously although I do not think that any of you will not
be able to cope with these hearings it could be that I might be
mistaken in respect of some one of you. Neither I nor anyone else
I am sure would want any of you to suffer or be ill. Whilst I would
prefer it if you could avoid having to seek counselling or other aid
should you feel that you real cannot cope than you must ofcourse
do what is necessary for your own well being. If that contingency were
to happen than whilst you must still not discuss the evidence I think
it would be in order to seek help from professional persons such as
for example your GP or social workers not with the facts or evidence
of the inquests but with the effect which this is having on you.

AS LEGA1 reprs   if they have any comments on this direction.

28. We have a tight schedule. On a normal day I scheduled 8 inquests.
We will start at 9.30 am have a coffee break during the morning. Rise
for lunch at about l.pm. Resume at 2.pm. sharp have another break
during the after noon and then finish as near to 4.30 - 5pm as
possible. I am anxious that whilst we cannot afford to waste time
that we should nevertheless give to each inquest as much time as
is necessary to do it justice.

29. Tomorrow we meet here.  On Friday and thereafter we are at the
Medico Legal Centre Watery  Street, Sheffield. If yo do not know where
it is please ask Sgt Griffith or Mrs. Taylor to explain its location.
Please do not be late as it would throegk out the schedule and
inconvenience a great number of people not least the bereaved families
and I ma sure that nome of  us would wish to do that .

30. Please remember that at the Medico Legal centre normalwork
continues. Each of the persons who comes there has also lost a loved
one and are mourning that loss. There may not be the press attention
which this tragedy has attracted but the pain and distress is non
theless as real and as personal. Be sensitive therefore when you come
to MLC and remember that people there are not getting the same level
of support which has been provided for the bereaved in this case.

31. This brings me conveniently to the Media. I quite understand that
you have a legitimate interest in reporting newsworthy matters. I must
however remind you that you have not always had a good press yourself
regarding the reporting of the disaster. It goes without saying that
I expect you to report accurately what is said at these proceedings.
However it is not always what is said that is hurtful but how it is
said and how it is presented. I now you have to sell your papers
but you your sub editors and editors please remember that you are
                                   Page   6
writing about personal losses and sorrows of people . Please do not
make things worse for them.

32. Do not harrass relatives, particularly within the precinct of my
court. I would take a very dim view of that.

33. Please do not wander around the building or enter unauthorised
corridors or rooms. You have no authority or licence to do so.

34. Families will know that there are social workers and others
who seek to reduce any stress that the inquest proceedings may bring.
I am most grateful to all these support services for all the work
and effort which they have put into helping the bereaved.

35. I am also am grateful for the WRVS who have agreed to provide tea
and coffee for a charge. There help is most gratefully acknowledged.

36. There are a number of matter which have been raised by families
which are really outside the bounds of an inquest and which will not
be dealt with. I will however say this.

a. We were fortunate that a building like the gymnasium was available
to serve as a temporary mortuary. It was large enough for the purpose
and madeit possible for the bodies of the deceased to be segregated in
such a way that people only had to view one body rather than many.

b. The polaroid photgraphs were taken at my request as I felt that
this was a better and kinder way of achieving identification.

c. The decision to move bodies back to the temporary mortuary from the
hospitals was authorised by me. In the circumstances relating to
Hillsborough to have started identification without each body being
at the same place would have lead to very great distress. A moments
thought will convince you of the correctness of this.

d. The bulk of the deceased were unidentified. There were a few who
had some identification on them. However it would I think have been
unwise to rely on this until positive identification had taken place.

e. I authorised the taking of blood samples for alcohol I do
not require alcohol estimation in every inquest death report to me
but it is done in quite a few particularly nearly all RTA deaths,
emember I am dealing with the victims not the drivers unless they are
deceased.

 f. Viewing . Some were not happy with the viewing arrangements. First
 remember the numbers involved, secondly MLC is a mortuary and not a
 chapel of rest, third view is for identification purposes, fourthly
 no access to view area except through mortuary. It would have been
 impossible and quite wrong to have taken people through that area,
 fifhly speed was required. It is not possible to do everthing.

 I will now very briefly turn to the site and with the help of Insp.
 Layton try to identify main features so that you members of the Jury
 can follow the evidence more easily. I will also mention have few
 times events to make the accounts more intelligible.

 Site.

 Lepping Lane.
                                    Page   7
 several gates relevant ones are:

 outer perimeter gate
 Gate C
 Gate in inner perimeter    fence.

 West Stand.  Upper part seating referred to as a stand,
              lower terrace for seating,
  lower terrace divided into pens numbered 1-7
 centre pens looking at the field No 4 on left
                                  No 3 on right
 each of these had a gate.
 on the right of pen 3 is pen 2 with a gate
 on the left of pen 4 is pen 5 which is very narrow with a gate.

On the opposite side of the pitch is the Gymnasium.
Main access point for police and ambulances, lots of people put down
near there.

Once through the outer gates an area in front of the turnstyles
There were 7 turnstyles A-G serving the terrace. Inside the turnsyle
there was a large courtyard or concourse. From there there was a
tunnel leading onto the terraces which at the end was bisected by a
fence so that one could go into the L (4) or right (3).


A crush developed outside the ground and eventually Gate C was
opened to relieve the pressure.

Gate C was opened 3 times

14.48.04 to 14.48.31 to let someone out estimated that about 150 or
so fans came in .

14.52..06 to 14.57.35 main opening large numbers came into ground

14.59 .12 reopened

14.59 .30 kick off

15.04.49   Beardsley hit cross bar

1505.36 Players leave the field

1515.33 St John ambulance on pitch

1616 coroner contacted.


Note that some of the dead were taken through the tunnel and dealt
with in the concourse area and then laid in the LI area from were they
were taken to the temporary mortuary.
               r               RESUMED INQUESTS 19TH NOVMBE& 1990^ i'

DRAFT PRO FORMAOUTLINE QF>INQUESTS.


1.   INTRODUCTION- by^Colronfet.•

2. ■filCKSROHIW" STATEMENTS T Viva voce       WMP or ? Documentary-

 A. Stadium    1. History

               2. Layout                      Perimeter Gates
                                              Court Yard
                                              Dividing walls
                                              No: of Turnstyles
                                              Layout and Numbering
                                              Signing above Turnstyles
                                              Concertina Gates
                                                   Position
                                                   Lettering
                                                   Size
                                              Concourse
                                                   Dividing walls
                                                   Openings
                                              Signs in Concourse area
                                              Tunnel
                                              Terracing
                                                 Capacity according to safety
                                                 certificate
                                                 Perimeter fences (dates size etc
                                                 Perimeter gates
                                                 Radial fences        1
                                                 Radial fence gates
                                              Police Control Room
                                               Director box
                                               Commentary Box
                                              TV monitors ?
                                               Players entrance to pitch
                                               Club room
                                               Gymnasium (location)
                                               Pitch tract
                                                      playing area

                   3. Relevant Alterations
                   since 1981 if not
                   included in above

                   4. Relevant proposed
                   alterations since 1981
                   if not included above

                   5. Previous major events
                   (briefly)

                   6. ? Previous episodes
                   of crushing 1956,1981
                   1987,1988.                  Outline only for elaboration
                                               by evidence


                   7. Licensing                By whom
                                               When
B. TRANSPORT AND ROADS                  Roadworks location
                                        ? holdups
                                        ? time roads reported clear
                                        No of Coaches
                                        Special trains
                                        Total Livp. train travellers
                                        ? other vehicles

C. PUB SURVEY                           May need to be done seperately

D. DEPLOYMENT (Police) Planned.
   Compare 1988 with 1989               Totals
   distinguish between                  Liverpool sector
   SYP and Merseyside officers          In Lepping Lane
   distinguish between foot             At perimeter gates
   and horse                            In Court Yard (turnstyle area)
                                        In Concourse area
                                        At Tunnel
                                           Concourse end
                                           terrace end
                                        On pitch Leppings lane end

E. DEPLOYMENT (Club)                    Stewards
   Distinguish between 1988/89          Turnstyle operators
   Total numbers                        Programme Sellers
   and then concentrate on              Others?
   Liverpool sector.

   ? Is it know who of the various deployed persons were in the same
   position and job in 1988 and 1989 ?

F. ANNA CAPPA - DATA     (VIDEO, PHOTOS ? OTHER INFORMATION)

            1. Lepping Lane             Motor movement
                                        Congestion (? how far back)
                                           Perimeter Gate
                                           Turnstyle Area
                                           River Don area
                                           Concertina Gates

            2. Perimeter Gates          Opening and shutting
                                        ? Damage

           3. Horses                    When, where how many

           4. Concertina Gates
              Gate C                    Opening
                                        Shutting

                Ditto for Gates   A and B   briefly.

           5. Terracing                Beachball
                                       Movements
                                       Surges
                                       Perimeter gates
                                        opening and shutting'—
                                        based on video or
                                        photographic evidence
                6. Field and Police         Team On
                                            Roll call
                                            Toss up
                                            Play start
                                            Play events
                                            Perimeter tract events
                                            Supt. Murray on pitch
                                             "    Greenwood on pitch
                                            Play stop
                                            Any other significant event

                7. Rescue/response          At fence
                                            On terrace
                                            In tunnel
                                            Supt. Nesbit
                                            Ambulance
                                               St. John
                                               SYMAS
                                            ? other

      DECEASED
             1. No and location             No. in each enclosure,
                                            Location within enclosure,
                                            Location of broken barrier,
                2. Entry times              Entry time of deceased to
                                            stadium related to:
                                             i . enclosure
                                             ii. position within enclosure
                                             iii. alcohol estimation

                3. Removal                  via perimeter gates
                distinguish between         over perimeter fence
                enclosure 3 and 4.          through perimeter fence
                                            over side fencing
                                            through tunnel

 H.             ? SUMMARY OF HSE FINDINGS
                                            Numbers
                                            entry through Gate C
                                            No on terrraces


3, lS ( 0 c Q
4. THE STADIUM      evidence from:

                The Club                    structure
                                            function eg tickets
                                            supervision of stewarts
                                            training
                                            security

                Eastwoods

                 Sheffield C.C.

                 ?? Police

5. PAST HISTORY of previous incidents       witnesses
                                            documents

6. POLICE CONTROL ROOM                      ? Correct place
7. LEPPINGS LANE and surroundings          Publicans
                                           Shopkeepers
                                           Residents
                                           (Supporters)
                                           (Police)

8. LEPPINGS LANE Buildup
    Cp. 1988/ with 1989 were appropriate
             In Lane                  ) Residents/shopkeepers
             At perimeter gate        ) club
             On forecourt/turnstyles )    Turnstyle operators
             Concertina Gates         ) Program sellers
                                          Security
                                          Club room staff ??
                                        Supporters
                                        Police
                                          Merseyside
                                          SYP
                                          Foot
                                          Horse

9. LEPPINGS LANE    Concourse and tunnel
                                           Stewards
                                           Turnstyle operators ?
                                           Supporters
                                           Police

10. TERRACE

              Perception                   Supporters
              various locations            St. John Ambulance staff
              and time                     SYMAS
                                           Ball boys
                                           Referee
                                           linesmen
                                           football players
                                           Media
                                           Police
                                             on perimeter tract
                                             control room
                                             others ?

              Barrier breaking             Supporters

              ? The crush                  Supporters

9. Response and Rescue                 Supporters
                                       St. Johns and SYMAS
                                       Medics
                                       Police
Limited to say to the appearance of Ch. Supt. Nesbit

10. EXPERTS                                HSE
                                           Others
                                              ? crowd behaviour
       >                                       with/without influence of alcohol
                                               effect stress.
CLOSING ADDRESS

1.   Deal with Rule 43 matters:
     evacuation problems a ssociated with exits located in positions
     other than the orientation of spectators, and problems arising
     out of forward progression and gate sizes (Helen Muir, Cranfield
     Research Establishment).
2.   Safety Certificate - in p articular the turnstile area and
     difficulty with number assessment with no counting mechanism.
     Does not seem to have been covered in current c ertificate -
     needs review. Write to Club and counsel.

3.   Safety Certificates - apart from a national inspectorate
     r e commended by LJT, I intend to write to the Home Secretary
     to suggest that with a specialist issue such as safety in
     sports grounds it may not be safe to leave the determination
     of what is required to numerous bodies all w o r k i n g independently
     and all using people who no doubt are very competant but
     nevertheless not specialised in that field. I shall ask the
     Home Secretary to consider w h e t h e r a national licencing and
     i nspectorate should be set up to ensure uniform standards and
     build up a pool of knowledge and expertise.

4.   I am also writing to the Home Secretary to suggest that possibly
     the l i cencing/ins pectorate or maybe other body could initiate
     and oversee suitable t r a ining and hopefully all organisations,
     irrespective of that, will have arrangements for conti n u i t y and
     disemi nation of information.

5.   I will also be writing to the Home Secretary to ask him to
     consider the Police involvement w i thin stadia and to seek to
     lay down clearer guidelines as to what their proper role and
     function is.

6.   A l t hough it would be good to think that f u rther disasters would
     not occur, whilst we have been sitting there has been one
     disaster in South Africa where 40 football fans were killed,
     and only last week there was a potential crowd disaster
     involving crushing at Nottingham. Unless there is some change
     in attitude and an acceptance that terracing carries a substantial
     potential risk, which may be m i n i m i s e d but not n e cessarily
     e liminated by all-seater stadia, I fear that there will b e f u r t h e r
     disasters.

7.   A l t hough the next point is strictly not to do with safety, I
     will be w r i ting to the Home Secretary and asking him urgently
     to r eview the i n t e r - r e latio nship between public enquiries and
     inquests in major disaster situations, to try and ensure if at
     all possible that unnece s s a r y duplication is avoided.
    JURY

    1-     T'    1        "                   i, perseverance, interest.
    2.     Remind tnem tnat at the opening I had indicated that they
           might be stressed and pointed out to them that in their
           situation they had each other and in effect were a mutual
           support group.

           The inquests are now about over, they will be going back
           to normal life, and they may find, although I do not think
           that they will, that some help or c ounselling would be
           welcome. There are at least three sources:
           i)        their GP
           ii)       Family and Community Services Department,
                     Redvers House, Union Street, Sheffield, SI,
                     and in particular Mr David Webber, Senior Principal
                     Social W orker (tel 734856 or 734855), who has
                     indicated to me that he and his staff w ould be
                     happy to counsel or assist if there are any problems.
                     He has assured me if you did contact him in writing
                     mark y o u r letters Private & Confidential.

<             need be, you could even get in touch with me through my
           office and I would seek to point you to someone who might be
           able to help if I am able.

    I am not suggesting that any of you will actually need any help,
    I just want you to understand that it is available.
        J 1 .I .H .U U /   UJ   aiaie lor   K.ensinglou raiooc                 Sf!R
                           mm
                                  :                              MBSM          Irt
the recommendation o f the                  David John Lister Goy, The a t
Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay                Hon Peregrine Charles Hugo liw
o f Clashfem, to approve the                S im o n ; Ia in A n stru th e r ill
na:nes o f the following persons            Milligan; Jonathan Michael fo
for appointment to the office of            Caplan.                           w
       s Counsel:                              P eter F rancis G rosvenor
                                                                              a
          Julian Bevan; Chris-                        * % * * * « Timothy
                                                                               ii
                                                                               U
                                                              Andrew Paul
                                            Russel Arden: Nigel John P<
                                            Martin Teare; Stuart Chris- |M
                                            topher Brown; Angus James
M ohun^Cecil '"careyT Andrew                Scott Glennie; E ch^rd Alexan- b.
R obert C ollender; M ichael                £ej: Bannister; ChariM Leslie s*
Picton Parroy; Michael Henry                Falconer lan Walter Gcenng; b
U « o n ; Anthony Paul M oms;               Stephen Andrew Furst; Stuart




       Linda Jov Stem: Edward               «ooos; Miss ram cia Janet
Ja m es H o lm an ; R lCh ard               Scotland.
Brunton Latham; Nicholas                    TK<‘              ar'rv'
Jeremy Atkinson.                            following to be Queen’s Counsel
   Andrew David Heddcrwick                         scausa:
                                            honom causa:
Trollope; John Henry Boulton                D r Francis Mann, honorary
Saunders; Patnck Robert James               professor a t Bonn University;
--------------
B  Mon;                " - ‘-e rt           Professor Jim Gower, professor
                             .en-           em entus and formerly vice-
                                1-          chancellor of Southampton
                             . r,           University; Bernard Kelly, head
Wiffiam Clegg; Julian 'H enry               o f the legal department and
M alins; Jo n a th a n R o b e rt           director o f Mobil Oil; Gerald
Gaunt; John Charles Rees;                   Hosker, solicitor to the Depart-

Gordon Boyie; David Howard                  the Crown Office and Queen's
E v an s; N ich o las D av id               CoronerandAttorney, Registrar
Padfield; George Frederick                  o f Criminal Appeals and of the
L aurence; G erald Edw ard                  Courts Martial Appeal C ourt
THANKS

I would like to thank the Town Hall staff, the Lord Mayor, the
Leader of the Council and all of the Councillors for their help
and c o -operation and for making available their Chamber. I and
am sure everyone else is very grateful.


West Midlands Police - present team of about 12 and I would like
to commend t h e m for all they have done.


Legal representativ es and Mrs McBrien - for their courtesy,
c o - operation and goodwill.




In a few moments w e i will be concluding the proceedings and what
I intend to do is that when we have f i nally finished we will all
stand and have one minute's silence as a mark of respect and
remembrance for those who died.


I would like to think that the conclusion of these inquests will
g- -L 1- I-- 1-=   .   . .   I



That is all I have to say - have I forgotten anything?
                                                   /9 ^ c     -fre e        /S S c S tS *


      /.            C J^>                                   cf< y£           0*7       / A / ^ / t 3L


     JL                     <b             d X                               f     ^   *i         —


                                   <=^7.                     < ^< o^ .        cJ&


                                                 C j/* S     cJA Q

                                                            7 4o.




 <r.


 6             cie> 2&           OCJ^Z




                                                 C ^ ^O             ^e/t*     ^        t/-C jcS



JO                                                                          -4 u J ?              c-o   ^   ^t=5e— ^



//,        (J cgp       '                  «-»                                              a
                                    _
                               &                       cJp.
                                                                                             I C'K&iys,
                  Gk* k J t                                                                  Js&.£-fce**^c*ji
                 © t^ /                                                                       e&Sl
                                                                                                             ^
                                                                                                            y^t */v*f

CP         <^/ gjest*-'***-*                                                                            «£^' '


G9                                                                  /^c*. ^ jfPtzrrb#? /j


0)         <2<^ .
           f ’c^Ct c<          f=&c>L,
V-
                               vfi?     Ccu#?^
sr          f"OL'Vf'


                                                 V                                            ^ T /d ^ J ^
                                                    -Z-GlcA^r^ C/&            /i’-ffi
                                                 /*hr>; uh»* ~r<*c ,
                                                                                             /^c< /»-<fci <£**&)

                                                                                             fe jb s r i      C ^


                                                                                            0oJy ft& h.
                                                                                            fip CftU. $Z&3&f£-*—
                                                                                            '7T>->txP
     J^'         /»>    *7 <^»                                                              Jim.‘ ^®>
                                                                                        <    /* h^y*> K 4

      (i> C.CJK                    ir                                                   £*J> /2«vl
      O)                                                                                     4< ^ >
                                                                                            ftU*$ k j / y »



       / ftet-irvc^-^

       t *Zst-4~                         Coi/^t      -A-^
                                        ^LttfX^yC.          /O-t^
       i~                             ■                                                             <W^<J .


                       / e^7
                                      t~<Z-n*4T
                                 & t*s h ? < ? C ci   \jv £ -<-%)                             vJ«->^V
                                      (               I
              C^Ctt^ufc^ tsi 6f)                                                                    a><
                                                                                               <-/9    j         &
                    /e^           ^                                                                C^**! tes£t.'/t >7


                                d (&*'??0 6 ?
                                 &<-*-H>t’                 iJUL «_J         *+■*
                                                          Je^c*               ^

                             C2*^<r               c'j&fr




        (C-c^z<                                                                     yQoLtou-
            O j& e -n tv ^                                                         j6   c j ~ c*    J t- r ^




^      (j-& h                                                                           f0^ £**H
          ^=&3£f O&O^lA^                                                                 l~e**sC

                       fy^€^C?jL? '->J <£-*=» *><=^                 /^-*»




                                 be>4l                                                                fist/Lr o4-

                  &?L6p h^ -*j < ^ td U h*>
                     ^3C&rx/i. h^°> -^7                                /t7V'/>




/© -    & phb& -
                                      SUMMING UP


INTRODUCTION

1. Summing up not summary

2    Inquests into 95 deaths not one Who when were and HOW          fiy
                                                                    /jUtr *tJS~ "
3. i. Issues of fact for you issues of law for me.         '          0   ^.
   ii. fact finding not fault finding
   iii. strong cross examination does not alter above rule

4. Issues of fact

     a. quality of witnesses          truthful
                                       economical
                                       untruthfull
                                       forgetful/ muddled

      b.    testing of witnesses      demeanour
                                       bias if any
                                       corroboration

      c.    i. facts what matter
              replies from witnesses not questions from lawyers
           ii. opinion with caution experts eg Nicholson
                                               Nicholls
                                               Pathologist
                                               some police officers eg Mole
                                                                       Creaser
           iii.   conclusions of witnesses even less weight Jury job
                                                                                               t-
                                                                                               f

      d. exclude non verbal etc communications                                             /
                                            body of court
                                            lawyers
                                            silence
                                            media
                                            sympathy    families, police
                                            antipathies

      e. exhibits       plans                                                            //F
                        photographs    care re to much reliance                     \J
                                       static
                                       angle
                        video

      f.    have a duty to guide but not to direct
            robust presentation by me discount as necessary
            if they consider some point of evidence more important
            even if not stressed by me that is their choice .

    4. Inquisition forms : describe and take through
                           explain that typed in sections for
                           assistance only

    5. Conclusions open to jury        Unlawftflly^illed
                                       Acpdtt«y*Cal/ misadventure
                                        Xpe?
6. Describe inquisition explain their duties and that both typed
and plain copies of forms will be given to them. One form for each
death remember that each case is individual

explain that           para 3 deals time and circunstances at or in which
                       injury sustained

   Normal practice not to specify exact time as usually impossible
   Time of certification not usually time of death
   location of death (found dead) usually based on place of certification

   Remember each case treated as individual inquests
   examples of possible wording

   Died on 15th April 1989 as a result of crush injuries sustained at
   Hillsborough Football Ground Sheffield
                            or
   Died on 15th April 1989 between      and          as a result of
   crush injuries sustained at Hillsborough Football Ground Sheffield
                            or
   Died on 15th April 1989 as a result of crush injuries sustained
   following overcrowding (and/or crowd movement) on Leppings Lane terraces
at Hillsborough    Football Ground Sheffield
                            or
   something smilar of your choice remembering the rules of what may
   or may not be included in an inquisitions which I will be telling
   you about in a moment.


5. Para 4. Conclusions open to jury     Unlawfully Killed
                                        Accidental/ misadventure
                                        Open

6. Legal directions    see attached next sheets
7. Need to deal with each case but possible to do some categorisation
if wished.

   i. date of death 15thApril 1989 except for Lee Nichol which was 17/4/89
   ii. Pen 4 cases:
     Name            Alcohol Entry    Hospital if any      Hearing date
 1 Stephen F. O'Neil                     NGH                 18/4   ?Doubt
2 David Hawley           -                    -              19/4
.3 Adam Spearritt                        NGH                 20/4
4 William R. Pemberton -                      -              23/4
5 David G. Rimmer        71                   -              24/4
6 Gordon R. Horn         55                   -              25/4
7 John A. Anderson       76                   -              27/4
8 Paul W. Carlile        61                   -               3/5
9 Stephen J. Robinson 141                     -




All the rest were in Pen 3 but note

Alan Johnstone    doubt   ie location not positively established
David Thomas       "                       "

Francis Joseph McAllister not identified within pen but he was with
Nicholas Joynes when last seen (See 216 R.J.E. Thomas)

It would be possible also to distinquish perhaps* those that came in before
2.30 if that was thought helpful as well as/Knose were the evidence does
not enable even a presumption confidentlv/^o be made, whether helpful is a
matter for you.                       s
Remember it is possible to have different verdicts /conclusions for
different victims.

8 . Scope of inquests

  a.   at the resumed Inqs. in Novl990 did not deal in any detail with the
rescue as it is appropriate to have some cut off point but remember that at
interim inquest considerable information given to you regarding the
individual right upt to the PM. Done in the main by officers recounting
summarised evidence. More extensive than normal. In so far as relevant
sufficient. Usual rules of assessement of the evidence apply. In a few
cases have f0ll0Med -it- up w-il-h su.ya vnrp PviHprrp pp; PP. JhWprteffl — TTVftft


 b. reason for cut off point is that the pathological evidence points to
the cause of death being due to crushing Notefor example:
Prof Usher
Dr. Clarif
Dr. Slater
Prof Jones
ProyUnderwood
Dr/Holt
Dr. Appleyard 917-918 dealt with this too as well as Dr. Gumpart and
Dr.Slater on 4th May 1990.
Also Dr. Wardrope stated that none of the patients in cardiac arrest who
were resusitated in fact survived.

Note does not mean that if it had been possible to get at a victim sooner
ie within the time limits he/she might not have survived but this is the
sad fact in many accident as well as natural illness cases.
9. Whilst on this of the 95 victims only about 14 got to hospital.
1. Carl David Lewis (85) to the Royal Hallamshire (3rd May 1990) and we
heard                        from Dr. Stoddard regarding him. The others to
NGH. 2. Lee Nicol     (95)                Notes
3.Stephen Harrison    (91)                Notes
4. Gary Jones         (86)                Notes
5. Arthur Horrocks    (92)               ?Notes
6 . Adam Spearritt 94 Pen 4 to ITU but NO Notes
7. Philip Hammond     (93)
8 . Barry Bennett     (88)
9. Victoria Hicks     (89)
10. Stephen O'Neil    (87) Pen 4
11. Paul Brady        (84)
12. John Gilhooley    (83)
13. Philip Steele     (82)
14. David L. Thomas (90) see 417 on23/4 ?

There were on my count 11 young people under 16. Of these 6 are in the
above list.

Only about 3 ? 4 cases out of the 13 to the NGH had written up notes.

10. Brief history   Note only really looked at small part of stadium

a. Long History 13 semi in 20 years (Mole)
b. Club responsibility for stadium
                           safety certificate
                           staging
                           provision of staff
                           green guide observation
                           signing
                           tickets

c. Green Guide and Safety certificate       1979 not amended
   terrace still considered as a whole and therefore
   in so far as pens are seperate units had to rely
   on visual assessment.
   Experience of this inevitably limited,
   capacity of terrace about    10d00 accepted by OWP
   no stewards specifically allocated to terrace
   annual inspections by engineer Not appraisals
   testing of barriers on 4 yearly cycle 124a tested 1988
  ( bi) annual inspections by OWP. club not part of group
        consisting of LA
                       Fire
                       Police
    Initiative for change from OWP or Eastwoods Club put into effect
    what was required.
    1981 crushing. See Greenwood Mole and Eastwood
    Remedy proposed by Police radial fences deemed to have cured
    problem (Mole)
    Eastwood spotted 1981 advantage of seperate units not then taken up
    1985 again proposed ? for segregation or seperation but not done
    because of urgent safety work arising out of Bradford Fire disaster.
    Note Green Guide recommends radial fences Para ----------
    Radial gates control over manning compare Mole, Greenwood and ?Marshall
    with Eastwood, Butler and Seaman.
    In locked open position on day not manned. Assesment of density
    (Mrs. McBrien) but see Mr. Goodman evidence as well as Twidale and -
    Simon Hughes.
   Simon Hughes.
   Difficult to see when Pen is full. Intended as secondary means of escape
   Removal of Barrier 144. see Bownes and Eastwood
   Testing of Barriers see Eastwood and Dr. Nicholson
   Means of escape 12 meter rule see contrast Eastwood and Seaman
   Means of escape Tunnel Gates external opposed to closure Marshall
                                                            Mole
                                                            Mackrell
                                                            Lock
                                                            Eastwood
   Not opposed M r . Seaman
   Internal Gates preferred Dr. Eastwood ? communicated
   Evacuation times      5 1/2 minutes through tunnel
   both routes even less     but not achieved

   Operational Order. Standard format used formanyyears
   updated, various amendments made between1988 and 1989 order
   Refers to safety in intent.
   No specific reference to overcrowding
   No specific reference to monitoring fans
   No specific reference to diversion of fans at tunnel
   Appears to have followed normal pattern foryears
   1989 order not significantly different would have been
   signed by Mole if still in charge
   formal approval from ACC

   Diversion of fans at tunnel
   appears to have been know to Lock
   does not appear to have been within practice of Mole
   ? breakdown of communication at some time                  _.—
   N0 - ^ ^ tf^e‘g ^ ^ l £ -^rT”TOTe‘
                                    ^or^anrca1C5!t™rtl3Bn7orT5uckenf ield
   Similarly Mr. Murray denied knowledge of practice
   Mr. Creaser 48 seemed to indicate that closure was an option
   if need arose and this seems to have been the view of most
   of the officers who discussed this

   Filling of pens. Sequential filling ie one at a time -
   Mole pens open up rather than pens being closed

    Find your own level filling. Appare^t^x successful in 1987 and 1988       J
    as far as commanders concerned. NotiT988 gates shut.
    Consider system. Even within pen find own level
                     Not objected to even in evidence by say Eastwood
                                                             Lock
   provided that there was monitoring                                         V/
   This not dissimilar to police evidence the issue is that all depended      v
   onrecognising a full bottle from a half full one (Lock) and whether
anyone had the responsibility and or was exercsing it.

   Evidence from police officers eg Bullas, Murray Goddard, Duckenfield
that if anything noticed would be reported and actioned Partnership between
fans and police and stewards.
Postponement of kick off     principles involved
                             external grounds fog etc     Mole Duckenfield Murray
                                                          Bichard
                             simple lateness
                             effect of postponment on internal situation
                             safety considerations
                             communication of decision

     Now consider the evidence of Dr. Nicholson

     1. No entering
     2. No in pen note relative sparcity of pen 2 at 5 per sq meter                 J
     3. Barrier testing and load

    Dr. Nichols in particular

     1.   age and sex distribution
     2.   time of entry
     3.   alcohol levels at different times of entry
     4.   representative of the respecitve crowd

Now turn to short account of events on the day.

1. Time of arrival in      Sheffield or   coaches and others                                ^
2. time of arrival at ground.      Lomas Creaser MarshallWaring Mounted officers        y
3. Alcohol consumption

     a. Numbers see Mr. McKay and Marshall
     b. quantity
     c. effect

4. Ticketless fans                                                                      ^
     Numbers
     filters
     Numbers entering

5     forcing of entry      see gate A particularly Cobb
                                                   Horsfield perimeter gate         /
                                                   Higgins
                          ^illam
                          .scholey
                           other officers

Perimeter gates            control
                           mounted officers
                           rushing
                           pushing Boardman Cully Stephanie Jones Murray
                                    Bartholowmew Lee etc
                                    Mounted officers
                                    Best Huckstepp and other officers

Turnstyle operators        Spion Kop entry
                            conditions outside

Gate Men                  Gate A     Cobb
                          Gate B     Ridge opened (500)   see also Pitt and Seddon
                          Gate C     Beadsley etc

Assessment of risk        Purdy     Marshall   Anderson other fans
Requests for assistance from outside    Marshall      Road
                                                      Mounted officer?
                                                      PC Buxton
                                                      PA. Annoucement       .   //
                                                      Gates open

Activities       Perimeter gates ? forcing thereof Proctor Scholey etc
                 Mounted officers control speech signalling
                 PC buxton appeals
                    broadcast match postponment
                    requested match postponment (too late players out)
                    PC Wilson match postponment •
                    ? Mr. Cully rumour match postponment effect
                    Mr. Jolly and his horse
                    assessement of pushing? ability to respond
                    Overwhelmed

Assessment of mounted officers by various people see schedule

Concourse area  Butler Smallman Washington           Ins. Crawford
Gatemen         Bain Beadsley Thorpe
Gate A area     Cobb Hurst Sgt Higgins
NB Compilation tape and gap^? in the wall

Tunnel see schedule as to conditions

Terrace   Pen 4      see plan and take witness

             Pen 3   see plan and select witnesses
                     tJ6011*1
             view from periphery  Motson, Curry, Wells Gillam Eason etc
                                  Wright, Hicks Devonside Flenley Steele
                     timing of barrier breaking

          Gate 4     Illingworth, Ellis Lycett Dickenson Hooson Sosno^ski
                      Swift Spearritt Leigh another one

          Gate 3      Smith Cooper Taylor Packer Case Case Singleton
                      Shefton Stephanie Jones, Mullins

Police officers pushing people back
Wright, etc
 1. Ticketless fans

     Numbers
     filters
     Numbers entering

 2    forcing of entry    see gate A particularly Cobb
                                                 Horsfield perimeter gate
                                                 Higgins
                         gillam
                         scholey
                         other officers

3. Comparision between turnstyle area and terraces

4. Perimeter gates.

Whatever may be said about the confined area within Perimeter gates you
have to assess the position outside these gates.

a. Closure of Leppings Lane. Mr. Marshall request. Vwery unusual indeed
on of the unprecedented events. Timing ? 1417 or later. Effectiveness of
closure. See Video. Intention to avoid accidents and to produce holding
area Insp. Sykes (49) and Marshall (109). Lots of questions to the
inadvisability of action but would RTA not have closed off the road anyway
diverted effort. Mr. Marshall when challenged said that closure did not
increase the flow rate it merely spread it. Other side of coin that if
road is blocked with vehicles then access to turnstyle area is restricted
and therefore crowding reduced. Although with hindsight this might just
possibly have some attraction at the time it is hardly an option which
would havecommended itself to a prudent person given the risk of accident.

The Perimeter gates from the photos and video look as if they are earlier
on. Much has been made that the in 1988 the outer two were apparently
shut. You might ask yourself the question whether there has been any
evidence that those gates were designed for that purpose and more
particularly whether it was the shutting of them in 1988 which made the
difference or the rate of arrival of the fans.

In any case there is ample evidence that the gates were shut or that
attempts to shut them were made. Mr. Gillam (35) describes it though you
may feel that his timing is out. He felt that they had to be shut because
of the numbers. He agreed that the gates were not shut until the crowd was
too dense to form queues. He describes a young officer and also a
tremendous influx of people. His timings I think are suspect but you
may feel that he gave a general overview of the situation.

We heard from several officers, eg L. Proctor (72). Tried toclose
middle gates to relieve pressure. Space created but no movement back into
it. Unable to form queues without army of police. Policing by consent Gate
sprang open, he and PC scholey refer to bolt, agreed that they were
overwhemed. Queus impossible if pressure from behind.. No reason for
people packing area outside the perimeter gates. Packed turnstyle area
visible. Some confusion with turnstyle entry.

PC. Scholey (73) Like rugby scrum at PG. People joining at back but no
pressure. Impression people fighting to get in. Abusive because frustrated
to get in. No response to mounted officers people
PC Taylor (74) left scene to deal with complaint re theft. On return went
to river don gates shut them easily. Passage of time people became irate
surged against gate closed but eventually not able to hold it and noticed
that Gate C open. See video. Felt that pressure was generated from further
back.

PC G. Wright (71) also claimed to be at river don gates, filtered some
people through, but force of crowd open them 2 - 3 times. He felt that
crowd was hostile even to some fans one who dropped ticket.

PC Best (76) Formed impression that people at back were pushing came
in surges. He left the scene as he arrested someone for his own safety
 whom he described as drunk.

PC. M. France (77) One of the train escort. Gave up searching as appeared
unnecessary. Actually contained at least one ticketless fan Mr. Lackey who
xpressed surprise that he had not been stopped. Am puzzled why if he
had not expected to get near ground he had made the journey on a football
special. Was part of cordon but people pushing past. No eye contact.

Mounted officers. Including Merseyside officers Nottingham officer s
andSYP officers. Initially officers sweeping. Assisted with quiries.
Crowd initially allowed to join onto the the people within turnstyle area.
S.H. Thomas (61) not used perimeter gates as filters before. When crowd
dense within turnstyle area attempts to prevent further entry. Merseyside
officerwithin turnstyle area OK. till approx. 2.15 then pressure increased
appleas ineffective. Tried to create gap succeeded. People did not
move back felt that PG were forced Crushing intensified. .

S. Fry (55) another Mersey side officer, appealed to people some
responded others could have done but did not. Gap created rear of crowd
not undr pressure. Was encouraging people to groooond at 14.28 when
position alreadygetting difficult. No reason why queus could not have
formed rely onoperation Pressure best relieved from back but attempting to
segment crowd.

PS. Smith Merseyside officer. No restriction on people coming down LL
but no pressure to move forward Cordons formed He felt that it was plain
that they were trying to bloxk road. People moving forward on own
volition.Many unwilling to listen to reason. Plenty of room in LL. No
reason why queues not possibl to fom. Described match at Tranmere late
entry about 4. pm. no problems. He deployed officers within T/S area.
Agreed that barrier provocked aggressiveness.

C.G. Watson (87) Notts officer. Tried o use horse as catalyst. Cordon.
People runnig around horse. Pepople at PG pushing. People had ability to
respond other than those crushed at t/s/ Felt that non aggressive crowd
could safely be let through PG. depends on mood. Compare t/s with terrace,
presence of police but ieffective because of desire to enter?

62. P. Kerry. Notts, crush people pushing unable to introduce horse,
people outside PG had opportunity not to push. Has expereinced similar
pushing at Nottingham when late. Control best from back but if too many
arrive overwhelmed.

60. Hand Davis Ok till about 2.30. then crush inside. Nothing like it
in previous experience. Due to No of people time of arrival and
behaviour. Anxious not to critizise complancency based on previous good
experience and frustration and not listening . Attempted several
strategies including cordon. Held but became unnecesary when crowd
entered. Prior to that people not in danger had gone under horses.
The police had become overwhelmed.
58 Elizabeth Wilson. Moving people about asking ticketless fans to leave.
On that see Mr. Tracey who confirms that this did happen. Noticed some
confusion re tickets. 14.30 /1440 atmosphere changed. Part of cordon.
Told people kick off delayed some effect but whe roar heard pushing
 and aggressiveness increased.

No 48 Mr. Creaser.

No 46 Insp Waring at rear of crowd Note no cordon in 1988 as far as he
could remember. Traffic stopped at PR at about 2.30. at 1450 very large
crowd from back but no immediate impression of problems. Heard message LR.
and tannoy??. people not reacting In his view crushing not recoverable
from rear.Agreed crowd seemed to change in moment. No specific contingency
plansre late arrivals except extend phase 1. Difficulty and Numbers
required to place cordon. No previous experience of this type of problem.

49 Sykes. LL closed after discussion dnager and holding area.
          Pushing from LL and vol of crowd.

39. S. Berry. Recollected remark that only one P0 on PG   and to rush and
push him. Came from front but push from the rear.

 . 43. Mr. T.K. Hilton remembered P0 letting people through in batches
2.40 plus.

44. Graham Richardson describes crowd as angry outside PG and saying
trouble if gate not opened.

45. Graham Hewstone 2.35-240. wedge shaped crowd outside PG. had been in
even bigger crowd at Wembley thereofe cautions. Heard announcement re
possible delayed kick off. No effect. Mounted officers not effective

90. Mark Dawson. Pushing throgh PG heard appeals but neither he nor others
responded. Once within T/S area could not have responded.

97. Iain D. Crawford. Seemed to remember steward filtering people through
at 2.30 T/S area not crowded. Did not approve of manner of riding of
mounted officers to agressive.

98. Brian J. Anderson describes pressur but no pushing. Father became
distressed and they took refuge by ducking under bar.
103.1 Severe conditions outside PG only one officer Mounted seen. Gates not
shutTks far as he can recall, got through eventually. He is one of
those who did not find the turnstyle area too bad but heard comments r e . ,
women and children and also entered through Gate B „            c)<
                     -rf^               - l l •?                             ^
105. M.T. Hollinghurst. One M. officer seen Merseyside, trying to form     ***
queues not succesful Everyone being pushed people distressed people
shouting dont push people are getting hurt. Made no difference.

106. L. F. Campbell people clearly pushing nobody took notice Only one
officer but should have had more back up. Also the view of Stephanie
Jones. But compare pictures of No of officers there and numbers actually
deployed per Mr. Marshall.

107. D. Richards. Initially not crowded outside PG 1425-1430. became more
so. Mounted officer broadway on trying to stop forward movement but
carried, distressed in turnstyle area, not crushed but pushed along.

178. Mr. Cully, describes pickpocketing activity and crush advantage for
this.

Others also describe scene including Mr. Bartholemew and Miss Lee as well
as Mr. Marshall strong pressure moving forward obliviousness to the
welfare of others aggressiveness unwillingness to listen to advice and
unprecedented in his experience.

Was the crush entirely involuntary. Consider evidence of E. Wilson
and also L.D. Lloyd who both said that crushed eased off when possibility
of delayed kick ff rumoured. Indicates an element of voluntariness but
also effectiveness if possibility of communication see marshall and
Hewstone re annoucement and failure of response.

Clear that people got distressed, see for example

a. 198 Mr. Atkins crushed outside PG to such extent as having
difficulty with breathing. PG controlled. Eventually entered area but just
as bad

195 P. Edwards panic stricken    frightened of being crushed.

186 Mr. Doyle brother lifting lad out. caution.

174. Gains    thought people would get hurt.

167. Nicola    Steward Frightened in T/S area peopletring to push back.

159. Mr.Ball    people against PG distressed.

 107^ Very distressed in t/s area

98.   Mr. Anderson distressed in t/s area

34. Stephanie Jones hurt when against gate ??

59. Mr. Rawlinson. Worried about friend and older man.

50. Insp. Purdy very worried about injury.      Limpchild   plan Mounted
officers at rear and gates open at front.

38. Mr. Gould. Overheard one lady express view that someone would die
outside, and he agreed with her assessment, though I think he was more
concerned about the people outside the PG.
 36. Kevin Carroll made an interesitn remark as to people requesting the
 gates to be opened as in every other home game though he could not
 remember for sure.

 34. Stephanie Jones recollection is that the fans were screaming for the
 gate to be opened because they could see something was going to happen
 outside if he did’nt.

 30. Richard Thompson. Assesment of the situatin was that if the gates had
 not been opened therewoul have been some structural collapse as he
 couldsee something swaying and there would have been a lot more deaths.
 27. Ross M. Wright describes a shouldee injury in the T/S area.

 Perimeter gates           control
                           mounted officers
                           rushing
                           pushing Boardman Cully Stephanie Jones Murray
                                    Bartholowmew Lee etc
                                    Mounted officers
                                    Best Huckstepp and other officers

Turnstyle operators        Spion Kop entry
                            conditions outside

Gate Men                   Gate A     Cobb
                           Gate B     Ridge opened (500) see also Pitt and
Seddon                              Gate C   Beadsley etc

Assessment of risk         Purdy    Marshall   Anderson other fans



Requests for assistance from outside      Marshall     Road
                                                       Mounted officer?
                                                       PC Buxton
                                                       PA. Annoucement
                                                       Gates open

Activities     Perimeter gates ? forcing thereof Proctor Scholey etc
               Mounted officers control speech signalling
               PC buxton appeals
                  broadcast match postponment
                  requested match postponment (too late players out)
                  PC Wilson match postponment
                  ? Mr. Cully rumour match postponment effect
                  Mr. Jolly and his horse
                  assessement of pushing? ability to respond
                  Overwhelmed

Assessment of mounted officers by various people see schedule

Concourse area  Butler Smallman Washington           Ins. Crawford
Gatemen         Bain Beadsley Thorpe
Gate A area     Cobb Hurst Sgt Higgins
NB Compilation tape and gape in the wall

Tunnel see schedule as to conditions

Terrace    Pen 4     see plan and take witness

           Pen 3     see plan and select witnesses
          view from periphery  Motson, Curry, Wells Gillam Eason etc
                               Wright, Hicks Devonside Flenley Steele
                  timing of barrier breaking

         Gate 4   Illingworth, Ellis Lycett Dickenson Hooson Sosnosski
                   Swift Spearritt Leigh another one

         Gate 3    Smith Cooper Taylor Packer Case Case Singleton
                   Shefton Stephanie Jones, Mullins

Police officers pushing people back
Wright, etc

                           Terracing.


Pen 4.

No 29 Louise Hinton. Gate C Near back heard people shout stop pushing
Players on pitch or ? even playing. People crawling over others trying
to get out. her impression police not realised postion initially.

No 30. Richard Thompson. Heard people screaming whilst near tunnel.
Escaped by going over heads (sufferred crushed rib. ) son rolled down
towards him. P0. shouting to people to go back ? took it to his son.

No 31 David Lowe, and Alison Bennett No 32. Spion KOP ticket.
Illustration of difficulty in establishing time. Alison said in
response tosome questions that her friend Julie left her at about
14.50 when she described conditions as normal. In response to Mr. King
she said the pen was as full she had ever experienced it at 2.30.
Further examination by Mrs. McBrien elicited that were normal upto
14.50 and then changed suddenly.
No 37. Robert A. Knowles    Gate C. back full not unusual, forward.
Players on pitch, satisfied with postion. Became tuight after kick off
moved boys out not himself distressed see statement. Terrance just
before kick of not abnormal. Bottom of page 4 and 5. satisfied till
kick off or so
No 39. Mr. Berry KOP ticket Gate C Play in progress on enty tight but
able to put up with it then surge.

41. Stephen Boardman   Gate C Players on field terrrace not too bad.
Able to hear appeals not to push able to tell fans in front in trouble
but fairly near front.

82. P.J Garrett, near front almost adjacent to gate 4. Early entry.
Some discomfort before players came out but nothing unusual comparable
with White Har Lane. Players out increase in pressure Heard whistle
did not see match saw officers walking by lost consciousness, did not
see gate open Rescued through back.

124. Mr. Spearritt Compare account with Mr. Knowles and Garrett.
Noticed Alan Hansom players having come out and remarked to son. then
vice like grip. Called to officer no apparent response, tried to lift
Adam lost consciousness

No 98 Brian Anderson and 99 Karl M. Mullee Halfway down terrace
against barrier, pressure build up from 1445 crush about 2.50 onward
Mr.Anderson distressed after players on field based on crowd noise.

No 100 Geoffrey Bridson. 1440 not apprehensive, at 1445 estimates
condition as equivalent to 1988. Tried to set watch at 1454 when
players came out unable to move arm but later able to do so. Still
prepared to watch match very tight but not worried till kickoff.
Though track officers would have been aware of crushing.

No 101 Andrew Michael Dodd, entered ast 1455. if recollectioncorrect.
terrace as previous experience.

104. Alfred W. Langley, see his statement re distress at 2.40 but
thenmodon seeing C344 and reference to people climib into stand.
Officer calling people animal bald headed not there till 1459
associated with people swearing presence of photographer query
comment at that time.

128 D. Perry. Like sardines at 1445. but not significantly bad till
players on field, crush normal except that it did not relax. He
describes P.O. makeing people go back into pen but then explained that
it was by signals which were obeyed. Describes one episode of P0
tapping persons hand at 310 315 but says not many people on pitch and
in anycase too far back to hear conversation or see what fan was
standing on.
141. Mr. McMahon Gate Players on field initially able to move to left,
became unbearable one or two minutes before kick off. Slightly more
room behind him.

160. S. Gray. Felt players on pitch because of noise. Felt surge.
Tried to resusitate John McBrien.

162. C. Jones players on pitch likelocal derby expected to be pushed
about Did not see gate open account of police lady and key. apparently
able to to discus this with friend. C367 timed 1459 friend already our
and he probably.

194. S.P. T. Sweeney. Difficulty with timing as no recollection of
events surge felt panicked climbed on barrier ?????

195. P. Edwards, entered about 1450. at back of pen. tight and
concerned because he knoew many more fans to come got worse as
kickoff approached, surge at kickof forward with no return . Able to
see condition in front worse could have got out via tunnel but
difficult, saw gate open and say sh.ut but did not notice P0.


                             Pen 3

34. Stephanie Jones, difficult to be sure when she went in but must
have been after 1454 as seen on time photo outside, describes
tterrace as not worryiiing releived to be out of conditions outside,
exit out of gate before match over and seen on compilation video,
just stepped out.
she together with several others were not too apprehensive even at
kick off eg.

36 K. Carroll positioned at kick off like Anfield on full kop. looked
for safer place in front of barrier.

64. D. Lackey Gate C ticketless. felt safe kick off no worse than on
other occassions. The push surge did not come back, shouting
recollects two opening of gate polce shouting push back, people coming
over the top from the back had health and strength to do it.
91. Anthony Greer, with Simon Hughes and Stuart Thompson deed. On
barrier spun round at kick off but even then not too bad settled to
watch match similar to previous experience, then became immobilised
like set in concrete, eased off advanced saw pile of bodies retreated
adviced to leave terrace by PC refused as did not want to miss
match.pulled into stand.

92. Simon Hughes, found condition probably less comfortable but also
wanted to be with friend. Able to go back. 3/4 full at 1440. sat on
wall Knocked off perch, by surge from tunnel, people shouting not to
push.
97. Iain Crawford. Gate C. told not to go down tunnel by supporter.
Made his own assessment, went down. Not initially frightened, says saw
supporter pushed back but bad on times.

142. A. Booth, early entry. Normal when players came out. Surge when
B.hit cross bar. Did not go back, friend Paul Clark seemed OK. just
before kick off. ditto 143 L Fitzpatrick.

144. Singleton, at gate got bad just about kick off.

145. Sephton   as normal match upt to players coming ot. just before
kick off distressed.

110. Mr. Hicks, distress spans time from 1435 to 1506. some caution
need. Identified man in grey at 1450 from police box position. ?
identified Mr Greenwood 1450 but see description which does not fit
and video evidence at players tunnel at 1459 and earlier if there to
see players out.
111. P.Hand. Hicks girls ? fainted before players out. did not want to
leave, after players on field massive surge, did not go back.

112. S. Fortune, confirms no problems at beach ball time, tightness
players out and even later than that. Hicks gils noted earlier had
been crying had moved to quieter area as he had.

113. J. Rex. 1445. hicks sister holding up the other, fainted or
distressed, crush sever just before players came out.

114. Dr. Flenlye Gate C. Pen 1 worried about stand collapsing . He
thought the terraces crowded, agreed that fans inpen 2 and indeed at
back should have seen condition of fans ashe cp. Mr. Goodman.

115. L. Tudor, started getting tigher 2.30. to 2.45 but considerably
worse when players on pitch, anticipated things to ease off when kick
off but did not occur.after players on field called to officer re boy.
Not concerned for himself, officer appeared not to hear. Next to Mr.
Baron.

118. Sary Oyitch. next to Marion Mccabe and Inger Shah, recollects
players being announced and discussing it . tignt crush from then,
thre surges after that last one did not go back, first one told to get
off fence by fans.

125. J. R. Watson. Recollects league matchwith diversion in January,
felt at 2.20 and 2.25 that crowd large and action might be taken to
control entry, things became tense when players came out. Had not
entered his head that he should leave the pen when he saw people being
lifted up at 1450 to 3p.m. ? timing and condition.
132. Gerrard Barron. Lost father. Lost consciousness. Unable to
remember any event but claimed uncomfortable at 1415. He in the end
agreed that the times stated by him were quess but as accurate as he
believed possible, seemed to have recollection of various comments and
remarks re opening the gates and peple dying but doubtful inview of
own condition.

133. Mr. Duckworth, better witness. Near to Mr. Barron,
recollects beach ball some surging not worried, saw two girls crying
and being taken out by police foloowing this two to three not allowed
out. it seemed to him that Police could not have realized what was
going on. Gate opened in period between player coming out and kick
off. Initial people exited under own steam. Opening gate created more
problems, but his route was forward.

138. R. Jolly. Players on pitch no discomfort, things then got
tighter, shouted at PO. could see he might not have heard, gate
opened twice.

147. I. Southgate. 2.30 -2.45 quite full 2.50 full lots of pushing as
expected. 2.55 onward too full, surge at possibly kick off carried
philip Hammond away.

148. J. Glover with brother. Out of Pen at 15.02 corrected time, out
at second opening, prior to getting out people calling out for help.
Officer appeared to be using radio.

149. R.B. King, with four friends, packed but pushed through as he
thought people not moving, surge, caried forward, decided to try and
get out forward, heard shouts to push back but said did not understand
them. Another example of getting the witness to say whatever one
wishes. To Mr. Oayne voluntary pushing forward. Tp Mr. Humphreys
involuntary movement.

150. H. J. Clarke, quite normal till players came out. Evidence that
people toldto get bak off fence at least two minutes after match over.

159. R. Ball, players on pitch very tight, solidified at kick off he
fieared for own life but felt that Kester would be OK. Felt officers
initially not respondong walking from L to R. queyr Packer taylor etc.
CHECK   ANDREW OUTSIDE BEFORE BEARDLEY KICK???

166. D.M. Horrocks. players on pitch not too bad like Anfield expected
to settle, had been breathless but been in that situation before and
not panicked.

167. Nicola Stewart. Players on pithc initially accepted position but
hoped it would improve, surge later on she thought that gate opened
and reshut when Beardsley hit cross bar. See photographs, including
those of Supt. Greenwood.

171. P.J Smith, entered 1430-35. thought pen fuller than he would
have expected. Contrast    157 A. Brown who at 2.25 expected more
people to be in the pen. Placed distress at 2.45 -2.50. saw beach ball
note timeon video which coincides more or less with this.

173. P. Duggan. Initially claimed pen very crowded frm 2.30 onward,
but note that at that time friend left pen to fetch some food and did
not return for about 15. minutes, also eventually agreed he was not
uncomfortable till kick off but pen filling up.
175. A Hollinrake. shoved way through substantial block at tunnel
exit, only doing what every football fans would do. Players on pitch
wil still in tunnel, then surge kick off just taken place.

179. N Abbott. Onto terrace just before kick off. arrived on barrier
that broke after kick off. Identified away from position on way down
at 15.02. Still prepared to watch match, but things became different
in about a minute. Interesting comment re people falling back saw
someone being helped and only succeeded in pulling jacket off. ? what
would this have looked like to a more distant observer?

180. R.J. Greaves, recolectsbeing in pen 3 when play in progress. Made
way across pen into Pen 2. claimed fans pulling people over but P.O.
not having any of that. Admitted in the end only one seen and then
that it was after he was outside and some PO.pushing someone into pen
gate. Note this for example of care in assessing evidence.

181. L.D. Lloyd. Note witness re t/s area and kick off delay.
On terrace as players on pitch came t standstill at kick off. Not life
threatening situation but uncomfortable then sudden surge did not
relax.

183. T.W. Lloyd, runnig into brick wall . forced forward from
pressure from behind, facing wrong way thought he wouldhave to move
asnot able to enjoy match. Man nearby said that gate wouldhave to be
opened.. By ths time people screaming and walkingon his head, from the
back. Indication of panic?

184. I.G Seddon. Entred via Gate B. Onto terrace. Not in discomfort.
Had not realized people in front crushed, saw and understood message
to mve back but could not see need for it. Not much room anyway.
Enjoyed being squashed. Friedns stayed to gether as group an
comfortable, compare Mr. Pitt 185. Not quite as sanquine as Seddon but
friends able to look at programme. Had seen someone exiting with child
child distressed but not the man who said murder inside. Neither he
nor anyoneelse turned round as far as he could see.

186. Mr. Doyle   caution with his evidence, see another example denied
gate open or seing poice officers except for sgt with stick, in Pen
2 at 1502 and 1504. on fence 1507 with gate open and Po. nearby .

190. R. Latham, seems that at kick off rather hectic but still able to
check with friends that they were ok. Noted that anyone screaming must
be OK it was the ones that could not who were in trouble.

 Interesting he recolects people being passed to railings and not
able to get them over and they dropped back. Notuncommon for peopple
to be passed forwardif they fainted.

191. A. Duncan. 0k tillplayers on pitch, two surges the second did not
relax.

193. B.L. Scarratt. entered affter match started. Move forward not
compfortable back to little wall. Helped people upt into stands, saw
officer in terrace within three to five minutes after taking up
position. Also claimed that say officer touchingpeople hand or pushing
them off fence 4/5 minutes aftr B. hit cross bar. ? distance.
196. I. Fearns. with Carl Lewis, big surge before players on pitch
but OK till 1445. claims Gate C open before surge momnetarily noone
got out and police closed it. ? P.C. Smith doc. evidence .This is the
witness who toldus that Paul Carlile did not like rowds but for some
reaon they nevertheless agreed to meet at the dense part.

197. T. Cooper. 14.20 surges see Rex and fortune too. moved to right
after about 15 minutes climbed into pen 2 for own safety. Frien who
had remaind in original position eventually joined him had some
difficulty in making way across. ? localised pressure effects ?
                               SU M M IN G        UP

                         SITUATION OUTSIDE THE GROUND

We heard fro m several licencees, inc luding Mr Buck (3), Mrs G o l d w o r t h y (4)
Mr Mo unt ai n (5), Mr O lle r e n s h a w (6) and Mr Salt (54).

Average c o n sum pt io n es ti mat ed at 4/5 pints, no cause for concern except
Mr Knight (small pub) and query p roblems at the "Owl" (mixed pub).
           l6 V )
We also heard from a group of local t r a d e s p e o p l e and passers by,
induding MrsGuj^stone (14) who pa ssed several pubs, spillage onto the
road at these, be ha vi our boisterous, she felt atmosphere (see Mrs
G u i l l an d-C um m i ng (11), compare F os te r - A s h (10) who estimated a high
number, 50%, c a r ry in g cans. He d e s c r i b e d c row d as boisterous, outgoing
and friendly.)' Olive M ayh ew (9), petrol pump attendant, c o n f us ed in
some respects but c l ear as to how m a n y bags she filled with em pt y cans.
Aware of anti-social behaviour, also used in teresting expre ss ion "the
alcohol gave th em courage"                                                              DAY 3,
                                                                                         P.30
We then heard f r o m another group, m a i n l y local residents, the most
graphic was A n gel a Hockenhull (15) w ho de scribes strong anti-social
behaviour in her garden by substantial numbers and who noted some
aggression, was told by one fan that it was "only lager". She also
noted peaking fr om 2.30 onward but her garden access was c o n t r o l l e d
by PO some time after that.
J T aylor (16), a Notts supporter, also took the view that b eha viour
was unacceptable, a ttr ibutable in his view to alcohol, t oge t h e r with
aggressive behaviour. He thought it was the worst behaviour he had
seen, but of course that is only his opinion.
E L Lee (17) noted wh at she took to be the effect of alcohol on people,
including some who w e r e staggering about.
Mr B a rt ho lom ew (24) was a very intere st in g witness. Saw fans on his
way home f r o m the bakery. He too des cr ibe s alcohol consumption, a n t i ­
social behaviour, chanting, singing and swearing. In contrast, Mr
M c G aul ey (40) in W a d s l e y Lane, w a t c h i n g the cr ow d with his baby for
some c on sid e r a b l e time between 1.30 and 2.30, saw no alcohol being
carried, no anti-social behaviour, p eople w a l k i n g only on the pavement,
and indeed de sc ri bes be haviour as being better than normal.
    SITUATION OUTSIDE THE GROUND (continued...)

    Sgt Lomas (26) close by, forme d c o m p l e t e l y d i f f er ent impression with
    regard to the c o ns um pti on of alcohol. In addition he noted that it
    was language which was giving c ause for conc er n and complaint, but
    he did note that when people wer e spoken to they res ponded po si ti vel y
    to his advice.
    Supt. Marshall (109) e x p r es sed the view that he was saddened to see so
    m a n y people drinking. Several of the m o u n t e d officers also des cr ib ed
    alcohol consumption but, on the whole, their ev idence was to the
    effect that th ey were not p a r t i c u l a r l y c o n c e r n e d by what they saw.
    Chief Inspector C r e as er (48) tho ug ht that w i t h i n the crowd people
    who had drunk w ere of the t hre e- pi nt variety. Ruth Cobb  (86)
    de sc r i b e d the people who she saw as be "happy drunk".
    Supt M c K a y (47) who was standing near the turnstiles, e sti mated that
    perhaps one fifth of the crowd had cons um ed alcohol.
    Supporters took a va ried     ,view, e.g. Stephen Jones (34), John Glover
    (148), Mr Spearitt (124), saw nobo dy c a r r yi ng cans, Mr Wright (27) and
    Mr Thom pso n (30) only noted minimal nu mber and d es cr i b e d the atmosphere
    as "jolly". Mark Dawson (90) thought about 20%, A Booth (142) perhaps
    10%, but Mr Gould (38) felt that perhaps it was 50/50. It is c lear
    fr om the ev idence of some of the supporters that mor e than 2/3 pints
    were c o n su me d by some, eg. Mr Dodd (101) who a dmitted to eight, and
    Mr (                    \ w h o ad mitted to five. One of the turnstile
    operators, Mr Rhodes (63) said that he saw mor e than ahandful of
    what he wo ul d desc ri be as "drunkenness".
    The wo rd "drunk" of c ou rs e is very emot ive and depends to a large extent
    upon the d ef ini ti on and e x p ect at io n of the witness.

    It seems to me that the evidence taken as a w h o l e indicates that there
    was a con si d e r a b l e amount of alcoholic re fr es h m e n t w hi ch had been taken
    and that there p r o ba bl y were a substantial n um ber in the 3/4 pint
    bracket, to ge the r with a sprinkling of people wh o had taken more. In
    addition, there we re also substantial numbers who had taken nothing at
    all, or less than wha t is stated above. Remember, it was a w a r m day
    and that people are used, rig ht ly or wrongly, to drink alcohol. Also
    r emember that alcohol can have an effect, w h e t h e r we like that fact
    or not.

^      ft-                                                                     A
SITUATION OUTSIDE THE GROUND (continued...)

A great deal of time was spent on ticketless fans and what part,
if any, th ey played in the d i s as te r which occurred.

I w o u l d first of all remind you that we heard fr om various people
                      CI v                                                | Is Uj                J
includinq Mr Wa ttsrwno at the Free man Arms spoke to a couple of ft                         '
yo un g people who clai me d th ey uvDiJ.m;ai'U litkm.'tess fcTTib saying
"they wo n't stop us, they haven't done yet".

J D Shel ley (20) of-ihe--MaldoGk^accompanied a group who did not see
the lack of a ticket as a problem,.w                      -e^'fgl) ov erh ea rd         DAY/^
a c o n ve rs ati on by three men re ga rdi ng the cr eation of a crush to              £9/6
force a gate to be opened.                            % C44.IL /


R W Cobb (79) gateman at Gate A gave a very graphic d es cr ip tio n of
the co nd it ion s out sid e his gate wiiese the ac4^-viti-e»-ef, what to
                                        r
him, w e r e t icketless fans. His view said that his gate was in
ppril hut, ynn -tA^tUd note that                          the lack of t i c ke t s
           w av in g of m o n e y at him.^/ Th er e is also some other                  DAY 5
evidence. PC Loma^S"slemed to have over he ar d c omments by ticketless                 103
people "come on, we can get in".

          ( 23)
Mr Murray, father of Paul Brian Murray, heard someone say as he                          DAY 6
entered Gate C "told y ou we w o u l d n ' t need a ticket" or words to                 22
that affect.

S K B oardman (41) ove rh ear d group of supporters near Gate C saying
"•£©|^rtime fee - get the gate open*, the^r w e ' r e going to push through"            DAY 10
It was t he re for e his opinion that they did not have t i c k e t s / ^ ^
d&to r<?\- n^-ct^uly
A                       i             ng~~~» drunkeit,~r ewdy-4-erb-i'               fi/}) 2.1
                                                                                        f* 31-
hhP p«i t i mnt i nn—nf t i r kpt l                 ry difficult   Mr
f-hruigfa-h pnnj       ^apenal                     Wilson (58) and    H Thomas
(61) referred            Sweeping ie m o v i n g people from one spot to another.
k_Ecne               o s t ima to d-100.
 SITUATION OUTSIDE THE GROUND (continued...)
                            Q. fll4-bOi%
 Tu rn s t i l e Ope ra tor / No 63        estimates 20 with out tickets      T A " *—
 "         T-     S/th LI}           66    ll        150 "       "                    ^
 "        ^A t . LA-yc.o^t           67    ll         0 q ii     ii           'T”/<£~

         S h zofZifrjo               68    ll        150/200 (30/50 off er ing money) t / t
                 h>                  69    ll         70     (20 offering money)        riT 6-


 It is di ffi cu lt to be a bso lu te ly sure of the number of ticketless
 fans and it m a y not be as large as thought p art ic u l a r l y in the light
 of the HSE es timations that indicate that numbers wer e not that
 far fro m stand capacity. £ fi? ■x'ft^ £L                        C

 A lot of time was spent arguing about di fferences between 1988 and
 1989 ^ c h e c k i n g ticketless fans. It is quite clear that numerous
 checks w e r e ma de on vehicles. In some cases wit ne ss es only
 r em em be red alcohol checks, in others undou bt ed ly tickets as well.
 See for e xamples 108, 112, 116, 131 efce** fzAet&d*.


 Cl oser to the           s°m^ com pl ai nts wer e mad e re tickets not being
 chec ke d eg Mr b et tey}^but as he was on a special train and as PC
 France (77) dealt with this ie no need to check.

 In         we had vari ou'S~'dLLuimt5-> Dr F l l n l e y (114) though there was
 a block n e a rtitUb Lane. 0 t h e r s / \ S T r ac ey (199)
 de sc ri bed checks at Penistone Road rpundabout. The only person
 who says he saw t icketless people befing turned back was Mr Berry (39
                                             J                                                  y I j g\
 and he was passing on a di ff er ent s/de of the road bec au se he was                               ^
                                           /                        /
 going to Pe nistone Road, no-one elyse                   happen. Ftn
                                          se saw it nappen.           r t h o rrtm o r G
                                                                   i-artno-
 Ruth Cobbs (86) says officers w onc going a s-e--c h i c € n e -checking
 people and advising the m although not spe ci fi cal ly for tickets
                              M-6- LCLAAp-y IOb                                     _
 and this is c onf irmed by S~Graj/ (1 6 0 ') and S Hamilton (131). ■!+- °IK> *j9'"
  (Lrrec-K        f?'LK&n /ft                           /ft.£/*V /*%***$>
 tfte -ob jective of such-tr e ncck/is simply-~to sto.l1 people at the
                 X 6-A&f U 6 ° /                                        ,
 ot+tei— ticket checks— no o n e ffliew what w air y c rniy uii anyway
 In addition we have heard re fer en ce s to the sweeping w he re M r _         X I^
 co nf irmed that he r e a l is ed/ th at police we re moving groups of
 ticket les s fans and advisi/ig t h e m to go away, /ZoM
 -eA                           f4 r &                      Tn
 h k u # /o i *                                                      ~                      “
Jh-hMbU-)     h*Jtck,                poo**"      -                                     &K
d ikn U ^ 6 'x ^ c itf <* d k -h s tc ji-.
w



                          c. 13                          Coroners Act 1988


                                  (b) inquire of and find the particulars for the time being required by
    1953 c.20.                         the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 (in this Act
                                       referred to as “ the 1953 Act”) to be registered concerning the
                                       death.
                            (4) In the case of an inquest held without a jury, the coroner shall, after
                          hearing the evidence—
                               (a) give his verdict and certify it by an inquisition; and
                               (b) inquire of and find the particulars for the time being required by
                                    the 1953 Act to be registered concerning the death.
                          ^ (5) An inquisition—
                               (a) shall be in writing under the hand of the coroner and, in the case
                                    of an inquest held with a jury, under the hands of the jurors who
                                    concur in the verdict;
                               (b) shall set out, so far as such particulars have been proved—
                                         (i) who the deceased was; and
                                         (ii) how, when and where the deceased came by his death;
                                       and
                               (c) shall be in such form as the Lord Chancellor may by rules made
                                    by statutory instrument from time to time prescribe.
                            (6) At a coroner’s inquest into the death of a person who came by his
                          death by murder, manslaughter or infanticide, the purpose of the
                          proceedings shall not include the finding of any person guilty of the
                          murder, manslaughter or infanticide; and accordingly a coroner’s
                          inquisition shall in no case charge a person with any of those offences^
                             (7) Where an inquest into a death is held, the coroner shall, within five
                          days after the finding of the inquest is given, send to the registrar of deaths
                          a certificate under his hand—
                                (a) giving information concerning the death;
                                (b) specifying the finding with respect to the particulars which under
                                     the 1953 Act are required to be registered concerning the death
                                     and with respect to the cause of death; and
                                (c) specifying the time and place at which the inquest was held.
                             (8) In the case of an inquest into the death of a person who is proved—
                               (a) to have been killed on a railway; or
                               (b) to have died in consequence of injuries received on a railway,
                          the coroner shall within seven days after holding the inquest, make a
                          return of the death, including the cause of death, to the Secretary of State
                          in such form as he may require; and in this subsection “ railway” has the
    1842 c.55.            same meaning as in the Railway Regulation Act 1842.


    Failure o f jury to       12.—(1) This section applies where, in the case of an inquest held with
    agree.                 a jury, the jury fails to agree on a verdict.
                            (2)     If the minority consists of not more than two, the coroner may
1                         accept the verdict of the majority, and the majority shall, in that case,
                          certify the verdict under section 11(3) above.
                 ttlDFA-                   ;/

_______                                                                 a                      1 U-IT > ^ '*^35^— «s£gp ___

     ^                    f               -------------------------------------------------------



              c»<             E            '               ___________________________ _______ ________



                                          £j<-^                      <>5         ^                           €     . . .




                                                                                                            <3l/
  A -£ Jp £           & / <&■_________                    ^   ^                                          --?<^<_S          < £c-~^L,^


               ./2< ^     ^         *c>L*J                        ________________________________________

   <^ P ) J    J^/y£?^cJ r                   &*>                  < Zdb2 <             &       tJ>




•                                         - ---- - - --                                                                      ---
                                               ^                                  /rt^cj& A* 7%e*f4                           _J~&_____
                           G>j/     CA       2^9 ^                     fc?       ^ 1           O &SJ \~dr2LJ<__ a?^&£j&«-a_______

              A ^ 2^C-^U&s??A-€Sy?.                      4 r -^     f ' <^G j>v*/                                                       Jh»

                _       f-i?                         **C.<UcQ                J                       __ ______________________

  t& k        & ^ .       S >/± v U j L      { J fC t/   ^                   SS>j z ^ A        £ &    _<i^ g a ^ ^ g ^afc-f-
                                                                                                                           <___
      ^ £ 24— ^ tJ > ^                ^        £*3<2£&Cs6h ._ ^ jL fA                           j(2 ^ ^ € 4 -*                   £_^T__
                               d j L & /L -3SO       *i>~»&0£sL4S



 VJ<      w /                                                                              ^                                 <£ S £ \
                                  ,                    ^                                        ^                     .

          ^SS?^                       jZ & ^ic? jp                            J% C^£^£>              #>
                2 ^^        £ 2& £c~ JSij fe -               ^f^U L C *?                   i^<

                                                           L*o £ c                                  J&



                j£ ^i t f                   cX’ 2^>^y                   <^&0*‘/£ /r)                C^*> k
                                                                            /b ?         <s£z&* ^         c&
        d i ^       C^*> J             < z^Z^V ?cs/'                          >*5?'*^9* ^ ^                                              <i

          J^-^o1
               ^                           <&^x)o^>c<p o<_                         ./^^c^Cr-T                          s £m^7 s<j2l^2s    d^kjz^a*?
                                                   <&7

                                                                                  & *.. ^ - s^tx? s * * t£ c ~ ^ . -afe-
                                                                        ^              j ‘-— ^ f     -      y & ^ .       .. ci<^_
                                                                                                                                              J^LeQr

  C~)<Z>               ^& iX ?                                                         <jy%£*Cdj^tr-Q      oC     <£--^&<Ze?3r       „         ea*,   -
c *           C A                      *   M       ,           ^              *zlt/ v e #                                                     ........

                                                           /&S/'^--"7^-~y^‘            L ^e^f    .... ■'-=•/.                                     ....




      '^ M f'                              ^               ^                 „     ^        /&; o         <^»          Cg^o*? <&,*+-? <3^»

  W       .     & > ,cJZsC&h                               £*>              rC/    <^-<-                    <&?<pj& c)&> <a^              «3^-^2*-&^-3

                * ^ fe> T -4    _..^9L _____<£s>

                b ~y           SrT     <?£?& J** ^                      dk* J
                    j/L        » > ju j2 t-n           'j/>        1^             ! IIP



                                                       ^ 2^      J^X                                            O 7?

                                                                             ..i*£.        J& ju *    * ^         ^        £     < ^en ^
                                      -ZZZVi       ^                              -dsfuD^T
    L       c> yLL-ir '                    oj                   £   >



M       —   5   _   .«-»   g>*7   X J 8>        /U C-»-w   CA

                                                                    iisC^ ^JC~d~^rS+ c/



        /■
                  r


DRAFT.



DRAFT PROVISIONAL OUTLINE OF LEGAL DIRECTION TO J U R Y ^



I am now going to turn to giving you a number of directions

on issues of law.     As you will see in a moment,     a majority

of the time will be occupied with aspects relating to a

possible verdict of Unlawfully Killed.        You are not to

construe this as meaning that I am directing you either

towards or away from that particular verdict,         it is simply

that the legal concepts and aspects which have to be

considered are a.     numerous,   b.   complex   c.   important and

d.   differ in certain respects    from those applicable to

some of the other verdicts which m a y be open to you.

However,   before I get down to that,    I wish to draw your

attention to the provision of the Coroners Act 1988 Section

II (5)    (b).




Furthermore,     see Section 6 of that Act.




As an aside I should perhaps mention that this amendment

was introduced in 1977, prior to that it had been possible

 for coroners'    juries to name people who they thought had

 been guilty of murder, manslaughter or infanticide.




 BAEABL
in addition to the Act of Parliament,                        there are also Rules

which apply to coroners and the current rules are the 1984

coroners rules.




I therefore now draw your attention to Rule 36.                         This rule

read as follows




The effect of this rule is that neither you nor I are

allowed to put on to the inquisition what used to be known

as   '   r i d e r s ' i.e.,   advice or c o m m e n t s .




I am also required to draw to your attention Rule 42.



It is essential that the provisions of this rule together

w ith the provisions of Rule 36 (b) are strictly adhered to

by you and indeed by me.



 SELF INCRIMINATION.



 I also wish to draw your attention to Rule 22.                         This reads

           1.   "No witness at an inquest should be obliged to

                 answer any question tending to incriminate

                 himself.




 BAEABL
       2.   Where it appears to the coroner that the witness

            has   been asked such a question,   the coroner shall

            inform the witness that he may refuse to answer".

This is an exceedingly important rule and is fundemental to

the present system of Justice in the United Kingdom.




You m ay have noticed that some of the witnesses were told

of the rule and of the privilege to which they were

entitled and some exercised their rights.        Put another way,

a witness has a right of silence.



RIGHTS OF SILENCE.



It would be grossly unfair and quite contrary to the

intention of the rule and indeed to justice if you were to

construe a refusal to answer a question under the privilege

as an admission or an indication of guilt.       To construe the

privilege in such a w ay would not only run contra to the

whole principle of the rule but would in effect place the

person who exercised the privilege in a far worse position

than        he had in fact answered the question.



The position is simply this:        That you m a y not construe

silence as constituting any part of the evidence on which

your deliberations are based.       You have to be satisfied

 from the evidence which you have heard and not from




 BAEABL
                                  -       4




evidence which you have not heard nor m ay you draw any

inferences    from the exercise of the privilege.            Under no

circumstances must the privilege be turned into a noose.



VERDICTS.



I now remind you of the possible verdicts which you might

be able to consider in respect of these inquests:-



     1.     U n l a w f u l l y killed.



     2.     Accidental Death or Misadventure             (I will tell you

            now that in law, there is no difference between

            these two terms.              We will deal with this in a

            little more detail later o n ) .



 ?   3.     A special verdict which again I will deal with a

             little later on.



      4.     What is known as an Open verdict.



 STANDARD OF PROOF.



 In considering the evidence, you obviously will have to be

 satisfied that the necessary standard of proof has been

 achieved in order to enable you to reach one or other of

 the verdicts which I have mentioned.                Different standards




 BAEABL
of proof are required for different verdicts.      If I may

summarise first of all,   in respect of the verdict of

Unlawfully killed you have to be satisfied to the standard

which can be described as the criminal standard of proof.

In respect of Accidental death or Misadventure     (or a

special verdict)   the standard would be that of the balance

of probability.    In the case of an Open Verdict there is in

a sense no standard for the reasons which you will see

later on.



CRIMINAL STANDARD.



Let us then deal in a little more detail with the standard

of proof required for Unlawfully Killed.     Before you are

able to bring in a verdict of Unlawfully killed, you have

to be satisfied beyond reasonable d o u b t ( or to put it in

slightly more m odern language, you have to be satisfied so

that you are sure)   that the evidence which you have heard

and which you are considering satisfies you that both the

act and necessary mental state of the criminal offence

which you are considering has been made out.



In respect of the other verdicts except of course an Open

verdict the standard of proof is the lower one normally

described as the balance of probability.      It will be

obvious to you therefore that a v ery much higher standard

of proof is required before you can bring in a verdict of




BAEABL
ORDER OF CONSIDERATION.



As a direct consequence of this the order in which you

consider the verdicts becomes important.      In considering

the verdicts,   you have to apply your min d to the verdict of

Unlawfully killed first of all.     You have to consider the

verdict in respect of each of the deceased.       You have to

apply the facts within the context of the law as

> 0 explained to you and you must apply it in respect of

each of the parties whose conduct you are considering based

as I have already said upon the evidence which you have

heard.



UNLAWFULLY KILLED - INTRODUCTION.

What then are the legal parameters or requirements that

have to be met in the context of these inquests           ^jou,

are able to consider a verdict of Unlawfully killed.



I do not propose to take you through the whole law of

mu rder or manslaughter but for the purposes of these

 inquests the criminal equivalent of the verdict of
                        Dr^~ 9b
Unlawfully killed is wteet is a-ometim^c fcnown       involuntary

 Manslaughter^and by definition excludes what we know to be

 m u rder or any other aspects of deliberate killing.     The

 legal requirements   for this type of mans la ugh te r have been




 BAEABL
                               -   7   -




considered in various cases and in particular a case known

as R -v - West London Coroner Ex parte Gray.            In that case

which dealt w ith an alleged unlawful killing by a police

officer by neglect,      Lord Justice Watkins set out the

matters which a jury have to be satisfied on beyond

reasonable d o u b t .




Before I go through the points wfefcuh Luid JuaLiLiti WctLkins

hse— yiiumyicfted, I should add that although in that

particular case the issue related to neglect on the part of

the police,     the fundamental principles of the direction

would apply in respect of anybody w h o m you might be

considering as falling withi n the purview of this verdict.



You have to be satisfied/of the following points in the

first instance



      1.    That the police ea? the person whose conduct you

            are considering had a duty to have regard to the

           ^ h e a l t h and welfar^jof the deceased.



            That in the circumstances,      there was a failure to

            do what should have been done for the<fhealth and

            welfarertrof the deceased.



            That that failure amounted to a substantial cause




BAEABL
UNLAWFULLY KILLED                 - INTRODUCTION.




                of death.



        4.      That the failure amounted to recklessness.




        5   .   Tpc-H-g for rr 1 1 r■ivn-'— ° irs— bet dirt" by Lord JusLi.cc




       L M           r lu * * .
        f p gfc— Ho t x?cc]clsssnsss— was— w h Q thsr— th©— p©xson

                                           UiRy,    w a B .-   ^        ^     <k)                         at


        1.-     I n d i f f n r r r n 4-      ar>        -ir m g-       sarinus     risk     tn   1-J^e


                hnnlth nnrl nr^lf-^^ nf "thri rinnoaRflfl -

                Recognising that -^fetee risk to be present,

                deliberately chose to run that risk by doing

                nothing about it.                                   ,           S J 'J   „
Q      4s±fe          sufailure to appreciate that there was such a
                     (J36.6/           «^TL
                risk was not by itself/sufficient to amount to

                recklessness.

                                            retugfli
                                                             , ,_
^     n i l . Y^n r-an only; a verdict of Unlawfully killed if
               —    --               dA^y< tyt.p»0-<=&*7£t
              you can attribute «=»—j-in 1nwfa l cortduct to a

                 single individual whose conduct is being called

                 in question. o t+ > r*                                     CP^ AyK>     &C<L'00»7-£r

                k ^ rr *1 SO                           6^»




    BAEABL
                                          -   9   -




            ±±±£3*. That on no                          such a person be named

                      or



           Before looking at thesfi-^oTtTts of Lord Justice Watkins in

i r        more det       ri   wish to mention the following:



           CAUSATION.



           The next point that I think I have to mention            is the

           issue   'Causation'.      You have to be satisfied that the act

           or ommisXion complained of has actually caused the injury

           or the death in this particular case.            Not every causative

           act would give rise to liability.            For example it could be

           argued that n o —body would have died if the game of football

           were not played in the United Kingdom o r , bringing it

           slightly nearer home,       if there was no F.A. Cup competition.

           All of these in one sense are causes,           but with none of

           them I think would we have any difficulty in excluding them

           as causing these deaths because they are obviously too

           remote.    In other words, you have to be satisfied that

           the act or ommis^ion which you looking at is U

      ^<SS) sufficiently close aad sufficiently related to the event as

           to be logically classifiable as causative of death,

      (V              J                       oj. ~&L         ,




           BAEABL
                                                       -      10     -




             (Xn^~
    RISK £&, RECKLESSNESS.                                 yrm       11 —
    q ..         . o 4 r^ ^ > K                        &
                                                       J r .^                                '~*=r &£•
    Recklessness is .a p»a?t -                                                  •manelaughter

    unlawful killing,, which we are considering and

    ajj^ a d y          illustrated thio -
                                         b y reference to what L ord— Juoti&e

                       t4e k ^ I
    Wat.k jug ha a— s-ai-                     think it might be helpful if I .also, ^
?
                                                                   nrpr^t~
              yrm-Jar qno-t-oi frPffl              ™hP+~    j <
                                                              "•                 frfam   l o .-a.di rig
                           ^                                                             ^   OAsJ-d**
    •i p H q o m o n t   on    t-h i «   t-n p i             44-..r^omag     f i ^ im n- P a ftf t_ lfn < ^ n
                                                                                                           O&>\nl   -t<5j
    - v - Lawrence.                      TLt- is a r ^ p r "f~h<a details of w h ich I am

    not c onrprm‘p'1 T-n+1h but it m ay help we to understand what is
                 ip fyt-cklA#**r>                                                   ,,
    meant/if I give you a couple of quotes./'The first one is
             h                               fh                                 V
    from Lord Hailsham -who says when speaking about the word.*
                    V
    reckless,             r®cklQooly or reck le& sm o D D r he=asys                            "Unlike most

    E n g l i s h words it has been in the Jgnglish language as a word

    in general use at least since the eight century A.D.

    almost always with the same meaning applied to                                                   personal

    conduct,             as state of mind,                  stopping short of deliberate

    intention and going beyond mere i n a d v e r t e n c e ". y^Lord
                                       ——                r '/
    Diplock sayg in rnngfrning ,1-ho word rnnlclfiRS— in eh

    par4=-i^irl nr A r t of Pari i              that w ord had "not
         (sUnJ o*-
      q u i r o d ' a special mean in g as a term of legal art but more




    BAEABL
                                      -      11       -




its popular or dictionary meaning of careless regardless or

heedless of possible harmful consequences of ones act".                                                            He

goes on to say^'one does not speak of a person acting

recklessly even though he has given no thought at all to

the consequences of his act unless the act is one that

presents a real risk of harmful consequences which anyone

acting with reasonable prudence would recognise and give

heed to".           Lord Diplock gopf; ori| "recklessness on the part

of the dc^of an act does presuppose that there is something

in the circumstances that would have drawn the attention of

an ordinary                           individual to the po ssibility that his

act was capable of causing the kind of serious,                                                  harmful

consequence#          JLha t     the      j ; c - c t i o n _ w h -i-e h    cre ates- the        crfrfen.ce w a s       1

intended to prevent and that the risk of those harmful

consequences occurring was not so slight that an ordinary

prudent individual would feel justified in treating them as

negligible.           It is only when this is so that the doer of

the act is acting recklessly if before doing the act he

either fails to give any thought to the possibility of

there being any such risk or having recognised that there

was     such    a   risk    he    nevertheless                    goes       on    to    do   i 1-. J ^ f \t   1117"

” i°w          ^ F r <MT * < 'ltr'. i
                                    'netrnr'tjrin                          •t'hc* t^ry        t rhn
h          (jn Ji * 0 *                                                       6z
nieaja-t. by rirising rnnkl a ss4-y would bo . that Irfroy miiHt he

sat is fired of two things .                        First t h a t ^ h e do f o n do n t— wa &- in
                           S') £$*'
fact driving the vehicle in p3z€h a manner as to create an

obvious and serious risk'of causing physical injury to some

person whom^ghl: happen to be using the road,                                                 or doing




BAEABL
                       -   12




substantial damage to property and second,        t h a t r in driving

in the manner the defendent did so without having given any

thought to the possibility of there being ^ n y       such risk, or

having recognised that there was some ri^k involved,           had

none-the-less gone on to take it.       It I s   for the jury to

decide whether the risk created by t n e manner in w hic h the

vehicle was bring driven was both /bvious and serious,            and

in deciding this they may apply /he standard of the

ordinary prudent motorist as represented by themselves.              If

satisfied that an obvious and' serious risk was created by

the manner of the defendenty* s driving,     the jury are

entitled to infer that he/was in one or other of the states

of mind required to constitute the offence and will

probably do so but regard must be given to any explanation

he gives as to his Sycate of min d which ma y displace the

intes»fence         If y o u were to look only at what Lord

Diplock says as tme instruction to the jury namely that a

person is reck^jss if he acts so as to create an obvious

and serious ojt risk of causing physical injury and 2.             that

in so actinc/, he did so without giving thought to the

possibility of there being any such risk or having

recognisdd that there was some risk,       had nevertheless gone

on to take it, you might think that the assumption of any

risk ifiust constitute recklessness but this is I think

unlikely as an example will perhaps illustrate and as

indeed some of the quotations which I have already given

    co n f i r m.   Every operation performed by a surgeon




BAEABL
                           -     13




carries with it the inevitable risk of injury .±4w*juyh the

 incision but— in addition tn that it c a r r ion-a risk of &
                                          d(/s\
adverse consequences                  1 h|
                                         yqji death.          risk \ghi r:b. in many

cases is both obvious and serious and whis-h can occur

 however competent the operation is in fact carried out.

 The assessment of whether or not a patient should proceed

 to operation is made both by the surgeon and by the patient

 by assessing this benefit equation and trading off the

 advantages and disadvantages of operating or not operating -

 It would however be somewhat surprising if say having

 considered a risky operation and decided to proceed,                             the

 surgeon having performed it e n t ireOy competently were to be

 prosecuted for manslaughter because in the events the

 patient had died.
               7                                  / s     .
I i-f- you now— burn to tho piinciplcrs whij^h i hav®—

 already enumerated to you froip^Eord Justice

 Watkins, you will see Jsrttat the core of his

 definition is io^fact the definition of

 recklessness.          Hu ubtjfa slightly Jj-JCfsront wotds

 hyit- 1       -    ja 1— senPLR— is the same,           afljasAy that        ^

 there has to be an obvious and serious risk of

    injury and that if that has been established, <onc“^' 0/'
                                                            1

 i m s also gol to b e satiofled beye-nd leasundble'

 jiott^fc^that the person whose conduct is called in

    question e i t h e ^ w a s    indifferent to such risk or ( Q

    recognising the risk,             had decided to go on and

,      / y u                                &       tu                   -/             ^


    BAEABL             ±                           J k p s    CS>A<cA,    o<
■®&?Ffe~""f'here has to be a duty of care.                     That in

 man y instances is not too difficult to- de ternrine’.

 As a general rule if somebody undertakes to

 perform a task e.g.,            stage a football match or

 organise it or supervise it, they can be

 assumed to have a duty of care towards the people

with whom they come in contact.                    Slightly

 more difficult,         but I think^relatively

 straightforward is the issue of whether or not

 fans who attend also have a duty of care to each

other^aesl I can see no reason w hy if road users

have a duty of care to others upon the road,

pedestrians and fans attending do not also have a

similar obligation towards each other.



Breach of duty,          i.e., Lord Watkins puts iL as »

 failure to do what should have been done.                            This

may require more thought, " h m                jrm

©orraird er the evident           db it does -nete- follow tha-fe,
Q                                                           itz&o&o so l,
\S im p ly b e c a u s e s o m e t h i n g g o e s wrong t -ha-b auiuerbudy—-

o l a e —hai> btio n rreg liy m iL a s in d fe e d 'h a s r e c e n t t p

  heeH—s ^ i d i n a caSB-.        J - t h i n l f ^Ehere

a r e two m a jo r a s p e c t s w h ic h nrrrl I r- )
1.   By— takirrg— the person W hum you aro considering,

     ^c; n Ttiiniffi, ^ o u               have to be satisfied that in

     the case of a professional who is required to

     ex^ercise special skill,                              knowledge or

     experience the standard of care which he is

     expected to achieve is that of an ordinary

      skilled member of that profession, and which
      /n iii ii'tj
     •fefeart person would have exercised or professed

     to have had in respect of that special skill.

     We are not talking about some paragon of

     virtue nor of somebody who is particularly

           [, it is an ordinary average member of that
     ffx&Jvntf' </>cfof*
            . t/ IIn
     e-laoc .      n irespect of people who do not

     profess to have special skills you apply the

     standard of an ordinary prudent person as

     exemplified by y o u r s e l v e s .//If wh e n you apply
               _ dc^^°         ,
     this test you^come to the conclusion that

     there has been no breach of duty,                                      In respect
                                                                                 q     c & L .'y          L       Co
     of               person/ tb ea --ve^a w-jr-11 no do.abt a-l-&o ■>                                            .
                        ^                Hjl        poon, t~ on 'i&o/Ted
     feel        t h at it in imp^i i i M ** '1        1     — rn- '

     in— SQcpoct of him arny posaibility of

     r ocklebbHUfeb.                   The second aspect is

      what I fclaSe describe^, as a           c/
       <n                             z j- <x                / ^ A e€^                                            a -n
      a s crisis situation.               su^ri- a Sltlidl'i.un
                         61k. dfe^KUL o/ CL&vc             dMU tiu# C&l
     tw,hPirP'-ra porson ip— fnrtrrfii with n rj-Hr-Tnmn thrn
      H                                           (Jr\ 6 h .
     p r - r v ^ i r^ rl   Pi   r p a s n n a h l e - d e c ^ST U ri   33   tO   a   C Q U r SO       >
     6&-C&7Cjp*7 6r>                                         ML*"1/1 Q.
     o f action is taken,                        tiwrt th&_£aa-t that, in the—                                -
     [ s jiz J l    /vo/-                 *lo U h k           S 2J2-&J? <=>/                       /p z^ y ? < ^ 0 -


              4s>
                j^sT)— zsy-fcs-—         <3»- r?r>
                         -         16   -




         events it tur^p <-»"+•                            yf^ n g

         has been taken does not nep^ssarily mea n that

         that person was negligent i.e., that there was

         a failure or breacty<5f duty of care.                           In

         particular you w y l l             appreciate that as far as

         Hillsborough L d concerned,                 the primary crisis

         situation m(s the appeal to open the gates

         because oft. the perceived risk of injury by

         the E?i*op1e rwfe-s-ide .1          if you come to the

         conclusion «tfeatf the re was a^Gxisis, situation
                                    A                            A _____________
         whether that in fact was-the c a s e , you ca«—
                ht'3*~                                                                          \     j
         then     decide whether the response to that                                 -la*)*-**<f-i
                             hf t l r            / ..o Ak ±4         j        1S>^    t
         situation was /reasonable/aud 'TriTcjtrhte^lthfe                            Ac-fc«*.

         fact that there was a failure or appear^

         to be a failure to undertake variant other

         steps which in the events mj^effvt have

         alleviated the condit>c5n in a different way

         or avoided sub^etjuent deaths are excuseable

         in the ljxjfvt of the circumstances and the

             Sa?-IdULois whi ch prevailed at that f.'lme.'

         You may of course come to the conclusion that

         there was no                       situation at all or

         alternatively that the situation e u tsi de-

         Leppings— logins had been caused or precipitated
           0~       <?/«
         byithe person whose conduct you are
                             /»t^QL /Lz>
         considering.     You^have gnt t*~f -frayn clearly

         fixed in your mind that breach of duty




BAEABL
                                                        -     17   -




                                            has to be proved                 your g-atiof actdee-n by

                                            the e v i d e n c e •



                                            The third p o i n t -of Lord Juctico Watki-nc is                            ,-
                                                   -*&. Au.{*u
                                            that rlnnfn gp rrni'H*—haw s occurred -                 >You h iW 'e              £££-&*&&

                                            to be satisfied that ^a^Jie^gujt^itr^CTie

                                             failure         was ^-err^iftfantial cause of the

                                                            This is an important point because

                                            we have in the course of this inquest been

                                             looking at the activities of all kinds of
     cbd& iQ                _       _   _


                                            p e o p l e /                ~                                         ' l* » * L U a .
^JU'sTU0l
                                            J1n /j i/il]1/' 1( - '">' II.' 7 '' r I* I
& -y i !/v\ &-                              Somo quite— small cotjs away                 from the— ground but^

                                            whn nrunrtlif 1nfin mny~~iTi y ^ * -                im-ti inn hnvn,
/<tsCr<-                                    m adp mi staVPs            for ins.tan.cfy yon may-.fe.£l

                                            £       h          ^                  ^ ° nr>^ ^            64*1 ^ 0 ^
               j^o I- <b>^A                  it might have been better if officers /near
    is —   r       1/4^ •       i            Penistone Road roundabout in addition to

                                             checking for alcohol had also ask^a fans to

                                             produce their tickets and advi^! id those that
                                                     ksee-
                                             did^*-t not to proceed.               Whether that would

                                             have made any difference ot not is another

                                             question but whether it iwould or wouldn't

                                             the failure by some officer at Penistone
                                                                             /   ej &ts*-ctjL c4-
                                             Road to do this canj?(!ot/constitute a

                                             substantial causes of death,                 so even if you

                                            were to take t h f f view that Jtfea-t officer whoever

                                             it- might ho/nad hflan in breach--ef his fintv,


                 BAEABL
                                                   -       18        -


                         ■iu        ^
                                                                                                           ^        <c^ -

                         <*iJ ( ca~i                                                        ^
                          yon con 1-^4— 1 1 0 1 &.^ cfs'mcxLL^X of 1 sw considezr rroti

                          as in any way'Deing responsible for the

                          t r agoHy ^ h i ch sjjJ3 -se€ftretrtr±~y occurred .



                          If the person whose conduct you

                          considering does not in your vie w qtm.1,t-Cy

                          <^,0   to. r.p n nk undujj Lhfess'e U n e c                      heada, y o m

                          do not have to proceed to              consider the
                                                            x:o cunsiuei     un« jissue
                                                                                   -o o ^                                  .■
                                                 '          *«V
                                                              H/ ^ > -  A4k <&r*4T
                                                                            c6trt<r
                          of r ec kl ess ne ss. / ' Cm_J^hc
                                                    O n .t h p -othor
                                                                otho r hand if— y o u . ^                                   ^       n
                                                             f /J J -                 tA ~J J * * j r j ^ z ^ S^ & ik Z
                 .       do
                          do dsc-Ldo
                              dac-Lda that
                                       LhaL tu^MdAras-rn
                                             U ilj-U'Tm " in iucQl
                                                              iac'b negl-rgonao
                                                                    neglig ence                                                 ,       7% ^
                             — 7—       ». _           f    . f          -r/ /I ^ \ ^           . /it! / 7 7   <L,*nu


/Hv, ^   «       <)V»A                              <7>          r
             /           o£__eiren a— high— dogreo^of^-ftegligoncG-j that

                          jjs— ■
                               ftet- sufficient for you to bring in a

                          verdict of unlawfully killed agaJLubl a pcirmn -                                                                 .
                                                                                                      '&            +>t* sr ^ y
                          wh»c° ^imiimi                    yi m     rtm (Juiisid^aiia. ^ ¥©u -ha^ e                         /*>*> *
                                                                                                                           Jfou <u>-*yAJ>
                          to go on to the heart of the matter wh ich is                                                   (J
                                         ^yco              uuzJ<&y?/4#r &o
                          j-ho      Hof^nitinn              <->f    rorM nrnnnff-                 Ik e -p o in t'


                          a h p n t — t-h-i-s— d e f i n i t i o n           ii
                                                                              s— t h a t   you      have       to


                           be    satisfied             on       three^things               basically:-




                           1.    That          there       is       an    obvious       and      serious

                                 risk of injury.                          T h 6 ? definition includes
                                          1^0 0*1$              ^                     «   .   1   ,
                                 the wo id Lierrlt obvious and serious and you

                                    have to be satisfied on both.                                    In

                                    considering              this,         you    have      to     put     yourself


                                    into the position of the people wit h their

                                    state of knowledge on the 15th of April
                                               (j~ Qs&dU^du*}                  Jc<j
                                    198P^pri'T ta- |lllJ ^r-on-t-.K or the aisaster,                                        >



         BAEABL
                                                                -        19




                                                and       you       have          to    ask       yourself          the    question


                                                whether             on       that       day       there       was     an   obvious


                                                and serious risk of injury.^In a recent

                                                case in the Crown Court arising out of

                                                the Zebruggejfr disaster^ Mr.                                   Justice Turner

                                                in one place said                                "obviously we are

                                                talking about a risk and no-body denies

                                                there was a risk.                                 It is the application

                                                of the word                       'obvious' that is troubling

                                                me and has been troubling me for a long

                                                time.               Obvious if it operates that

                                                it    will           be       a   serious             risk.       I    quite      follow


                                                but obvious that*1will occur is the

                                                problem".                    If   you           think   about         it   that    is

                                                ■;n m a ny rQgpQr*fg precisely the problem
                                                                         (                        aoeJL
                                                which -efte is faced^in this instance.

                                                I-ft—Llte~C0ui^6e o f                       ■iS e- jLuliny          M~     J u stic e

                                                Turner gwotes the various comments on the
                                                                                                                                        & Oen^>
                                                use of the word                             'obvious2$5,' and he w ot
                                                                                                                 quotes
                      e^\)C^>ud
                                                ■
                                                \r^T~^r>nR flounco! who d'tJo^riL’c LhSlx
 fl^jbvC kr*!*'C&*Q te&\.
                                                n n r i o r s t a n riinn              of       the   word     'obvious'          as
                                                                                                             V^
 y©u          /nx^j                             m oaning perfectly evident,                                     staring origin

 6»   a   U   ^ h                       ^        the face,                   immediately apparent,                          fie         '

                                                 distinguishes the words                                  'obvious-4* and

                                                 ^serious'                   from being^synonymtes of

                                                ^ reasonably foreseeable .^HSvsn if you arc
                & t)K
                                                 satisfied that there -is. an obvious and




oL°                                         ^         ^                                     0                         ^
                    BAEABL        /->
           -    20




serious risk you are not yet home and

dry because you have to ask the next
                        . t>«*                  <^>ncL<k ^    ^
 question^ n a m e l y ,       the '4e-fyildynL
               ■ i          ^ 4-
recoqnise the risk aaad decide to go
                                                       OydifhuJ- &/ ^   •
                                                        tcok JL
ahead and take it, or was he ind'iffaront:

•bo i'b .//in order to avoid any misunder

standing Lord Justice Watkins then adds

"that mere failure to recognise the

presence of such a risk is not sufficient".

In other words,        he is drawing the

distinction,         as I see it, between a person

who may well be negligent and in that sense

liable say to civil penalties or damages

but whose state of mind does not meet

the criteria r e q u i r e d r e c k l e s s n e s s

which despite the xsp-yrfeation- is either
                        < ts\     ^
a recognition of fefee risk and decision

to take it or «t» indifference to such risk.

 here are two further arepetnfcs to t h i s .

Firstly,       in considering the'se aspects

of recklessness there is a very interesting

case whi ch was decided by the Privy Council

and in which one of the Law Lords,                known as

Lord RQskill gave the leading judgement                (-*-

E x p l a i n that Privy Council      judgements are

not binding in English courts,              but clearly

have persuasive a u t h o r i t y ) . This particular

case
                                   -     21       -




                            involved the collision of two hydrofoils

                             in Hong Kong in bright clear daylight.

                             Lord Raskill having quotjeA. e x t e n s i v e l y                                      ^___
      /           U *r
              // (s Q v *                          —_______________________Q f T l*«T i (li fa
                                                                                      (ft     f d / JM
                                                                                                   j

    (JUxs*    I
              I             f r-r o .m. . L   r d 1 Dt~i\ Jp _T
                                          T o_____           l o^c ^ 1
                                                                     .Si  T A-v
                                                                         T.o-rd nnii prvl
                                                                                       l o r k nror nn oaq- O rvia
                                                                                                               H


          J                 to    say      "Their        Lordships             emphasised                that
OzZ? 6n       C*>
r                           in    this      passage          Lord       Diplock             was        speaking


                             of    an     obvious          and     serious          risk          of    causing

                             physical injury created by the defendent-

                             He was not there concerned to deal with

                             cases        where        the     conduct          complained               of


                             was of a defendent's re-action or

                             lack of re-action to such a risk created by

                             another person".
                                                                     Onto
                             You will see that Jstespfc passage in some way

                             mirrors what I have already indicated to

                             you regarding crisis/s it uat ion s^aag -fefc ^                                                ^   /
                                              d
                              SQQiHS— t©— me— that— you— woul-d—^fee—
                                                                 i r * entxfeleci
                                                                       ! -S'; Ttt,r\ +r?~Cr
                                                                                     to     "

                              take into account all the circumstances

                              a^y^eMe.                   This point is backed up

                              to a certain extent by another Lord,                                            Lord

                              Edmund Davis in R - v - CajAldwell_>ik© says
                                                                    j£,yLC*cd0to(-ViJ
                              "in the absence o f f a c t o r s ,                                             the

                              defendents state of mind is therefore all

                              important where recklessness is an element

                              in the offence charged".                                In other words,

                              if there are no excuses which are

                              legitimate and proper,                           then 'a state of mind




          BAEABL
                                                                   -    22       -
«            *




                                                       is the all important factor.

                                O'   ^               l^ jO ne of the interesting features of the

                     i    it ^       ^                 Hillsborough disaster from a legal

         pisutc A                        ^             point of view is the difference between

                          oh*        ^                 this and ma n y of the other             disasters which

    p/Ai&h jP&CJtCV+v &0.                              have unfortunately               occurred in recent

    24+Ue— zxr~7^i                                     times.      For instance you think of the
JvJ J ^ c ^ o I                                        Zebruggejs- Disaster             (passengers killed on a

                                                       ship which sailed with open bow doors or

                                                       the Kegworth Disaster when an engine

                                                       caught fire and the wro ng engine was

                                                       switched off or the Lockerbie Disaster
                           //
                     p°                                where a bomb was placed on an aircraft

                                                       or some of the train accidents which

    (jL                              ^                 have recently occured or the Manchester

                                                       Air D i s a s t e r ) .       In all of these the people

                                                       who were killed were in a sense entirely

                                                       helpless.        They had nothing whatever to

         #                                             do with the flying of the planes,               running
                 .   IjL ^               ^       U
                                                       of the trairis, the sailing of the ship,

                                                       operation of the bow d o o r s .           In the

                                                       Hillsborough          Disaster the position is

                                                       slightly different in that there is a

     /                                       ^         very active interplay between all the

                                                       parties involved,               and not least the

                                                       situation outside the turnstile area

                                                        and possibly even the situation within or




                         BAEABL
                     23       -




         on the t e r r a c e s J                   (        _         n                y       /
                  cJ*«           C*w»                       ^                               ^
         T f   yon    b rT " -»   f ' -' * '        f a ^   ^ n11   a y -Q   n n 1 ~-


         ^ nH-iT-£a1 y hnTnn ~mri Hry-w»t. bocauge you have

         to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt

         that the recklessness which you are

         considering is attributable to one

         single person.                        What this means is that

         you may not aggregate or add together the

         acts of different people and then                                                          ✓   ,

                      trfee vdiaJL-you porcoive to 'bo a-a-^

         nrf of           i   '1'1 " r'rTTBgti wVi<-»n 'h^kwn rj1 1 togel-her

         to— eoae particular individual.                                   Each person

         stands on his own and you have to be

         satisfied on the evidence that the

         ingredients and grounds o~f Lliyof ferrce

         have been made o u t .

         This is not to say that you cannot in fact

         have more than one person who might be

          liable to a chang e o £ mans 1 fwgfetpr^or
                    ■^o CCk
          in d e e d fctee- finding of unlawfully killed.

          For example if two or three people attack

          one individual and they all individually

          inflict wounds which are sufficiently

          severe as to constitute a substantial

          cause of death,                      the fact that there may                                      ^

          be three wounds,                      each one of which on

          its own would have been sufficient to




BAEABL
                                —    r* 4 - —




                        kill the victi m does not absolve two

                        of the assailants.       All three,     for

                        their individual act may be held

                        responsible,    because each one,       taken

                        on its own would satisfy the

                        definition of the offence of murder

                        or manslaughter as the case m ay be

                        Finally,    and I do not need to spend

                        time on this,     if you were to find

                        the verdict of unlawfully killed under

                        no circumstances must you name or identify
                                         u      O&LA*                              v
                          je person,, and— I— k-avu already pi.tsv'i^utsly
                                            C\       I &L,




                                                                     /ne&^T
         Sometimes described as a rule against aggregation.

         What this means yis simply that you are not allowed to

          add together thfe acts of different people which on                     J * -

          their own wouiLd not satisfy the criteria of the
                                                                                          i
          offence and    An particular      recklessness,     so for

          example,     if. would be quite improper to add together

          br eaches/by different people and then attribute

          to o n e /   what you know             as an obvious and

          seri/us risk. This is a fundemental and vital

          poimt and you have to be absolutely clear m                 your mind

            tafe you m a ^ not do it .




^   Csy cz- jy                                        ^     <3r> ^            ^

    BAEAB^ w >
DRAFT.



DRAFT PROVISIONAL OUTLINE OF LEGAL DIRECTION TO JURY.



I am now going to turn to giving you a number of directions

on issues of law.          As you will see in a moment,         a majority

of the time will be occupied with aspects relating to a

possible verdict of Unlawfully Killed.               You are not to

construe this as m eaning that I am directing you either

towards or away from that particular verdict,                 it is simply

that the legal concepts and aspects which have to be

considered are a.          numerous,     b.    complex   c.   important and

d.   differ in certain respects           from those applicable to

some of the other verdicts which may be open to yn^, am-d.

finally that this verdict carries with itjjftjylications and

consequences of a nature which ip^flfiSny respects differs

from the implicationsvgAfctTother verdicts which you m ay

wish to t o t s i d e l c arxy *.   However,   before I get down to that

I wish to draw your attention to the provision of the

Coroners Act 1988 Section            //. Q G > )




*Reminder to S.L.P.         Dea"l here"'""faith the requirement that the

Jury after hearing the evidence/shall give a verdict in

writing on an inquisition s i t i n g          forth so far as has been

proved who the deceased/was and how when and where he came

by his death*              C




BAEABL
                              2   -




                                         d (A*
 Furthermore, under Section £           «*£           r.f t-ho

 Act 1988 it is specifically provided that at an^riquest

 touching the death of a person who came hy^liis death by

 murder, manslaughter or infantici^er^the purpose of the

 proceedings shall not incluji^'the finding of any person

 guilty of the murder^<frians laughter or infanticide and

 accordinly acpifoner's inquisition should in no case charge

   perse                    lose offences.



As an aside I should perhaps mention that this amendment

was introduced m t n     rnrortearc ' 1-Q^-i-e-l-a-fe-i'OR in 19 7 7 prior to

that,    it had been possible for coroners'           juries to name

people who they thought had been guilty of murder,

manslaughter or infanticide.



In addition to the Act of Parliament,             there are also /jfules

which apply to coroners and the current rules are the 1984

coroners r u l e s .



Rule 41 of” thoco rnlnn p r w w friaw            n,^...^-T|r     — r~nrr

sits with a jury,      he shaJA^s^jflT’uj)the evidence to the jury

and direct thenia^^Co^the law before they consider their

verdict^ftd^shall draw their attention to Rule 36                  (2) and




I therefore now draw your attention Rule 36.               This rule

read as follows




BAEABL
expiy^U any oplriion on any other matters



The effect of this rule is that neither you nor I are

allowed to put on to the inquisition what used to be known

as   'riders'      i.e.,     advice or c o m m e n t s . /'The ‘iTTl'eb in fact do.

p rovide undo g Rule 43                       this noronor—                   3.tgvag— fchaj:

action should be taken to prevent tJjgKoccurence of

fatalities similar to that in respect of which the inquest

is being held ma y announce/^t the inquest that he is

reporting the matter r e w r i t i n g to the person or authority

who ma y have power/u) take such action and he m ay report

the> m a t-t-.ni" Bi'Ji'jjg/LMdincrlv.



T me nti o n thin nt th+° stage to draw your attention to the

fact that there irs this opportunity but that it is a

privilege w h £ c h is in fact reserved to me.                              Whether or not

I will wish to exercise my rights under this rule I will

annofmr.fi at n 1 at.nr tim™-                  —



I am also required to draw to your attention Rule 42.                                         Thi-s-

rnlp    r paHe    "nn   n n y H i f"t-   mViDnlfl   h n —ftTVHWfitj-. i n   Slich   a   WaV a s   to


a p p e 'crr—fct?—U eleriuiT re—any q u e s t i o n —e-f—s-.         c-r-a mi na 1—Li a b i l i t y

oju-4hu part— a-f- d naiufad person "or"b.                      cxvxi lxabxlxty.



It is essential that the provisions of this rule together

with the provisions of Rule 36 (b) are strictly adhered to




BAEABL
                                             -      4   -




by you and indeed by m e .

i&u?
I also wish to dra w your attention to Rule 22.                                        This reads

            1.   "No witness at an inquest should be obliged to

                   answer any question tending to incriminate

                   himself.

            2.     Where it appears to the coroner that the witness

                   has     been asked such a question,                      the coroner shall

                   inform the witness that he m a y refuse to answer".

This is an exceedingly important rule and is fundemental to

the present system of >a JTustice -Ba-Hrlij, in the United

Kingdom.



You m ay have noticed that some of the witnesses were told
                                                            &
of the rule and of the privilege which they were entitled

-fa© and some exercised their rights.                               Put another way,             a

witness has a right of silence.

      -tJ          &I

It would be grossly unfair and quite contrary to the
as*                                      . ,        .   .   .r
pnrpo-ir of the                 rule and xndeed to justice xf you                       were to

construe a refusal to answer a question under the privilege

             viy           -r-M.i.g' as an admission jgifefee# of guilt

                        ^ v . - i t o construe the privilege in such a way

would not only run contra to the whole principle of the

rule but would in effect place the person who exercised the

privilege           in    np n n i t i ^ n   1i i       ‘-l l l“ n'~,Q 1°0T ' Ji-Qfl    ',nrl1

admission and                 guilt and might w f -11 plarp                h-Lrn in    a far worse




BAEABL
position than it he had in fact answered the question. //T h e

position is simply this: That you may not construe silence

as constituting any part of the evidence o # which your

deliberations are based.              You have to be satisfied from the

evidence which you have heard and not from evidence which

you have not heard nor m ay you draw any inferences from the

exercise of the privilege.                 niho p o r ^ n who has— it --& shs—

right-    to   i_t nndpr   the   tGinib    erf dry   m l e s   uwd fc?nder no

ciurcumstances must the privilege be turned into a noose.



I now remind you of the possible verdicts which you might

be able to consider in respect of these inquests



         1.    Unlawfully killed.



         2.    Accidental Death or Misadventure                 (I will tell you

               now that in law,       there is no difference between

               these two terms.           We will deal w i t h this in a

               little more detail later o n ) .



   ^3.         A special verdict which again I will deal wi t h a

               little later on.



         4.    What is known as an Open verdict.



In considering the evidence,                you obviously will have to be

satisfied that the necessary standard of proof has been




BAEABL
achieved in order to enable you to reach one or other of

the verdicts which I have mentioned.              Different standards

of proof are required for different verdicts.                   If I may

summarise first of all,        in respect of the verdict of

Unlawfully killed you have to be satisfied to the standard

which aoe can£*describ^pci'ha'pT.'— rrr— shorthand— as the criminal

standard of proof.       In respect of Accidental death or

Misadventure (or a special verdictX           the standard would be

the balance of probability.             1 wj4d cuiplarn to f w i the
 I*   Oh                          Uu l ih On ^             a— j h a s ie b S Jh ^
m o a M n g o-f -an Open verdict 1 crtojr on.                            ' <7
'VLCsyOA# cPLi           oCd   ck>-        o»i>


Let us then deal in a little more detail with the standard

of proof^ for Unlawfully Killed.            Before you are able to

bring in a verdict of Unlawfully killed,              you have to be

satisfied beyond reasonable doubt ^>r to put it in slightly

more mode rn language, you have to be satisfied so that you

are sure)that the evidence which you have heard and which
        *                                  -6U. a c t
you are considering satisfied you that tho inyiedlfclllT'S^
                  4-hA                            (j/UeA
rrqn irfinrnt'' of the criminal offence m i roopcct of wh ir,
                                                            .h.

you are considering tjh is v c x d ict hatfe been made out.              tord

Justice Watkins in a case,            dealing with coronal matte]

said   "I regard as equally unthinkable if not moife so that

the jury should find the commission al£fr6ugh not

identifying the offencer of a cj?±fninal offence without

being aaLrs-fied beyoftd I ^ 'sonable a o u p r ";         In respect of

the other verdicj>s^except of course an Open verdict the

           | a,     Hi     t'Tir lntrr nfi'r* nnrmnll" rjp~r-ri hrrl n~


BAEABL
the balance of probability.           It will be obvious to you

therefore that a very m uch higher standard of proof is

required before you can bring in a verdict of Unlawfully

killed.



As a direct consequence of this the order in which you

consider the verdicts becomes important.           In considering

the verdicts,     you have to apply your mind to the verdict of

Unlawfully killed first of all.           You have to consider the

verdict in respect of each of the deceased.           You have to

apply the facts within the context of the law as i — ewn and— —

-am abo ut fcrr -e-xplai.n to you and you must apply it in respect

of each of the parties whose conduct you are considering

based as I have already said upon the evidence which you

have heard.

    /fa-      )        —     //j   jy^OtO^CTt0^
What then are the legal parameters or requirements that

have to be met in the context of these inquests before you

are able to consider a verdict of Unlawfully killed.



I do not propose to take you through the whole law of

murder or manslaughter but for the purposes of these

inquests the criminal equivalent of the verdict of

Unlawfully killed is what is sometimes known as involuntary

Manslaughter and by definition excludes what we know to be

mu rder or any other aspects of deliberate killing.          The

legal requirements for this type of man slaughter have been




BAEABL
                                         -    8    -




considered in various cases and in tehe -e-ae-e wh ich I have

nl r m r |y yoforga^t— to— rrameiy, R ^ v - West London Coroner ex
               j H (J s J r <L fit*   t > U l\ 4 a *1&                         6   *      9 ^ '" V
 parte GrayjLord Justice Watkins set out the matters which                               /n < 4 c &■
cxvj^             **                CJ+yoKfi          *0*4
 y o « H i ^ n t o be satisfied on/thr? oTn rtonr.fc in1 cases where ^t

^                         +              ■ai.i.£u.3.. v m i n g   nrrnrrpd be c ause _

n f npn ~\oft- on t-ho pnrt-                 — the po+'ice. Before I go through

the points which Lord Justice Watkins has enumerated,                              I

should add that although in that particular case the issue

related to neglect on the part of the police,                          the

fundamental principles of the direction would apply in

respect of anybody whom you might be considering as falling

within the pefcrview of fehat verdict.



Let me then set out for you thepedThts that you have to be

satisfied on in relationJfc<5^the evidence based upon Lord

Justice Watkins            jujtef^ment. Whe n I have done that I will

draw several^ef€her aspects to your attention w hic h I think

have a Ja^aring on the consideration of the evidence in this

c—   /



 You have to be satisfied of the following points in the

 first instance:-



         1.   That the police or the person whose conduct you

              are considering had a duty to have regard to the

              health and welfare of the deceased.




 BAEABL
                                                 -   9   -




            2.     That in the circumstances,                  there was a failure to

                   do what should have been done for the health and

                   welfare of the deceased.



            3-     That that failure amounted to a substantial cause

                   of death.



    Tf T m a y     jnrt ^ . m u u r h a verfnT M iiiMin-nn-t— — Cliebe £.i rnt

    points can be equated with and indeed I believe are equated

    with what in effect is the teg.a.1 definition of^wegligence

    namely,      duty of care, breach of duty and driftage.                           It is

    important to grasp this point ferr two ^ e a a o n a . fHrrsrtr-crf-
                07 <p*u. yst4* «K>" M 01
        because^mere negligence on it^/own, even if fully made

    out, would not be sufficient tgf^airt ground,                         a verdict of

    Unlawfully killed, as— you infill ace irr a— m oment because Lord

    Justico Wafcfej.no added v^jjious olrhor p o i n t s and- 3-.—

    whatever reason yoj*'' a                                 :ied thajt—^tTiese first

    three requirem| Its have been majie^out, you cannot in effect

    go on to corfsider this ^elfdict either because the

    fundamental leas              "basis for it has not been established.                        I

                                                                   e while



                                 which Lord Justice
                                                                                                     u

       e failure amounted



^   fco r d J u s t i c e 'WatkiftS Limn y o c a on t o - e x p l a i n " ^ tlie t e s t   for
                           *<>           0 ~*y   b
    r e c k l e s s n e s s et-s—fo llo w a -t — -
                                                                    cJ         <^>'




    BAEABL
  ^ T h e test for recklessness was whether a po 1 ir:r» o f f incri^

   having regard to his duty, was indifferent to an obvious

   and serious risk to the health and welfare of the deceased

   or recognising that the risk to be present,                         deliberately

   chose to run that risk by doing nothing about it
            iuj)
   tdri1TTl-Ey that a failure to appreciate that there was such a

   risk was not by itself sufficient to a m o u n t to
                              — ----- m i s i --- ——   y   co,
   recklessness#     -f^^ ^ ]y                 j” -"y S only return a
                                                    <y»Ci G.Oyr\
  verdict of Unlawfully killed if fcTrey coui-d attribute the

  unlawful conduct to a single,                  i-n -t k o -eentoxt of his e a c<s

  p ol-i-ce officer-— cnc— if you wish,            rr ainy-Ae individual whose
                                                             Qt>
  conduct is being called in question, -but that on no account

  should         person be named or identif ied’**.
                                                                   A

                                                             -feflat tho ro are

                                                           to take into account in

       luat                                                ing whether the act or

  onuniss         whic                                     falls within the

  gtrfametopB^-
              0 -
                f the legal requirements..                                                 ^
fh&K   —    cr°^<->   C SY) dis*** £j£t.

  T^t mo dpal         first of   p i i T.rif-h         1   art r ^ irr*- ••h i -h
  /»£ £    CiT
  -Wfe sometimes describe as a rule against aggregation.                            What

  this oaul-e means is simply that you are not allowed to add

  together the acts of different people which on their own

  would not satiny the criteria of rraclcloganea'
                                                S , so for

  example it would be quite improper to add together from* ghs-^

  f iv p   rgil.
               it ivo-ly: TniifWE, breaches by different prop! ~ and nny




  BAEABL
                                                11




    jjiat whjr-bfeL edtili One on their own is not, p a r LiCUlarly bad,

    frhe_x;nm o -f- thorn hrio r r e a f& r i a dangerous situation which

    c-feated an obvious and bferious
                              ttJ.iuu& "risk ui
                                             of xnjuj_y
                                                injury diiu
                                                        and which
                                                            w-
                                                             nxuix ■
                                                                   .yfjw-i
                                                     /P0-7 hp                                    <Zf <T>        4
    then attribute to one of 4.ho par-fcio-e ^nut --e-jE— Did. C- yrOcrp .                                     -2-^4

    This is a fundamental and vital point and you have to be

    absolutely clear in your mind that you may not do^ itj^ ^ T h e

    next point that I think I have to mention is the issue of

    causation.               You have to be satisfied that the act or

    ommission complained of has actually caused the injury or c u ,

    death in this particular case.                               -Wow fJo t every causative act

    would give rise to liability.                               For example,    it could be

    argued that nobody would have died if the game of football

    were not played in the United Kingdom or, bringing it

    slightly nearer to home if there was no F.A.                                    Cup

    competition ac -evon if Lliyvenue lrarl ~riuL happened to hFivp.

    faepn a-t Ilillbbuiuugh.                   All of these in one sense are causes

    but none of them I think-we would^have any difficulty in
                                                                             tZ/y         -h*o
    excluding these as being causative -eng-if you liko- »

    ^ lbiBtairbarajrTrgtt^&e- of ” Llm diM L lr~ (7T d iiyu n e-------

    -{Jape—           ui ids h e r o ) . -




    (Tape       2   ).

     T>TQ .........      11 111r ^TTy 'I fr'fT I''M T1 y i i> nnril ] i ' i i n g t he s e a s Ja^Tna

    aansat ivp in the Hp^fh of any of the 9 5 p e o p l e . C in other

    words, you have to be satisfied that the act or ommission

I   which you are looking at is sufficiently close and                                      Sc*
    ZL.CUJ £r t&_                            tu? & j .          ^ ' ^ 5                       rs-          ,
                                                                „ cL, 6r A
    BAEABL
                               12




srnfficiontly ifcil'ati'
                       u U Lu Lhe evjent go fee-bo logi ca-^ly




grouped as follows .           You have[~Eo~                          ;fied: -



      1.        That there was negligence,
                                                                 (j     Jt4. C&


                                                        O '?   CK.v< A.ot-a*r tf              >W
                      ^   C*-<J c?l *>'**
                That trhe- mental ota/fee1 of reckless                            Ty.uTccr^
                                                                                       -Vf«
                ^  (iO        iieCs                                          to
                dicplay ed-.,     /f
                                      iOt-n »/   t* i /L                                             ^
                                                    ►
                              U i f- \   C

                                                          t&JL
            &J * *-
               en»j
                  ? failure to apjpreciate/na- risk y a s

                sufficient to amouont to recklessness.


                                                                  - ^ - < > ■ 1 C st «■*—<£i-      » ^   .

     4.         That you must,               -a^grag^Ko tho acLivrties o f

                varimio parties



Perhaps I should,         at thisi'stage, mention that the core of

Lord Justice Watkins's/judgement is of course his

definition of recklessness and this is in fact based on a

couple or more decisions of the House of Lords.                                        Now I have

already m entioned that ne (fligence por oo^i, even if it is

gross negligence is insuf Eicient to found a verdict of

Unlawfully killed and I-h iwu illuiTCrated this c e t o r e r

Whetheir that is a                           a bad thing is not for us to say.

Youvsimplvj*tfve to accept that that is the present legal

 wB*a-£flLon.     i have also in iicated to you that before you are

able to apply tho to«-t f-**                 r e c k l e s s n e s s , you huvw— to be




BAEABL
                                      13




                 4.

satisfied that -at— tewst the first three conditions set our

by Lord Justice Watkins have been met.                                       Now in man y cases,

this does not present any particular difficulty and the
                                     o-
s o l e i s s u e w i t h w h i c h % 4*e j u r y has t o g r a p p l e i s w h e t h e r                or


not    the     act    or     ommission           complained          of   constitutes


recklessness            in    the     terms       defined-           In   the   case   of


H i l l .I n    ii j 11 h o w e v e r ,    the    matter       is    somewhat     more


complicated.               First      of    all    there       are    multiple     parties.


e x ample:-      you       have     the     local      aut hority         who   woro-feho            .

        1. You have the local authority who were the licensing

               and inspecting authority under the safety

               certificate.

        2. You have the Club who provide the premises and

               whose task it was as occupiers to comply w ith any

               legal requirements and to behave responsibly

               towards the supporters and others who might enter

               the g r o u n d .

         3. You have the engineer who advised the Club, carried

               out inspections and undertook t e s t s .
                                                     JLtlo C . ,                   s ffic fis t C                 CSK.
         4. You have the police, whatever that might mean,

               for thp pnrp^n^r                      t k u -J n g n n n ^ — involved a number

               o-f officoro who h a d different duties— to perform at

               fli ff°rnnt w              * finnri            f in-i 1 1y;                                .

         5. You have the fans w h-asa cnnfinrt. eitner singly'' s / s
                                                                                       ~     _   -



               or collectively, ma y or m a y not^h£V€"l 3 een called ****

               in question and to w h o m ^ t f ^ subject of the                                              f

               evidence,          the^e^xteria laid down by Lord Justice

               WatjsAffgcould also be applied.



BAEABL
                              -    14      -




 Lot jne-sfcop at this po int-^gjid^make it quite clear that the

 rule about aggregation applies            just as much X~<J the fans as

 it does tp^-'cSnybody else, anH    \ *-         ho gni    —wrr^nrj t-r> goov

 to aggregate individual f a n 's ac^i^'T' ies a(nd some of them

 to such an extent that^a-rrgcould. then say that whilst

 indiA^idual]^^>fc1 iey were not reckless         /collectively they

were .



The crucial point however which i/want to draw to your

attention at this stage is not sso much whether or not the

acts or ommissions of these various parties in themselves

are such that you could find/a verdict of Unlawfully killed

against them but rather whether their acts and ommissions

■as they, impinge or E f f e c t / t h e acts and ommissions of others

so ao to u IL ljl ClmTT*M   ij,lfl y£J u ut.   Let us take one or two

examples.       You m ay feel/that it is reasonably clear from

the evidence that the S a f e t y certificate was never altered

so as to take into account the penning of the terrace.



Similarly it seemed reasonably clear from the evidence of

Mr.   Seaman,   Mr. Bounds, Mr.    Butler,     that the risks which

seem in some respects so obvious to us now arising out of

the radial      fencing were never really contemplated.            On the

contrary,    the ^ i e w which appears to have been taken was

that the installation of the radial fences wo u ld improve

crowd contr^/l and natural movement and                   reduce the

risk of in/ury which had been exhibited in the 1981 match,




BAEABL
                                                15




when the terrace itself was completely open.                                    Furthermore,

the arrangements at the turnstiles had' that configuration

for many years and had apparently,                          certainly at the

turnstiles, worked without any particular pr o b l e m s t -4r«— 1907.

a*ftd->&£—~ iib jr r ~ t o n l y iint~ i 1—fc+re p o s s i b i l i t y   that     —1 9 —s o me .

ft 1 l      111l— r»f tickle^.,i. Tcjtttt" lirniH/vjrcurbed ncnssiblv at a.

distance though even that w a ^ not^pffEirely consistent

because except for one witnAa-^ who was not anywhere near

the filter,         no-one act^rcTll/y claimed to have seen a

ticketless         fan t*rirned aw/y.             This,     quite apart from any

legal and^g»6 licing difficulties have in fact successfully

trWJL>ilTy1 Utfer~'tri'ukyLlfcsa fann                       The marking of the

turnstiles^           The sicming within the concourse area, were

exactly the same ir/ thnso yg^jrg as in 1989.                               There wan a—
*4              to.
fw^febo^ ^djLfforonco? in thert. Sgt. Higgins appare n t -
                                                         lry closed

off the tunnel iri 1988 b«-t U n f o r t u n a t e l y this action                       .

appears not to have been 'known by-, finy o#— the senior

officers,        and ycertainly does not appear to have been

ocnveyed to Iffc. Duckenfield upon him taking c o m m a n d . ^ T h e

standard of /care which is expected of a professional who is

required t <f> exercise special skill,                        knowledge or experience

is that standard which an ordinary skilled m e m be r of his

profession would have exercised and professed to have in

respect/ of that special skill,                       so the question is would an

ordinary skilled member of the appropriate profession have

undertaken the tasks in the same m anner or wa y which the

person whose conduct you are considering did or did not do




BAEABL
                        C pl




                                                                ’h ^ 7 .
                                                                 <Z?-}                                & ^3^c*X             cs/     d2&*-r <*2*0.-o
                   L          ^   L         A        -                          '




                         <£^T                                    <^<    ^ /t2 s 6 '/e~Q ./***               "/                    <a*£M=r
                                                    5/.   dL...                                                    * < ^ * = * v ys* p

                                  6&U & ■ J^AS* tS>b> a-J/gje^cJL
                                                          C-b*                              C^)^                      ^3Kl^o                                .




                                                                                                        C - 3 ^ ^ ''/^^C*^^ “^ i K /Sbfcj



   $>     <-W                                                                               2jSLeOt^ cZ^yu ^\j<>s>^                                     ..

                                                                                                    (i^Su/ ^ c <          <*3

                         JSsS
                          •           —
                                          g*rv»t ^ u
                                           ~- - ~
                                                                                            —   f J&:   ?^C5»      ^5

  4? ._.../»yc?*        £** ° ^ ? J
                                                                                                                                                       o<
 c*l 2 £               776                            ^         y**i.             <r

 <3H^.,.(£.               'Xc^tu*                   c^*9                Ck. J                                        ■/<££                        09
                                                                                                                          >£>/ ^ c K

              nj   £ 4                    J&+-+           £ 0     <g .#-*»»!

                              tfr ^6 jp o U                                            &*.          </2js
                                                                                                        a_e^       VO /         «s»t-   S-jesyA
   ^ K^OUf jZ ^c^ejL t                              d? y ^ p £ o *^cCCt
  /^      <g    <f^L^v                       £ ^          y ic r > l «g-n                                            t / £c< *£A & t '* * ' & > sy'ts ^ * '

                                                                &U. -£c*&r                                   Z^                         £JC^£      -&&=*
O ^ S   fch                                               0/     <£&-       ty^Ou-Sl *                                                                      ___

        -g^rt^Kg.1 -                                                     o »7(_        1^       ^       ^      ^   n 11^                                     1/
                           __ ........            < ^a < ^         ^ __

                                                                    r.                                         _._ ...

                CJJ -                       _ ______________________ « ? > A                        ^
              J" rtrc ffr f di //• j A \          .1         1^^/              ^;>*a<auy**f <^~f,              /^ ^ » x
                                     *&                                                       'L+C          CfJ^-

                                                                                      ^ 7

                                      ^                                               J^X zLfir                  <Z*?
                    °l     0?         -*                                    t>> /rfL£*s^C-4>£                     ^




W
<Jr*JrU..&~-.- &n                                               y^»<v(4             cy*            y p c ^b e c s?


 ^                              Jf/cc,L^L ____ /* .                                                                          ..... .

<£&..                                             4 s 3 h r & *.            c^T < ^- A               r ^ ^            o L ^ A '^ o
& .                  d     £ -£ < £ / *?-                                  . <^<^    v^ ^ 0 *' <?V..        <&*?*^*lt *
Z tjr — *"?    ^4                ~ l/p f<>«* a^cci ^            7%f*t....$***-..!&..< ^...^i-^t. t* / £l^*$
  (j i )             A     g          -<^ 4       >rSj/-              if, |1,
                                                                            J                           *>} ^

                 7 ^ ci/(>>“• •1';:; 7 ^ 7             <^t>*f                                o~?        ^

                               (/?                         c-^£=ry?<S4*-*.— ^               ^ ^




 Qji)                    cAl              7^C<9                 2<5S*£--
         so?       If you come to a conclusion that they would then you

        cannot on the basis of the legal definition find a verdict

        of Unlawfully Killed against that particular p e r s o n / (<


-T fiZ r...........................
^       Hh-us—        — lookm-g a-fc Lliy yaws Hoii trom a non-crisis ~iLuilLiui*—

      .p o m L       erf riew.          In a situation where a crisis situation has

        ococurred or a person is faced with a dilemma,                 then

        provided a reasonable decision as to a course of action is

        taken the fact that in the events                 it turns out to be the

        wrong decision does not necessarily mean that it was

        negligent i.e.,                 that there was a failure or breach of duty

        of care which is owed.                 In the particular example of

        Hillsborough, we have this very well illustrated by the

        issue of the opening of the gates and in particular,                  Gate

       C. A desperate appeal was being made by Supt Marshall on

       the outside.                   He made it quite clear that if immediate

       action was not taken,                  he was anticipating serious injury

       and possibly death.                   People on the insid^ of the ground

       were faced with a dilemma.                   Did they^cc^b^T^to that

       request to open the gates or not?                   The evidence which we

       have heard seems to point to the fact that Mr.                  Duckenfield

       deliberated and when it was put to him that a decision had

       to be reached,                 he decided to open the gates.   The fact that

       it might have been perhaps better to postpone the match

       (assuming that that could have been effectively conveyed to

       the people outside)                 and that it would have been better to

       have given at the same time instructions to seal off the




      BAEABL
                                                                    17    -




                         tunnel and to divert the crowd has to be judged by you in

                         the light of the circumstances which prevailed at the time.

                         Even if you come to the view that he did have time to put                                                          , 0 ^ /

                         alternative plans into effect,                           a miscalculation in such a

                         situation or an error of judgement may not _necessarily— r-                                                         ,y
                                                                                                 / $***              •<             m w   f aife-
                        constitute negligence.                          -If you wprp^ fco take that vi-aw, thow
                                                                                                                                           to
                         in respect of those people whp^e conduct you might wish to                                                          yfe-   C jb

                        call into question for tl>£s particular act or ommission,

                        you would have to conclude that the fundamental criteria

                        has— nat-feet;ii p^ria o u t .                  It is a matter of course entirely

    .                   for you whether on the facts and the evidence^whicfo

                        have, hoar# 7— the blLUaTiorFwas such LltdL the what one m i g ht

cA .yU .fc4 *           call the normal rule of due care had been abhrpgat-e/.                                                'flhrrs™
' { /tU                             t> 9't U M .   J> k            tj              A c#   ti m              fair «              a            ug^,c~fe^
^       ;l1f to/        incidentally is of course usually dealt with on questions
                                 — --- ■/£****" * * <
                                                    ^ Jt{       ^  •»
^        ^                  negligence^fewt «a— a. Privy Council decision who^o the

                        ftrj yy -Cciiuacil 5i& z e considering the application of the

                        definition of recklessness to a case where two hydrofoils

                        had collided in open water in bright daylight,                                     Lord.

                        who gave the judgement of the                             Privy Council           (perhaps        I

{ /e l                  o u ght to mention here ladies and gentlemen,                               strictly

c-fc» h» &c*~,          speaking,     Privy Council                 judgements are judgements of the
                 ft**
                        House of Lords but are not binding in English Courts,                                             but

C -t-i-+ S              clearly they have some pursuasive authority).                                      L o r d ., / f r f
             Q
^                       quoted from the speech of Lord Diplock in the                                     case of feancc.
0}                                  Cj                     CJHA                                       j£*eA*A*r £
                           which^ he deals with the issue of recklessness,                                       he quotes

cL                      as follows Lord Diplock's w o r d s :-

             f          "In my view an appropriate instruction                               to the jury on               what


                 of           ^                           aL.^ ^*S>-r         &    if                     <X>


                        BAEABL
                                 18   -




 is meant by driving recklessly would be that they must be

satisfied of two things.       First that the defendent was in

fact driving the vehicle in such a manner as to create an

obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury to some

other person who might happen to be using the road or doing

substantial damage to property,       and second,       that in driving

in that manner,      the defendent did so without having given

any thought to the possibility of there being any such risk

or having recognised that there was some risk involved had

nonetheless gone on to take it.           It is for the jury to

decide whether the risk created by the manner in which the

vehicle was being driven was both obvious and serious and

in deciding this they m a y apply the standard of the

ordinary prudent motorist as represented by themselves".

Lord         . then went on to say "The Lordship emphasise that

in this passage Lord Diplock was speaking of an obvious and

serious risk of causing physical injury created by the
              j-k.                          ^J)                           /
defendant,    jfcfc was not theft concern to deal with cases

the conduct complained of was of a defendent's redaction or

lack of redaction to such a risk created by another

person".



If you therefore were for instance to take the v ie w that a

risk having been created without the gates,             by someone or

more persons,    then the criteria for establishing

recklessness and as I have indicated,             possibly even

negligence, m ay not be met.




BAEABL
Finally,           on this point I want to turn to the heart of the

definition,           namely,   the fact of recklessness.

Recklessness,           as you can see is defined as a state of mind,

either that the person,              having regard to his duty was

indifferent to an obvious and serious risk or having

recognised the risk to be present,              deliberately chose to

run that risk by doing nothing about it.               I want to draw

your attention to the fact that the definition both by

Lord Justice Watkins and Lord Diplock contained the words

'obvious' and           'serious'.    We have spent a lot of time in

these inquests considering the obviousness of various acts

or ommissions but in the final analysis it is your decision

as to whether or not an officer of normal skill at over

time would have recognised not only that there was an

obvious and serious risk of injury,             but also having so

recognised it, deliberately w ent ahead and took that risk

or was indifferent to it.              Mere inadvertence    (the

definition of that would be carelessness)              or to stick wit h

Lord Justice Watkins,            a failure to appreciate that there

was such a risk in insufficient to ground a finding of

recklessness.



You will see therefore that the issue before you is not a

simple one and I will try and summarise for you as

f o l l o w s :-

        1.     The right of silence under the privilege            of the

                   rule against self-incrimination must not be used

                   as evidence of guilt.

        2.     Under no circumstances ma y you aggregate           the acts o

BAEABL         different parties whether they are in the same
                              -   20     -




               organisation e.g., police officers or in different

              organisations e.g.,      engineer and police officers.

         3.   You have to be satisfied that the evidence

              establishes the requirements       for the criminal

              offence which for this purpose you may take as

              being Manslaughter by neglect or Involuntary

              Manslaughter beyond reasonable doubt or phrased

              in a different form,     that the evidence satisfies

              you so that you are sure that the person whose

              conduct you are considering is in fact guilty of

              the offence   which you are contemplating.

     4.       That before   you can bring in a verdict of

              Unlawfully killed you have to be satisfied that

              there is a duty or care,       that there has been a

              breach of that duty and that the act or ommission

              is a substantial cause of       a death.

     5.       Even if you   are satisfied those four criteria have

              been met, you must satisfy yourself that the act

              or ommission was reckless i.e., that there was an

              obvious and serious risk of injury and that the

              person recognising that risk to be present

              deliberately chose to run it by doing nothing

              about it or was indifferent to it.

     6.       Finally that a failure to appreciate that there

              was such a risk was not by itself sufficient to

              amount to recklessness and to bring a person's

              act or ommission w ithin that definition.

In connection with abbregation I have to remind you that




BAEABL
you may not aggregate the acts or ommissions of different

people.    This on the other hand does not mean that you

cannot have a situation where more than one person is not

liable in law for Manslaughter.     For example if three

people were to attack a person with knives and each one of

them were to inflict a wound which taken on its own would

be a substantial cause of his death,    then provided one

could prove all the other necessary ingredients,       it may

well be possible to convict all three of those people of

murder or manslaughter as the case may be.     What you have

to be satisfied with is that the alleged wound, using this

example,   is in fact a substantial cause of death.       To take

a slightly ludicrous examaple,    if three people attack

someone and one stabs the patient through the neck and the

other one through the lungs each one of those injuries

being sufficient to lead to his death and the third nicks

his finger,   a trivial wound which by no stretch of

imagination wo ul d kill him,   it probably doesn't take much

imagination to realise that although that third person may

well have intended harm, the injury which he inflicted is

so trivial that it cannaot be classed as a substantial

cause of death.    If we have a look at the situation at

Hillsborough,   taking the tunnel as an example,      it may be

that you will take the vie w that the substantial cause of

death was the failure to see that     (end of tape,    turn o v e r ) .

A n alternative scenario might be that you take the view

that the substantial cause of death was the fact that




BAEABL
peoeple emerged on to the terraces at too fast a rate and

 that it wasn't so muc h the overcrowding,     but the pressure

generated by the movement on to the t e r r a c e .



A third scenario might be that it is a combination of an

excess number of people on the terrace,       plus    an excess

number of people entering the terrace,      plus the movement of

those people on to the terrace which led to the increase in

pressure causing the crushing and which were in addition to

that in Pen 3 caused a break of the barrier,          thus

compounding the pressure effects at the front and finally

that the opening of the gates together with the obvious

panic within the terrace had created a further forward

movement which had compounded the problem.           You might even

wish to add that the slowness of the response in

recognition or recognition of the problem meant that the

rescue activity was not as well organised as it otherwise

might have been.    You are then faced wit h the rule against

aggregation.   If you take the view that takaing each

individual act on its own would not have been a substantial

cause for the death but that all the acts taken together

were then you cannot in fact bring in a verdict of

Unlawfully killed against any unnamed individual.            You will

see therefore that in thinking about this particular

verdict and in evaluating the evidence which you have

heard, you have to pay particular attention to all the

legal parameters which I have drawn to your attention.




BAEABL
The next section will deal with possible exclusions from this verdi



When you have completed your assessment of the evidence and

have applied your min d to this verdict,   if you come to the

conclusion that such a verdict is applicable in respect of

all the deceased,   you do not have to take the matter any

further apart from letting us know that you are ready to

tell me what your verdict i s .



It could be of course that you may decide that there is

evidence of an Unlawful killing in respect of one or more

of the deceased but not in respect of others.     That is a

matter for you on the evidence but I do wish to stress that

You have to think quite hard about bringing in differential

verdicts,   though it is clear that there are some

differences between Pens 3 and 4.    Whether these are

sufficient to enable you to distinguish verdicts     is a

matter for you.



If you come to the conclusion after due deliberation that

it is inappropriate to bring in a verdict of Unlawfully

killed, you are then in a position to consider the other

verdicts which I have left with you.




BAEABL
LANDROVER AND ANNOUNCEMENTS


-   2   -




The effect of having a gate shut tended to create tension.
Mr Hand-Davis thought things were satisfactory until about 2.30,
people then started not responding to pleas. Things got worse,
attempted several stratagems, people going under horses, he noted
that when Gate A opened he was concerned about where the fans
would go. On the other hand when he entered stadium his assessment
was pitch invasion.


E J Wilson (58) noted change of atmosphere 2.30/2.40. She told
people M c k - o f f would be delayed, situation immediately improved
around her but then d e teriorated again when roar was heard from
inside the grou'nd which led to increase in aggressiveness.


The evidence of the mounted o f f icers in a nutshell was that !:he.y
were trying to segment the crowd or create barriers. Their view
was that a proportion of the crowd could have responded if they
had wished. They agreed that some people nearer the front were
unable to do so effectively.


Mr Watson explained the t e c h nique of converting forward momen t u m
of the crowd by using his horse as a catalyst.


Attempts w e r e made to close p e r i m e t e r gates and form cordons outside
but this created pressure effects outside those gates which were
either forced open, pushed open involuntarily, or possibly even
opened by officers. From the video it looks as if the opening of
Gate C precipitated an inrush from without.
LANDROVER AND ANNOUNCEMENTS


Buxton arrived about 14.47, describes how he broadcast, appealing
to people to stop pushing (see B a r t h o l o m e w (24) etc), no response,
tried to contact mounted officers as well, recollects an Inspector
using the PA system.




He asked for kick-off to be delayed but was told by Mr Goddard
that it was too late. He remembers a Tannoy message not to push.
As far as he was concerned the people he was broadcasting to were
pushing.       ^
N.B.
See schedule of people who heard Tannoy messages.         Several people
heard messages, very many a pparently did not.

IMPORTANT POINT:
Even if kick-off had been delayed, would it have been possible to
c ommunicate it? See Mr Marshall's view as well as above. Note,
however, that no official attempt was made.


When comparing effectiveness, note that PC Wilson managed to get
                C.■£?. £jL'a
some response, Mr-.CurKly said that when the rumour went through
the crowd that kick-off would be postponed, there was some easing.
Others have said something similar, the point being that if they
were totally unable to help themse l v e s w ithin the turnstile area,
say, simply being pushed, then it would have been impossible to
get any response.
Mounted officers also attempted to commu n i c a t e but were in general
unsuccessful, e.g. S Fry (55) felt that people were f o rcing their
way past him, people at the rear were not under any p r e ssure and
that policing depended upon co-operation. PC Greenhill (56) felt
that people at the back had the c a p acity to move, that t h e y had
created a gap but it was filled. PS Smith thought the turnst i l e s
were operating slowly, people had c apability of voluntary movement
which diminished as one got towards the front, advance was volitional,
plenty of room in Leppings Lane. He describes a match at Tranmere
Rovers where only two turnstiles were operating, crowd didn't get
in until 4 pm yet there was no crushing.
                                                                                                      c>^            D-ik Qz&ss&j '<
                                                                                                                                   ^
                            h ^A         6»>    ^ i - T                                    «£) d X            ^ A : s^-c-*<&4
                                                           *>■>       ~7/<j                                  f**C>l C*-^%.   w   G^sOrX?
                        (J ^ \      6%t&rCx                     & cJ1^      t                    ^             <2*-*—S-*0 OC <^£-\

                        -t^-*                                                   ....                 .....              ................   .

                                                                      Cr%^        £                          — {Ip           C - ^ x ® 12^               ^
                                    o/*^~p            A6'6(                                 L. >


                            ~2cAoCf->                                   <
                                                                        z £ sH>q                             Cl ^ i^P
                        «**               < > ^t4^i^^'^T>                                                        '                   -
                                                                              <55^- /yCe*-&~*£— £
                                                                              Calcs'
                        $-'- (j~ -        J    C tjt I n          ^               < ?£< *£'                             J@ -xj                     <f<-~&-
                    _-                         jL&zd^        jj^O>^                               ?          Q-<^C{ju^                 . ■'         ^$2*+y-£e&J
 C                                   ^                      cct^U 1                              ^           -


                    ^                    t£- ~ ___    i£c               k~C*J2 _          yf>2 ^<n-^t*                    ^<a-x^=>.. sT.                           ......
                        Jb*'-i-     &*■                                           1'•?!                                                        '       ~_r/l
                                                           i/-0 & ^zi/}           _.e?K



                   ‘y ').                           CJZ*7 —       /^C.    y? ^ /% £a^bttU ^7 <” ^ y^-1
                         C?-                      /2 ^ r>^-^ ..JP***'?. ^***^ • //<- s o h £■&$ ^

               '                                                  >L*S>         CJO & & 1

               ~ }\ ,....A v                                _ <2^seszzsi=
              /t^L + ^ z f 2i oc-A-                                                                                   L O ^ ------------- .^> _p~-c~-£^'^
          _




                                                                                            ^X ^yp j                       b                                 ---
                        ik ^ J                         D&n ,- fp isc r* /


fy/T                        ^                   xJ ^        ^           o-        /             e x y                / ^ . /                                        / >^r


^3^   Q}~C<
          f                   4^)   J l^ l ^                          — Jsar                                 —        J-!<- /-eu~£                           c^    / <at*»*^j
              7 ^ /      w ^ p ^c^yA                                         dr               ■ '7 /J
                                       }-*- -P~)                                      J^“       i to—*'*pxe^e^A. cS^?
                         ^ jt\^              _                          _         _       ...                                                                      ^
                     a           ^        ,                                                                         jrjL&^cr*
                 ^       e           p         /^       T         T         ^   .       »           Z        S           %           f jS           ^         r p       '^
                 ~t 1S                                       cXep                                             J/^=t             *2&r07 *^& 7                        ^*v

                 fo v .                  J -* s           ^ > ^ - 6 -



                     OLrr'^C-^^ ............................................^ 7                                                              <^»        ^
                                                                                        <*>&7,<u £ J Z -.#£' <J&2>Tr> ^ /?£&

                                                                                                                                              <& .
                     @t1                                                   ^        ■J^ ar ■<fjf~/


c


                 (6 ) < £ L w , 5 > & /~ ° o M p * J < - ^ s                           /< -& £ .-■
                   ad        _ C& j&t<-t /*>          rtst-JZicsiJ*-- .^f> f* /-
                                   /r^f^
                                      p ’ ... /fT^ P O      “2^&~n( —         y d ^c^t  cy^ £&~
                   f-6 - ~ ~ # J                             <^          ~7/v^



          (■c)
                             '       -£UJ-
                                       "---              (j^L~
                                                         v   *■x£*->>—
                                                               !*           ^             ^         l^-^p                    <£•?_u-•    ^                                     u
                             7/7              ^aa^a 7Pf Sl^> ^ / J                      e?              ^c          r fj
                     /« ^ 5                   s y ^ g z s e n l& e.4 r> * ^(.   < O st^ r~ ~ ?    0 -e -4 * & * 4               - ^ t/   /^     ^       ‘tA     C Z J^r*-*-*

                     y x ji                     J-e& t'                                    ’~’/ Zc-      ^ -^ O c £ ^ <
                                                                                                                      ^ sly ->                           tk
                       j^ r ^                 z^n zsZ t                                    <£^?                          <c^/                               -2_~A>
                                     P t^y^^C                            LS£i/l*                                        -.-JL«0..-      lM&>

                                                                                                    <*>                                                             ^



                                                                                              ^                     -


             ...... ..“'             i              ^        4           £4         f> ~ & ^ ^ d r c ^ i                     £&<■                                    --



                 / C £                   Jjj^1s%js6££$                     C^3^         <S^7                     ^€ r\S ) /**■Cfi.                               / / 'j / —/A
                             &£*              2_-                     /£e_^¥*£ <^L^>-1                            d£ <2*£c-*~jp Kir-t-t                  <=<. -iZ^tc-r/L ^

                 A< /-tlJ </*>                                                  &
                                                                                /                J^^Zr
ll         . 6-               ClO cp&zhzU*, d>6^y            /2~ t J~A                                                                               /&&                       1$-C
     * ~~~’ ft%k-f>6-                Y       j£k>?£j cp-*t ?         ^                                                                              £3-«Sy^**^
       ^     ej&/<, O l&i I*- ^~sUioJ^ &&%      u-&~* <^>l*7
  &                    -&*■      (j£$).                                     (^h*)       o?        /*J- J ^ L * ^

  (p j          o t* . ^                                                ^      T- C i c ^ o         Q% )

 (£ * 9                        & < ~cxo                £/<          ^ ^ - 7 2 , ^ .


(£ * )          f                               CO .       c. &

                 cx    /x ^ ^ ju c       Zb*           tsrfA zi
                                                             Zi    ^.
                                                                   _    Q f<^       c    ^    '    ^           ^

 ff~ )     ik         C2-^   ^                                          >9 ^ —      g/ ^           ~7 7 t


                                 *J, ,#L ^                         cJZ,                      Jt&~u

                                              V~n*^Qy%^C>ctj/
"T^U            *3zpt?0^J
^y ^ H .                                 £$

 (pn £ C              o^> A      <6^0^
  ^        fa         4/ChzZ


  (L- (r- _           ^C-n                                                                             \ 0<2-r,
      * a5 &S.~.
      jj? -^     60                              £*,   l^ n )-L ^ y l

                   0~^< /b-^-*A &
- ffe           J r ^ ^ ^ 7 O Z-gA'/J « ADt&7?>
 { /Z ll       ^ h n . O-,            ^U _...                                                                  <Zrp&*-t
                                                                                             < ^3~ 4> U *£&        fp

                                                                          f? ^ \ jC&%-
                                                              >/        <£&£. d_        "*£                ^
                                                                              ^ e / / ^ 14 _                       y<=z>
#C<i*M           (J&L,                                   g£x>~L 'Ao A £j Jf& t/ <=»£yT


6 4    f A       &




               £$ /J*-               £        &-*i
                  hh0 '
DRAFT.




I am now going to turn to giving you a number of directions

on issues of law.         As you will see in a moment,       a majority

of the time will be occupied with aspects relating to a

possible verdict of unlawfully killed.               You are not to

construe this as meaning that I am directing you either

towards or away from that particular verdict,              it is simply

that the legal concepts and aspects which have to be

considered are a.         numerous,     b.   complex    c. important and

d.  differ in certain respects from those applicable to
           «»6Ut
some of the^verdicts which may be open to you.

However,     before I get down to that,        I wish to draw your

attention to the provision of the Coroners Act 1988 Section

II   (5)   (b).
                     >uM                 y-    11.
Furthermore,        s*se Section 6 of   that iV«t.


As an aside I should perhaps mention that this amendment

was introduced in 1977 prior to that,            it had been possible

for coroners'         juries to name people who they thought had

been guilty of murder, manslaughter or infanticide.

In addition to the Act of Parliament,            there are also Rules

which apply to coroners and the current rules are the 1984

coroners r u l e s .

I therefore now draw your attention to Rule 36.               This rule




BAFAAG
                           -   2




reads as follows




The effect of this rule is that neither you nor I are

allowed to put on to the inquisition what used to be known

as   'riders'    i.e., advice or comments.

I am also required to draw to your attention Rule 42.



It is essential that the provisions of this rule together

with the provisiions of Rule 36        (b) are strictly adhered to

by you and indeed by me.



SELF INCRIMINATION.



I also wish to draw your attention to Rule 22.         This

r e a d s :-

        1.     "No witness at an inquest should be obliged to

                answer any question tending to incriminate

                himself.

        2.     Where it appears to the coroner that the witness

               has been asked such a question,   the coroner shall

               inform the witness that he m a y refuse to answer".



This is an exceedingly important rule and is fundemental to




BAFAAG
the present system of justice in the United Kingdom.

You m a y have noticed that some of the witnesses were told

of the rule and of the privilege to which they were

entitled and some exercised their rights.    Put another way,

a witness has a right of silence.



RIGHTS OF SILENCE.



It would be grossly unfair and quite contrary to the

intention of the rule and indeed to justice if you were to

construe a refusal to answer a question under the privilege

as an admission or an indication of guilt.    To construe the

privilege in such a way would not only run contra to the

whole principle of the rule but would in effect place the

person who exercised the privilege in a far worse position

than if he had in fact answered the question.

The position is simply this:-   That you m a y not construe

silence as constituting any part of the evidence on which

your deliberations are based.   You have to be satisfied

from the evidence which you have heard and not from

evidence which you have not heard nor m a y you draw any

inferences from the exercise of the privilege.    Under no

circumstances must the privilege be turned into a noose.



VERDICTS -



I now remind you of the possible verdicts which you might




BAFAAG
be able to consider in respect of these inquests



     1.   Unlawfully killed.

     2.   Accidental death or misadventure         (I will tell you

            now that in law,        there is no difference between

            these two t e r m s ,   We will deal with this in a

            little more detail later o n ) -

 ?   3.   A special verdict which again I will deal with a

            little later on.

     4.   What is known as an open verdict.



STANDARD OF PROOF.



In considering the evidence, you obviously will have to be

satisfied that the necessary standard of proof has been

achieved in order to enable you to reach one or other of

the verdicts which I have mentioned.           Different standards

of proof are required for different verdicts.           If I m a y

summarise first of all,        in respect of the verdict of

u nlawfully killed you have to be satisfied to the standard

which can be described as the criminal standard of proof.

In respect of accidental death or m is a dventure       (or a

special verdict)      the standard wou Id be that of the balance

of probability.       In the case of an open verdict there is in

a sense no standard for the reasons which you will see

later on.




BAFAAG
CRIMINAL STANDARD.




Let us then deal in a little more detail wit h the standard

of proof required for unlawfully killed.       Before you are

able to bring in a verdict of unlawfully killed,         you have

to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt      (or to put it in

slightly more modern language,      you have to be satisfied so

that you are sure)      that the evidence which you have heard

and which you are considering,      satisfies you that both the

act and necessary mental state of the criminal offence

which you are considering has been made out.

            of=

In respect of the other verdicts except of course an open

verdict the standard of proof is the lower one n Uim n+i y

described as the balance of probability, ^ t ^ w i l l    be

obvious to you therefore that a vex^y-'limch higher standard

of proof is required befp^-er'you can bring in a verdict of

u g X awfully k iJLletf.-



ORDER OF CONSIDERATION.



As a direct consequence of this the order in w h ic h you

consider the verdicts becomes important.      In considering the

verdicts,    you have to apply your mind to the verdict of

unlawfully killed first of all.       You have to consider the

verdict in respect of each of the deceased.       You have to

apply the facts w ithin the context of the law as explained




BAFAAG
to you and you must apply it in respect of each of the

parties whose conduct you are considering based as I have

already said upon the evidence which you have heard.




UNLAWFULLY KILLED - INTRODUCTION.



What then are the legal parameters or requirements that

have to be met in the context of these inquests before you

are able to consider a verdict of unlawfully killed.

I do not propose to take you through the whole law of

murde r or manslaughter but for the purposes of these

inquests the criminal equivalent of the verdict of

unlawfully killed is one of the forms of involuntary

manslaughter and by definition excludes what we know to be

m urder or any other aspects of deliberate killing.      The

legal requirements for this type of m a ns laughter have been

considered in various cases and in particular a case known

as r _ v - West London Coroner Ex parte Gray.     In that case

w h i c h dealt with an alleged unlawful killing by a police

officer by neglect,   Lord Justice Watkins set out the

matters which a jury have to be satisfied on beyond

reasonable doubt.

Before I go through the points I should add that although

in that particular case the issue related to neglect on the

part of the police,   the fundamental principles of the

direction would apply in respect of anybody w h o m you might




BAFAAG
                                   7
»




    be considering as falling within the purview of this

    verdict.



    You have to be satisfied of the following points in the

    first instance:-



         1.    That the person whose conduct you are considering

               had a duty^to have regard to the health and

               welfare say safety of the deceased^. *T



         2.    That in the circumstances,             there was a failure to

               do what should have been done(jEor the health and

               welfare,    say safety of the deceasedj.



         3.    That that failure amounted to a substantial cause

               of death.



         4.    That the failure amounted to recklessness.



         5-    Recklessness means that there was an obvious and

               serious risk/Tto the health and welfare                  (safety)
                                       *2
               of the d e c e a s e ^ a n d that the person whose conduct

               is being considered having regard to his duty was



                  a. Indifferent to such risk or



                  b. Recognising that risk <2 S 3» M              be present,

         *1    (aliter:    not to c a u s e i n j u r y to the d e c e a s e d )

         *2    (aliter:    of i n j u r y to t he d e c e a s e d )
    BAFAAG
                                -   8    -




                deliberately chose to run that risk by doing

                nothing about i t .



     6.   It must be clearly understood however that a

          failure to appreciate that there was such a risk

          would not by itself be sufficient to amount to

          recklessness.



     7.   You can only return a verdict of unlawfully killed

          if you can attribute these ingredients to a single

          individual whose conduct is being called in

          question.   Such an individual should on no

          account be named or otherwise identified.




CAUSATION.



The next point that I think I have to mention is the issue

'Causation'.   You have to be satisfied that the act or
                                                                            6lJ L £r
ompfision complained of hcto-actually—e araso^ythe injury ear

the death in this particular case.           Not every causative act

would give rise to liability.           For example it could be

argued that no-body would have died if the game of football

were not played in the United Kingdomv&ar, bringing it

slightly nearer home,     i-41— t-fere^e wars— no-F.A.   Cup competition/
                                                                            iJx. Jx&il*
                                                                               (JOU4i8.
All of these in one sense are causes,            but wit h none of them
                                                                                /vLUir*-




BAFAAG
                                  9




I think would we have any difficulty in excluding them as

causing these deaths because they are obviously too remote.
fcJ*                         elects} e^c^u,-U')
In other words, you have to be satisfied that the act or

ommision which you are looking at is:-



       a.     sufficiently close,       sufficiently related to the

              event as to be logically classifiable as causative

              of death^and



       ^      is a substantial cause of death.




Recklessness is at the heart of a verdict of unlawf

killing.       In addition to what I have already toj^et^you I

think it might be helfpul if I illustrated p h e legal
                                          /
approach by reference to what was said^jpn another leading

case wh i ch is known as R - v - Lawr^atfce.         The details of

that case do not concern us but ±t m a y help to understand
                                          /
what is meant by recklessness^If I give you a couple of

quotes.



The first one is from Lord Hailsham.              He says when speaking

about the word/reckless t h a t :-



           Undike most fencrlish w<




BAFAAG
                           -     10   -




     language as a word in general use at least since the

    eight century /ck.&. almost always with the same meaning

     applied to personal conduct,           as a state of mind

     stopping short of deliberate intention and going/
                      --              11   ■*'      ""*               /


     beyond mere inadvertence".



Lord Diplock comments          "that the word has not Required a

special meaning as a term of legal art but mc>te its popular
                                                               /
or dictionary meaning of careless,               regardless or heedless

of possible harmful consequences of ones ^ct".                     He goes on
                                                          //
to say:-                                             /



     "One does not speak of a persoi) acting recklessly even

     though he has given no thought at all to the

     consequences of his a c t ... unless the act is one that

     presents a real risk of harmful consequences which

     anyone acting wit h reasonable prudence would recognise

     and give heed t o ".         /



Lord Diplock also says:-




     "Recklessness on the part of the doer of an act does

     presuppose ,that there is something in the

     circumstances that would have drawn the attenti on of
               /
     an ordihary prudent individual to the po ssibility that
           /
     his a6t was capable of causing the kind of serious,




BAFAAG
                                 11 -




       hamfiilr-co-rre^quences that the section which creates

       the offence was intended to prevent and that the r i s k /

       of those harmful consequences occurring was not so ^
                                                                    /
       slight that an ordinary prudent individual w o u l d /

       feel justified in treating them as n e g l i g a b l e .

       It is only when this is so that the doer of the act is

       acting recklessly if before doing the act He either

       fails to give any thought to the p o ssibility of

       there being any such risk or having recognised that

       there was such a risk he nevertheless goes on to

       do it".



Altho u gh as I say, the precise derails are of no concern

of ours, you m a y be interested /to know that it was a case

which dealt wit h the issue relating to reckless driving and

one of the aspects wh ic h tKe law lords were applying their

minds to was the distinction between an offence of reckless

driving and driving without due care and attention.

It seems to me that not every assumption of a risk can

therefore be described as being reckless           for example,   every

operation performed by a surgeon carries wit h it the

inevitable ri,6k of injury as well as a risk of other

adverse consequences including in some cases,            death.   This

risk in Riany cases is both obvious and serious and can

occur however competent the operation is in fact carried

o u t ./

The assessment of whether or not a patient should proceed
 /'



BAFAAG
                                -       12      -




to operation is made both b y the surgeon and by the patient

by assessing this benefit./equation and trading off the

advantages and disadvantages of operating or not.                          It

would however be somewhat surprising if say having

considered a risky operation and decided to proceed,                            the
                            /
surgeon having performed it competently were to be
                        /
prosecuted for manslaughter because in the events the

patient had died. (

                                    ^        U to M /o /.   LS.                            £*

Summarising then a g a i n / recklessness                     defined as:-



     1.   There has to be an obvious and serious riskCto the

          health and welfare of the deceased^                         If that has

          been established then,



     2.   That the person whose conduct was called in

          question either,



          a.   Was indifferent to such risk or



          b.    Recognising the risk has decided to go on

               and take it.



Before however coming to the                   definition of recklessness             in

this type of    case, as I have already indicated there are

three preliminary steps which you have to consider and

which we will look at in a little more detail now.


           * (aliter:       of i n j u r y to the d e c e a s e d )

BAFAAG
        1 .    That       there           has       to       be   a     duty       of    care.            That       in    many

                instances                is    not       too      difficult              to    determine.                  As      a


                general             rule       if    somebody               undertakes               to    perform             a

                task       e.g.,          stage          a    football             match       or     organise             it


                or    supervise                it,       they         can     be    assummed              to    have       a


                duty       of       care       towards             the      people           with     whom       they


                come       in       contact.                 Slightly          more          difficult,              but

                I    think          still       relatively                   straightforward                    is    the

                issue          of       whether          or       not       fans    who        attend          also       have

                a    duty          of    care       to       each       other.           I     can    see       no    reason


                why       if       road       users          have       a    duty       of     care       to    others


                upon       the          road,       pedestrians                and       fans        attending             do


                not       also          have    a    similar                obligation             towards           each


                other.




                Failure             to    do    what          should          have       been        done^/          This

                                                         ..   . .                                                 ■            <   '   ‘
                may       require             more       thought.




Simply        because          something             goes          wrong       does          not     mean        that


there     has       been       a    breach          of       duty.




There     are       two    major           aspects            which          you        need    to        think       about




BAFAAG
Professional


P e r s o n .________




        fti.       a.   You         have    to       be    satisfied           that          in    the       case


                        of      a    professional                who     is    required             to

                        exercise            special             skill,        knowledge             or

                        experience               the       standard           of     care         which       he    is


                        expected            to       achieve        is    that        of      an    ordinary


                        skilled            member          of    that     profession                and       which


                        such         ordinary             skilled        person           would         have

                        exercised               or     professed          to       have       had       in    respect


                        of       that      special          skill.            We     are      not       talking

                        about            some    paragon           of    virtue           nor      of    somebody


                        who         is    particularly              bad,        it      is    an    ordinary


                        average            member          of     that    profession                or       class.


Ordinary

individuals.




                   b.   In       respect          of      people        who     do      not       profess           to


                        have         special           skills       you       apply          the        standard          of


                        an       ordinary             prudent       person           as      exemplified                 by


                        yourselves.

_____________T f    when     you         apply       this       test     you       were       to    come

                           to    the       conclusion             that        there       has       been       no

                           breach          of    duty       in    respect          of     the       person          who


                           you      are     considering,                 then      there           is    no    need       to


__________________         consider             the       other    points          in      respect            of    him.




 BAFAAG
      'll J2 .    The       second           aspect        is    what         I    would           describe          as     a

                  dilemma              or    a     crisis       situation,                  -ff     a    p e r s c m — ts

                                                                         then          t h e _ _ d e g r e e _Qf,    .c a r e _

                  m a y - v - g r y - w i rtrh— b h c      c i r c u f n -o t a n c o-s -          In    an    emergency

                   the      fact        that        in    the    events            a     wrong          decision          is


                   taken          need       not     constitute               a    breach           of     duty


                   provided             that        the    decision               was      not      unreasonably


                   taken          in    the        circumstances                  g e JLa t i n g       which

                   prevailed                and     taking        all       the        aspects           into       account.




If    you        come    to       the       conclusion            from        the        evidence             that        there


was     an       emergency             situation           you         then       have        to    decide          whether


the     response             to    that          situation            was     not        unreasonable.




You     may       of    course          come        to    the     conclusion                  that       there        was        no


emergency              situation              at    all    or     alternatively                     the       situation

itself           had    been       caused           or    precipitated                   by     a   breach           of    duty


by     the       person       whose           conduct           you     are       considering.                      You    must


have        it    clearly          fixed           in    your     minds           that        breach          of     duty        has

to     be    proved          beyond           reasonable               doubt        from        the       evidence,              and

ac     I    have       alr^niy          w ***1 .....        -      .   .iln .il     w it h - i n         more—detail ;

that        it    must       be    attributable                  to     one        individual                 and    not              A


^ssumation              of    the           acts    of    different               p e o p l e . ^ The           third


point        is       that    the           failure       amounts           to       a    substantial                cause        of


death.            This       is    an        important           point            because           we    have       in     the


course           of    this       inquest           been        looking            at     the       activities              of


all        kinds       of    people              including         some           junior          officers           or     as

has        been       mentioned              'small       cogs         in     a    big      machine'.                There




BAFAAG
                                                        16




 may       well      have            been    some        failures            by       very       many       people             but    it

 should           not      take        you       very        long     to     exclude             the      vast        majority


 of     the       people             from    your       deliberation.




 The       word         'substantial'                  should         be     given          its      usual           meaning.

 It     is     an    ordinary               inglish           word       and      I    am    sure         that           you


 understand                  it.




 If     the       person             whose       conduct           you      are       considering                   does       not    » •


 your        v i QT ~/ m       r I    thr    r                     y n 11 d o     not       have       to       porcciv'cr t o


 consider               thie     issue       of        recklessness               in       respect          of       him.       ^If

 it     does        meet         the       criteria           the     most        that       you       have          in       fact

 established                   would        be     that       he, h a d      been          negligent.                    ft    1&*
fate*                            v                                     ^
 q y g.n     fnifelJala_tJiaJL-you                     may        feel      that       he    was       v e p __nax


        gjL«ociijly          mjgligowtr                                is    not

^jpftairrent,       sufficient                   ground       for      you      to     bring         in     a       verdict          of


 unlawfully                  killed.              It    simply         seems          to    me    to      be        in    this

 particular                  type      of        unlawful          killing,            the       opening             of       the

 door        which           enables             you    to    consider            the       heart         of        the       matter,


 namely           whether             or    not        there       has      been       recklessless                      as


 d e f i n e d . by-^CtTS             ju d g e s .       I    remind         you       again         that           you       have        to


 be     satisfied                on    three           basic       matters            in    respect             of


 recklessness.




             1 .        That         there        is    an    obvious           and        serious          risk          of


                        injury.              I    u a e - t -fre- w o r d — 'i n j u r y ' — b e e n u s e               t h a t — -r s


                        fc-h o     torm     that        hao       b e e n -u s e d     by- many                     the— judges^


             X.     ~f&                                o*> O                                     L              °


  bafJ g            o    >                                    ^        ^
             la-nf-   t-Vipy ngg.        i t.   in   th p


             d e fe-
                   Jfimont to- the health- a*vd

                       gpH      n r fche.-Sa fp ty..,Q £              The
0 )
             definition includes two w o r d s :-



             a.       'o b v i o u s '




             b.       'serious'



and you have to be satisfied on both.



In considering this, you have to put yourself into the

position of the people with their state of knowledge on the

15th of April 1989 and exclude the benefit of hindsight,

and you have to ask yourself the question, whe th e r on that

day there was an obvious and serious risk of injury.



In a recent case in the Crown Court arising out of the

Zebrugge disaster, Mr.                    Justice Turner in one place said

"obviously we are talking about a risk and no-body denies

there was a risk.               It is the application of the word

'obvious'      that is troubling me and has been troubling me

for a long time.              Obvious if it operates that it will be a

serious risk I quite follow but obvious that it will occur

is the p r o b l e m " .      If you think about it that is precisely

the




BAFAAG
                                18   -




 problem which you are faced with.        You ma y feel that the

 word   'obvious' means something like     'perfectly evident,

 staring one in the face,      immediately apparent"and indeed

 these terms were canvassed before Mr.        Justice Turner.

 Justice Turner also clearly distinguished— the’
                                               ""word

 'obvious'   and   'serious          being mere synonyms of

 re&e-oTraMry-foreseeab-lej^You may ask obvious to whom?

 Clearly in the first instance the person whose conduct you

 are considering,     but in assessing that you apply the test

 of the ordinary skilled prof essijfonal, as I have already

 described or if you were thinking of a n o n—professional

 person,   an ordinary prudent individual as exemplified by

 yourself and who might find himself in that position or

 condition on that day.       I also want to make it clear to you

 that obviousness on its own is not enough.          The definition

 clearly includes the word      'serious' and you have to give it

appropriate weight.       In other words there must be an

obvious and serious risk of injury.        If you wer e satisfied

that there was an obvious and serious risk you are not yet

home and dry       because you have to ask the next questions

namely, was the person whose conduct you are calling in

question indifferent to the risk or having recognised the

risk decide to go ahead and take it.




In order to avoid any m is un d erstanding Lord Justice Watkins

then adds that it must be emphasised       "that mere failure to



Ik V                                        rrc_ ^
recognise               the       presence           of       such        a    risk       is   not     sufficient.


In    other           words,         he       is    drawing             the     distinction                as       I    see             it


between           a     person           who       may       well       be     negligent             and       in       that


sense        liable           say        to    civil          ppnri 1 1~ i p.s— & &        damage^             but       whose

state        of       mind        does        not                  the        criteria         required                 for

recklessness                  which           despite             the     repetition             is    either               a


recognition                  of    an     obvious             and       serious           risk       and       decision                   to


take        it    or     indifference                    to       such        risk.        There          ars   _tw.Q                .

f i |T- t h o r   p n i..n        — tO    t h i s ...        *




FirstJyr              in rnnniili i iihj I ' a s p e c t s                                TYt nscklossnpRR— tliejre

is     a    very        interesting                 case          which        was       decided          by    the         Pr^vy


Council            and       in    which           one       of     the       Law    Lords,          known          asj/ijord


Roskill            gave       the        leading             judgement              (explain          thar          Privy


Council            judgements                 are       not       binding           in    English          courts                but


clearly            has       persuasive                 authority).                  This/particular                            case

involved              the     collision                 of       two    hydrofpals              in    Hong          Kong             in


bright            clear       daylight.                  Lord          Roskjal           having       quoted


extensively                  from        Lord       Diplocky ^ L o r d                   DiploQJfr w h o m              I       have


already            mentioned              goes          on       V ^ s a y     "their          Lordships


emphasised               that        in       this/passage                    Lord       Diplock          was       speaking

of     an     obvious             and     se/lous                risk     of    causing          physical                   injury
                                              /
created            by    the        dependent.                    He    was     not       there       concerned                      to

deal        with        cases        where          the          conduct        complained                of    was             of       a


defendent'#re-action                                or       lack       of     re-action             to    such             a    risk


created'by               another              person".




BAFAAG
                         -   20




 YStt-wil't-ser'tlial this passajj& in some w a y m-irxQrs what I

have already indicated t o ^ o u   regarding crisis situations

or emergency i.e., yoy/are entitled and indeed must take

into account all tj*§ circumstances.          This point is backed

up to a certain/textent by another Lord, Lord Edmund Davis

who in R - v/- Caldwell says       "in the absence of exculpatory

factors thfe defendent's     state of mind is therefore all

important where recklessness is an element in the offence

ch ^ 4 j e d — e^fchea^-woirds ^J^C 1"Chhi!~ are no excuses vThich

are legitimate arid^^roper then the state of mind is an all

impo^afi^5ctcrtor.
                ____
F inally—cm ttacrst...pt?jnt^t is possible to imagine a situation

where a person perceives a situation,       assesses it as not

constituting an obvious and serious risk situation at all*

    Indeed to a certain extent this seems to be the case in

respect of nearly all the parties who immediately before

the incident if asked, would havo— I— thirtJe, would have said

that they felt the use of the stadium was reasonably safe

for the admission of spectators to the semi-final match.

This ma y have been based on various assumptions as to what

or would not happen but it forms a basis of their belief.

If you were to find that this applied then that person

would not fall w it h in either of the two limbs of the

definition of recklessness because he would have applied

his mind   to the risk situation.      In other words he would

not have been indifferent to it^ and having decided that
         Jit &XA oK-    ¥>  ^       \y) oL -tM/UoJA 1^4 lA V_
there was^no risk could not be described as having seen it,




BAFAAG
                                                            -      21      -




deliberately                 went          on    to     take       it
                                                                                                 „                 £> ^                **■
                              ±    l       ,    7 <     ~    £


 ,ne   of        the    i n t,Q r p q t-1 n q         f o ^ w r f t s ,.a f         the       H i l l s b o r o ugh,


d i s ^ t e r         from    a    legal          point          of     view         is       the     diffe^pence

betweeVthis                  and       many       of       the     other            disasters             wfiich            have


unfortunately                 occurred                in    recent             times.              Fo/r    instance               you

think        of       the    Zebrugge             Disaster              (passenge/s                   killed            on    a    ship


which        sailed          with          open       bow       doors          or    tbe       Kegworth                Disaster


when        an    engine          caught          fire          and     the/Wrong                  engine          was


switched              off    or    the          Lockerbie             Disaster                where       a     bomb         was

placed           on    an    aircraft             or       some/of             the       train        accidents               which

have        recently          occurred                or    fene      Manchester                   Air    Disaster).                    In


all     of       these       the       peopleyfcho               were          killed          were        in      a    sense


entirely              helpless.                 Ttfey      had     nothing               whatever             to       do    with


the     flying          of    the          ndanes,          running             of       the       trains,             the

sailing           of    the       shap,          operation              of      the       bow        doors.             In    the

Hillsborough                 D/saster             the       position                is    slightly              different

in     that       there       is       a    very        active          interplay                  between             all    the


parties           involved,                and    at       least        the         situation              outside            the


turnsti/e              area       and       possibly             even          the       situation              within            or    on


the

Finally           before           you          can     bring         in       such       a     verdict,               you    have

to     be    satisfied             beyond             reasonable                doubt           that       the

recklessness                 which          you       are       considering                   is     attributable                  to


one     single          person.                 What       this       means          is       that        you      may       not


aggregate              or    add       together             the       acts          of    different                people          and




BAFAAG
then    attribute             say       the       failures          of       several          persons       to       just


one    particular             individual.




Each    person          stands          on    his       own    and       you       have       to    be    satisfied

on    the    evidence             that       the       ingredients             have          been    made       out.


This    is       not    to    say       that       y    ou    cannot          in    fact       have       more       than


one    person          who    might          be    liable          to    the       finding          of    unlawfully


killed.           For       example,          if       two    or    three          people          attack       one


individual             and    they       all       individuallly                   inflict          wounds       which

are    sufficiently                severe          as    to    constitute                a    substantial

cause       of    death,          the    fact          that    there          may       be    three       wounds,


each    one       of    which       on       its       own    would          have       been       sufficient             to


kill    the       victim          does       not       absolve          two    of       the    assailants.


All    three        for      their       individual                act       may    be       held    responsible,


because          each       one,    taken          on    its       own       would       satisfy          the

definition             of    the    offence             of    murder          or    manslaughter                as    the

case    may       b e .J^ F i n a l l y ,         and    I    no    not       need       to    spend^time             on


this,       if    you       were    to       find       the    verdict             of    unlawfully             killed,


under       no    circumstances                   must       you    name       or       identify          the


person.




You    are       dealing          not    with          persons          to    be    blamed          but    with       an

inquest          and    you       have       to    decide          not       whether          someone       is       to    be


charged          with       some    offence             or    other          but    whether          the    death


was    occasioned             unlawfully.                    You    are       looking          at    the    victims


but    to    reach          the    verdict,              you       have       to    find       that       some

person       whose          conduct          you       are    considering                meets       the




BAFAAG
requirements                   which          I    have          tried       to       outline          for       you.        If    you

decide          that          the       verdict             of    unlawfully                killed          is

inappropriate                       in       respect             of    some       or    all       of    the       deceased,


then       in       respect             of    those          you       will       then       have       to       proceed          to


the       other          verdicts.

     fore       I    discuss             these          I    should          just       mention             one       otber


point          and       that       is       the       question             of    corporate             liability.

There          has       been       a    lot       of       argument             as    to    whether/it                is

possible             for       the       company             to       have       acted       in    s/ich a w a y             that


the       verdict             of    unlawfully                   killed          be    retu^fied            in    respect          of


its       conduct.

To    a    certain             extent             these          a r g u m e n t s A\ave          been       settled          and

the       present             position             is       that       if    a /Company            is       to    be       liable

the       directing                mind       of       the       company ^fulfils                  the       criteria             of


unlawfully                killed             in    exactlyyche                   same       way    as       if    the       company


were       an       individual.                    It       follows          that       the       only       issue          which


you       have       to       decide          is       wlWt       or    who       is    the       directing                mind    of


the       company.                 The       position             seems          to    be    that       not       every

employee             of       the       company             would       fulfil          that       term          but       that    a

director             or       senior/manager                      who       has       the    running             of    the


affairs             of    the       company             would          fulfil          those       criteria.                 As    it


happens             in    thi/s         particular                 inquest,            we    have       different             forms


of    companies' wh i c h                     I    do       not       think       you       need       to    be       too

concernedy^ibout                        but       by    way       of    example             you    might          be       prepared


to    take/the                view       for       instance             that          Dr.     Eastwood                whose

company             is    known          as       Eastwood             and       Partners          would          constitute


s u c h    a    person                                       ot       his    compan-y ,           pit?fe&&hz _ M r .



h         U ->            *                                       ^

                                                                                                        m              s           ^
                         -   24     -




Mackrell in respect of Sheffield Wednesday.

I am very m uch more doubtful as te^whether it would be

possible for you to reach t h ^ c o n c l u s i o n that Mr. Bounds

was sufficiently elevated to constitute a directing mind

and will of Sheffield City Council,.                         should also
                                                                              A
remember that all the rules which I have outlined hose

applv                             s a a a i n s t~arrrr^eq^-bi n q

If you come to the conclusion that unlawfully                        killed is

inappropriate then you m ay go on to decide whether a

verdict of accidental death or misadventure is a p p r o p r i a t e -

In this case the burden of proof is entirely different.

You may bring in such a verdict if you                   are satisfied on

the balance of probabilities.              In other words,           if you are

satisfied that it is more likely than not that the

deceased's death was due to accident or misadventure.

There is no difference in the meaning of these two words.

You m ay chose w hichever you           prefer, but I would advico you

that-—M                        i-n g -t h o se verdict s r ,
          you— were -eons i der-                                        you can

not make a decision on which word you prefer, you m ay feel

that you could safely decide on the wor d                  'accident'.

You should understand w e quite clearly that the                       word

'accident'    straddles the whole spectrum of events from -fe-he-

force ma j^euru or act of (§od where most of us would take the

v ie w that no-one can really be blamed to a situation where

you are satisfied that there has been carelessness or

negligence to a greater or lesser extent and that someone

w ould have to make for instance,             compensation payments in a




BAFAAG
                                             -     25




             civil       litigation.               In    other             words          bringing          in    this    verdict

             does       not    mean     that       y    ou    absolve                each       and       every    party       from

             any       measure     of    blame* ^ o u                 are       of    course          not    entitled          to    say

             which       party     or    who       is    to       be        blamed             because       the    rulejfs


             quite       clearly        say       that       we       are       not       to    decide       aspects          of


             civil       liability^ kmt U h a t                   does          accident             or    misdadventure


             mean.        It     means       an    unforeseen                   event          or    accowrts       arising          out


             of    a    situation        which          was       intended                to    occur.           Most    of    us

             understand           the    word          without             too       much       thought.           We    may       for

    m        instance          wish     to       wash    a    glass             and       whilst          doing    so    drop       it


             in    the    sink.         It       breaks,          it       is    an       accident.              Whether       there


             is    any    culpability              would          depend             on    all       the    circumstances,


             for       example,        you       were    washing                up^glass^as                carefully          as    you

             could       and     one    slipped          out          of    your          hand       because       of    soapy

             suds       you    might     feel          that       y    ou       couldn't             be    blamed.        On       the


             other       hand     if    you       decided             to    do       it    in       total    darkness          you


             might       think     to    yourself,                well          perhaps             that    wasn't       very

             wise.        Tf you. Hpr i Hp that the M(sjr,rLLci:—                                                  ^u-44ry--ki1 l e d

             is inappropriate you                        can than -Jooye^on to the other---

             posB-ibt-e verdicts e t c .




        1    Ok                  0^°                                                                                               ^J-SSlg^
                                                                  ^> ceM                        ( /A                    d t
O   jaJJ^L               {y>/i                                                                               JeM
    A
y

        (3.00 o ’clock.)
                                       R U L I N G :

        MR. JUSTICE TURNER:    The origins of the activity which has been
    B       preceding in this court over the last three sitting days is to
            be found in the transcript of the proceedings; day 17, page 33,
            in the following exchange between myself and Mr. Jeffreys when
            I said:   "I am anxious to understand as fully as I may, the
            basis upon which you put this case against, certainly
            defendants four to eight, possibly also Captain Lewry.
                      "It is of the essence of the case for the prosecution,
            as I understand it, that before we get to the relevant state of
    D       mind of any one defendant, that there must be," by which I
            think I must have meant, "must have been, an obvious and
            serious risk of the vessel putting to sea with her bow doors ^
            open, in the light of the various alleged deficiencies.          And
            Mr. Jeffreys agreed.
                      I went on:    "We have heard a body of evidence which I
            assume for present purposes to have been relevant, probative
            and therefore admissible to the effect that experienced
            seaborne personnel never thought for a moment that with the
•   F
            system in force there was any risk of that event h a p p e n i n g ."
                      I reminded myself last night of the statements in
            evidence which had been given for the purposes and at the
            committal proceedings of Captain Blowers, de Ste. Croix,
            D avenport and Martin, who, as far as I understand their
            evidence, will confirm that which has already been said, and
            where does that leave the case in terms of obvious risk?
                      To which Mr. Jeffreys replied:       "It is our submission
    H
            that although witnesses say it did not occur to us there was an
            obvious risk, that is not conclusive of the question whether in

                           Jte to p te Reporters Htb.
w* .
fact there was."
          At page 36 of that same transcript I interrupted Mr.
Jeffreys and said:     "What we have actually to consider, at this
stage, is the obviousness of the risk," and he agreed and went
on to submit that there was a large body of evidence to say, as
Captain Rutherford had, "it never occurred to me.
         "In our submission," Mr. Jeffreys continued, "he is
not the judge or the final judge of whether there was an
obvious risk.     He can not shut it out from the jury's
consideration by, I entirely accept.     Simply because witness
after witness who operated a system which we submit was
inherently defective for the reasons I have gone into at some
length, if they were operating a system that was inherently
defective and if this was an accident waiting to happen, the
jury has to judge, in our submission, whether the system that
was in force did indeed and in fact create an obvious and
serious risk."
          At page 38, in continuing his submissions, Mr.
Jeffreys said:     "I know we can not use the doctrine of res ipsa
locquitur in a criminal court.     The starting point effectively
is this is what happened on the day:     The ship sailed with her
doors open.     What led to her sailing with her doors open?     A
failure of system," he answered."     He went on:   "A failure
either to comply with such a system as existed or, of course,
an overall deficiency in the system, we submit, which allowed
this to happen in the first place.
         "One then moves on to consider as against other
defendants, first of all, I agree in the objective sense, was
there an obvious and serious risk that the ship would sail in
that condition?     In the objective sense, our answer is yes,

              jSetosate Reporters Htb.
        there was.     Look at what happened.     Look at what seems to have
        been the cause of it.     Is there not, we say to the jury, with
        the other incidents such as they are of open doors, and was
        there not on the 6th of March an obvious risk        of the ship
    /   sailing in that condition."
                    Later on I again interrupt Mr. Jeffreys and say this:
/
        "Obviously we are talking about a risk, and nobody denies there
        was a risk.     It is the application of the word 'obvious' that
        is troubling me and has been troubling me for a long time.
        'Obvious,' if it operates that it will be a serious risk, I
        quite follow, but obvious that it will occur, is the problem."
                     Mr. Jeffreys then went     on:   "If one accepts that
        there was    a failure in the system, I use that in the most
        general terms, if one accepts that failure, or that there was a
        system which was so defective that it did not permit a safe
        operation and allowed the very thing to happen that did happen,
        albeit it had not happened before, that is still evidence, in
        our submission, of an obvious risk."
                    At page 41 Mr. Jeffreys continued:      "In our
        submission, there is material, and ample material here for the
        jury to infer the obviousness of the risk that the ship would
        sail in this condition.     It has to be largely inference, as I
        have indicated, because as your Lordship has pointed out and as
        is obvious, there was only the one incident of this scale, and
        that I appreciate.     That does not remove from the jury's
        consideration the obviousness of the risk, which we submit they
        can infer from the defective system in existence.         When one is
        looking at the question of how it would have presented itself
        to an individual defendant, one applies the test, as your
        Lordship has put to me, with which I respectfully agree:             Would

                      jgetogate Reporters l t b .
 O-boO&ilA

&CoL*>U, Cj(^J=oU
    I -f.ffiCi   <2-
v'
A


      it have occurred to a reasonably prudent person in the shoes of
      that accused, that there was such an obvious risk?"
                He then w en t on to turn to the question of lights.
B              Then later, at page 66, Mr. Jeffreys said:     "The
      company had put into service, ships with a through deck and
      loading doors close to the water line.     It is vital to the
      safety of such a ship to prevent its sailing with its doors
      open or, to put it in language more appropriate to this
      submission, to prevent the risk of such a ship sailing in that
      condition, a system has to be devised and the system was
      devised with two features, the first of which was, it was the
D     job of the assistant bosun to close the doors, which was" —        I
      introduced some language of my own, "by itself inadequate.        It
      must have been obvious that, for whatever reason, the assistant
      bosun might not perform his duty.
                "In our submission a system which dealt simply with
      the assistant bosun closing the doors, without any supervision,
      gave rise to an obvious risk that the assistant bosun might,
      for whatever reason, fail to perform his duty.     Hence, too, the
      second part of the system was devised, the supervisory function
      of the loading officer.    That function, as written into the
      instruction at page 346, was^prpart more in the breach than the
      observance and hence did not remove the risk that existed, if
      the assistant bosun's job was to close the doors without there
G
      being any supervision.    That was an obvious risk, we submit,
      and therefore remained an obvious risk because of the failure
     • to observe the instruction at page 346.    One can add perhaps in
      parentheses,    (No other system was devised to ensure that the
H
      doors were closed by means, for example, of positive reporting
      or lights)," and I commented that that goes to the breach of

                     j&etogate Reporters Htb.
the proposition, with which Mr. Jeffreys agreed.
             Mr. Jeffreys then referred to a case in the House of
Lords in the civil jurisdiction, Cavanagh and Ulster Weaving
Company, Ltd., reported at 1960 appeal cases, 145 and also
referred to in the case of Morrison and Hartlepool Shipping
Company, that is steam navigation, reported at 1956 appeal
cases, 352.
            W it h reference to Cavanagh's case, Mr. Jeffreys said
this:   "At the reading from the head note of that case, at the
time of the accident the plaintiff was wearing rubber boots
provided by the defendants, the soles of which were wet and
slippery.     It was a case," I interpolate, "whereas might be
supposed by the intelligent listener, the plaintiff fell from a
roof.   Held, one, that on the evidence the jury was entitled to
find the defendants guilty of negligence, since the evidence
such as to create practice alone could not be treated as
conclusive in favour of the defendants."
             Then after a reference to the case of Morris, which I
had already mentioned, Mr. Jeffreys continued at page 71 of the
transcript:     "We are now citing this in support of the
contention that evidence of other masters as to their failure
to appreciate a risk or an obvious risk is not conclusive of
the absence of such a risk."      He then went from the head note,
"As reported in the Independent Newspaper, of the appeal, the
judgment of the Divisional Court in the appeal by Captain Lewry
from the O r d e r of Suspension which was made at the conclusion
of the formal investigation."
            The quote was:   "The fact that the behaviour of a
master conformed to standards which were regarded as safe by
most, if not all, of his fellow captains, did not preclude his

              Jletogate Reporters l i b .
behaviour falling short of the standard of care required of the
reasonably prudent cross channel ferry master."
            He continued:   "Another way of considering this is if
an   ordinary prudent bystander would have conceived an
obvious risk of doors being left open, then that is evidence of
the existence of such an obvious risk."
             Mr. Jeffreys referred to a passage in a case called
Sangha w hi ch is reported in the All England Reports for 1988,
volume two, at page 385, and I quote:      "Is it proved that an
ordinary prudent bystander would have perceived an obvious risk
that property would be damaged and that life would thereby be
endangered?     The ordinary prudent bystander is not deemed to be
invested with expert knowledge relating to the construction of
the property, nor to have the benefit of hindsight.      The time
at which is material is the time when the fire started."
             I venture to think that there are some obvious and
important truths contained within that particular passage.
            I turn to the transcript of the next day's
proceedings, which in fact came after the weekend and after
time for reflection, page two:     "In our submission, the
starting point is this:     That the standard of obviousness is
not dependent merely upon what any defendant knew, but what
should have been apparent to an ordinary prudent person in his
position.     The test of what he ought to have known, to put it
in short form, follows, of course, we submit the analogous
stream of authority in negligence in applying the reasonable
man test."     I asked the question, "This is going to lead us
simply into negligence, is it not?" and received the answer:
"Not necessarily."
             In his submissions that continued after that, Mr.
                              6
              Jletosate Reporters ltb .
Jeffreys said this:     "One is talking about a foreseeability of
risk in simple negligence.      About the existence of an obvious
risk in applying the Caldwell/Lawrence test, but one still has
to have .the existence of such a risk, in our submission.          If
one approaches it on the basis of negligence, one then has to
move into the question, whether the breach is such as to render
the negligence gross negligence in accordance with some of the
old authorities, but the starting point, in our submission, is
the existence of a risk which should have been apparent to the
ordinary prudent person applying the Lawrence/Caldwell test in
the shoes of the defendant or as has been said in more than one
case, a prudent bystander observing what was going on."
          Reference, of course, to the Caldwell/Lawrence test
was a reference to the case of the Commissioner of the
Metropolitan Police and Caldwell, reported in (1982) AC at page
341, in the course of which, at page 353, Lord Diplock arrived
at a decision as to the meaning of the word "reckless" in the
Criminal Damage Act of 1971.      At letter F, Lord Diplock had
been considering the case of the Queen against Daryl Porter
reported in (1977) 1WLR, page 600 and after some other
observations went on to say:      "The court, however, reached its
final conclusion by a different route.        It made the assumption
that although Parliament, in replacing the Act of 1861 by the
Act of 1971 had discarded the word 'maliciously' as descriptive
of the mens rea of the offences of which the actus reus is
damaging property, in favour of the more explicit phrase,
'intending to destroy or damage such property, or being
reckless as to whether any such property would be d e s t r o y e d . '
It nevertheless intended the words to be interpreted in
precisely the same sense as that in which the single adverb

             Jletogate ^Reporters Htb.
’m a l i c i o u s l y ’ had been construed by Professor Kenny in the
passage which received the subsequent approval of the Court of
Appeal in R v. Cunningham (1957) 2 Q.B., at 396.
          "My Lords, I see no warrant for making such an
assumption in an Act which declared purpose is to revise the
then existing law as to offences to damage to property, not to
perpetuate it.     'Reckless' as used in the new statutory
definition of the mens rea of these offences is an ordinary
English word.    It had not, by 1971, become a term of legal art
with some more limited esoteric meaning than that which it bore
in ordinary speech, a meaning which surely includes not only
deciding to ignore a risk of harmful consequences resulting
from one's acts that one has recognised as existing but also
failing to give any thought to whether or not there is any such
risk in circumstances where, if any thought were given to the
matter, it would be obvious that there was.
          If one is attaching labels, the latter state of mind
is neither more nor less 'subjective' than the first, but the
label solves nothing.      It is a statement of the obvious;            mens
rea is, by definition, a state of mind of the accused himself
at the time he did the physical act that constitutes the actus
reus of the offence; it cannot be the mental state of some
nonexistent hypothetical person.
          "Nevertheless,    to decide whether someone has been

reckless as to whether harmful consequences of a particular

kind will result from his act, as distinguished from his

actually intending such harmful consequences to follow, does

call for some consideration how the mind of the ordinary

prudent individual would have reacted to a similar situation.

If there were nothing in the circumstances that ought to have
                                g

             Jletogate Reporters Htb.
drawn the attention of an ordinary prudent individual to the
possibility of that kind of harmful consequence, the accused
would not be described as 'reckless', in the natural meaning of
that word, for failing to address his mind to the possibility;
nor if the risk of the harmful consequences were so slight that
the ordinary prudent individual, upon due consideration of the
risk, would not be deterred from treating it as negligible,
could the accused be described as 'reckless' in its ordinary
sense, if, having considered the risk, he decided to ignore
it.   In this connection, the gravity of the possible harmful
consequences would be an important factor.     To endanger life
must be one of the most grave.    So, to this extent, even if one
ascribes to reckless, only the strict meaning adopted by the
Court of Appeal in the Queen against Stephenson 1979 Q.B., 695
and the Queen against Briggs,    (Note) 1977 1WLR at 605, of
foreseeing that a particular kind of harm m ight happen and yet
going on to take the risk of it, it involves a test that would
be described in part as 'objective' in current legal jargon.
Questions of criminal liability are seldom solved by simply
asking whether the test is subjective or objective.
         In my opinion, a person charged with an offence under
Section 11 of the Criminal Damage Act, 1971 is reckless as to
whether any such property would be destroyed or damaged if (1)
he does an act which in fact creates an obvious risk that
property will be destroyed or damaged; and (2) when he does the
act, he either has not given any thought to the possibility of
there being any such risk, or has recognised that there was
some risk involved and has nonetheless gone on to do it.       That
would be a proper direction to the jury.     Cases in the Court of
Appeal which held otherwise should be regarded as overruled.

            Jletogate Reporters I t b .
          As has been seen, the case of Caldwell was concerned
to analyse and define what were the requisite elements of
'recklessness' where a prosecution was brought under the
provisions of section one of the Criminal Damage Act 1971, and
it did not attempt to expound upon the meaning of what I will
call "non-statutory recklessness,” although Lord Diplock arrived
at his conclusion by attributing to the word 'reckless,' in the
relevant sub-section, its meaning as being in accordance with
ordinary English usage.     It remained, but not for long, to be
seen how 'reckless' or 'recklessness' would be interpreted in
the context of another statute, namely section one of the Road
Traffic Act, 1972,   (as amended).
         In the Queen against Lawrence,     (1982) AC, page 510,
Lord Diplock again delivered the leading speech.        He adverted
to the decision in the Queen against Caldwell.      At page 525 of
the report in Lawrence he said:      'This House has very recently
had occasion, in the Queen against Caldwell, to give close
consideration to the concept of recklessness as constituted in
mens rea in criminal law.      The conclusion reached by the
majority was that the adjective 'reckless' when used in a
criminal statute, that the Criminal Damage Act, 1971 had not
acquired a special meaning as a term of legal art, but bore its
popular or dictionary meaning of 'careless, regardless or
heedless of the possible harmful consequences of one's acts.'
The same must be true of the proverb of the adverbial
derivative,   'recklessly.'"
         Continuing at letter G:      "In ordinary usage,
'recklessly' as descriptive of a physical act such as driving a
motor vehicle which can be performed in a variety of different
ways, some of them entailing danger and some of them not,

              J5>etogate Reporters Htb.
refers not only to the state of mind of the doer of the act

when he decides to do it, but also qualifies the manner in

which the act itself is performed.                One does not speak of a

person acting recklessly,          even though he has given no thought

at all to the consequences of his act, unless the act is one

that presents a real risk of harmful consequences which anyone

acting with reasonable prudence would recognise and give heed

to.     So the actus reus of the offence under sections one and

two is not simply driving a motor vehicle on a road, but

driving it in a manner which in fact creates a real risk of

harmful consequences resulting from it."

           Lord Diplock then went on to address the respects in
which the offence u nder the Road Traffic Act might differ from
that u nder the Criminal Damage Act, and at letter E said
this:     "I now turn to the mens rea.             My task is greatly
simplified by what has already been said about the concept of
recklessness in criminal law in the Queen against Caldwell.
Warning was there given against adopting the simplistic
approach of treating all problems of criminal liability as
soluble by classifying the test of liability as being either
subjective or objective.           Recklessness on the part of the doer
of an act does presuppose that there is something in the
circumstances that would have drawn the attention of an
ordinary prudent individual to the possibility that his act was
capable of causing the kind of serious harmful consequences
that the section which creates the offence was intended to
prevent and that the risk of those harmful consequences
occurring was not so slight that an ordinary prudent person
would justify treating them as negligible.                It is only when it
happens that the doer of the act is acting 'recklessly' if

              J l e t o g a t e R e p o r t e r s Itl).
  before doing the act he either fails to give any thought to the
  possibility of there being any such risk, or having recognised
  that there was such a risk, he nevertheless goes on to do it."
  I interpolate the language of this passage is, of course, by
  now familiar.
             Lord Diplock then went on to set out what he
  considered to be, and what has subsequently been adopted by the
  Court of Appeal, Criminal Division, as the necessary direction
  to a jury in any case in which recklessness is necessary    as one
  of the ingredients of an offence.    I do not repeat that
  direction as it is by now already well-known.
             It is, however, worth noting that at letter A, Lord
  Diplock went on to say that:
"It is for the jury to decide
  whether the risk created by the manner in which the vehicle was
  being driven was both obvious and serious, and in deciding
  this, they may apply the standard of the ordinary prudent
  motorist as represented by themselves," and those words may
  usefully be underlined.
             The decisions in Caldwell and Lawrence left
  undetermined whether statutory recklessness for Road Traffic
  Act purposes was to be equated with common law recklessness in
  the offence of manslaughter.    Again, there was not long to wait
  before this point also was decided, in the Queen against
  Seymour,   (1983) AC at page 493.
             In that case, Lord Roskill, who had been party to the
  decision in Lawrence, gave the leading speech.    For present
  purposes, it is sufficient to quote from the first part of the
  holding in the head note which is to be found at page 494,
  letter C, that, "where manslaughter was charged and the

               J^etogate Reporters I t b .
circumstances were that the victim was killed as a result of
the reckless driving of the defendant on a public highway, the
trial judge should give the jury the direction suggested in the
Queen a ga inst Lawrence."
         In subsequent cases it has been held that when giving
a direction to a jury that requires a Lawrence/Caldwell
direction on recklessness, the very words of the Lawrence
direction should be given.    So it is that concentration at the
present stage must be upon the words 'Obvious and serious
r i s k , ' as indeed these words are f ound’in the counts of the
indictment which are currently under discussion in this case.
         The indictment alleges against the relevant defendants
either that they gave no thought to the serious and obvious
risk of a vessel sailing with her doors open, or that if they
did, they nevertheless went on to run it.      There is added, in
the case of all defendants, the alternative assertion that what
happened was a result of gross negligence on their respective
parts.
          In Kong Cheuk Kwan and the Queen,     (1987) 82 CAR at
page 18, at page 26 Lord Roskill, who had been a party to the
decisions in Caldwell and Lawrence and Seymour, when delivering
the opinion of the Board, said:     "The second part of the second
limb appears to be a throwback to Bateman."       (Lord Roskill was
there referring to the direction given by the learned
judge) and continued:    "Though Lord Atkin in his speech in Andrew
Director of Public Prosecutions,     (1937) AC, did not disprove of
what was there said, he clearly thought that it was better to
use the word 'reckless' rather than to add to the word
'negligence' various possible vituperative epithets.       Their
Lordships respectfully agreed.     Indeed, they further

             jSetogate Reporters Ufo.
respectfully agreed with a comment made by Lord Justice
Watkins in administering the judgment of the Court of Appeal
in Sey mo ur , ” and that is a reference to 1983, 76 CAR, page 211,
at page      216 by where Lord Justice Watkins said:
             "We have to say that the   law, as it stands, compels us
to reject Mr. Connell's persuasive submissions and to hold that
the judge's directions were correct, although we are of the
view that it is no longer necessary or helpful to make
reference to compensation and negligence.       The Lawrence
direction on recklessness is comprehensive and of general
application to all offences, including manslaughter involving
the driving of motor vehicles recklessly, and should be given
to juries without in any way being diluted.       Whether a driver
at the material time was conscious of the risk he was running
or gave no thought to its existence, is a matter which affects
punishment for     which purposes the judge will have to decide, if
he can,      giving the benefit of doubt to the convicted   person, in
which state of mind that person had driven at the material
t i m e ."
             Out of respect to the judgment of the Court of Appeal
in Seymour, and the persuasive effect of the opinion of the
Privy Council in Kong Cheuk Kwan, it is         my judgment that the
use of the words "gross negligence" in cases of manslaughter is
no longer aposite.      I am minded therefore not to leave the jury
with g ro ss negligence as an alternative basis for their verdict
in this case.
             This leaves for present consideration the application
of the first limb in the Caldwell/Lawrence direction, that any
one of the defendants, of the three to seven on this
indictment,    'Gave no thought to the possibility of there being

               Jietogate Reporters Htb.
an obvious and serious risk that in consequence of the failures
respectively alleged against them, the Herald of Free
Enterprise would sail with open d o o r s . ’   It is to be accepted,
for present purposes only, that such a sailing had or was
likely to have the consequences alleged in the indictment.
That is to say, that at this stage, I have heard no argument on
the issue of causation, although indications have been given
that such indeed will be raised at a more appropriate moment.
          The prosecution contend that it should have been
apparent to ordinary prudent people in the several positions of
the third to seventh defendants, that there was a risk of an
open door sailing in the absence of the taking of precautions
that have been variously alleged against them.
          What each defendant ought to have known follows       the
test of negligence.     Insofar as Captains Lewry and Kirby were
concerned, it was said that if they had not been enured to the
system, if that be the correct way to describe it, they would,
as reasonably prudent masters, have perceived the obviousness
of the risk.     The obvious risk, it was said, comprehends their
failure reasonably to have foreseen what might happen.
          It is at this stage relevant to consider what is the
evidence already led and that which is available to the
prosecution on the question of the obviousness of the risk.
Captains Hartwell, Lodge and Rutherford and others, Martin,
de Ste Croix, Hackett, Thorne, Blowers Davenport, have all testif
that unless and until evidence of any individual failure of
what they had supposed was an adequate system came to their
attention, it had not occurred to them that any risk existed,
let alone that it was an obvious one.       All three readily
conceded that once there was evidence of failure, there were a

               JJetogate ^Reporters I t b .
number of precautions, some one or more of which appear in the
particulars in the indictment, that could and should have been
taken to obviate that risk.
          There are, in addition, other ships masters whose
evidence is yet to be led, notably Captains Blowers, de Ste.
Croix and Martin, all of whom were or are employed by Townsend
Car Ferries and now the eighth defendants.     Neither the
statements nor depositions from these witnesses will advance
the prosecution case on this issue.
         There are, in addition, witnesses from other shipping
lines; masters who may speak as to the practice adopted on
various of their ships.    I do not understand that the
statements of any of these witnesses condescend to criticism of
the system employed by the defendants in this case as one which
created an obvious and serious risk, except to the extent that
any legitimate deduction maybe made from the fact that they
took precautions other than those employed by any of these
defendants.
          Mr. Solley has given early notice that he will object
to the admissibility of such evidence.     Without pre-judging the
result of that objection, it would be inappropriate for me to
suppose that that objection would necessarily be
successful.    So that, if the evidence is admitted, I will
consider it as I have read it, but say that I am quite unable
to see how it can advance the prosecution case as to
obviousness of the risk.    It would be evidence merely of
different practices adopted by others, and so would leave the
point for consideration up in the air.
          Mr. Kentridge helpfully provided me with written
submissions which he supported with oral argument.     At the
                              16
              JJetogate Reporters lti> .
outset he addressed himself to the meaning of "obvious.”         In so
doing, he was following the lead given by Lord Diplock in
Lawrence and Caldwell to the effect that we should all be wary
of applying terms of art to English words, the meanings of
which are well-known.     Although Lord Diplock would disavow the
use of terminology like "objective" and "subjective," counsel
and judges alike in the criminal courts are familiar with those
terms.   The first part of the Lawrence/Caldwell tests is
readily identifiable as being an objective one, and hence the
existence of "obvious and serious risk" must initially be
judged on direct evidence, or upon evidence from which an
inference to that effect may properly be drawn.
           The mere fact that in the indictment the prosecution
have identified a number of ways in which the risk of an open
door sailing may be reduced or eliminated, can, in my judgment,
be no substitute for evidence of what the hypothetically
prudent master or mariner or howsoever would have perceived as
obvious and serious.     I have used the word "initially" above
advisedly because if there were to be evidence that any of the
individual defendants, three to seven, knew or knew of matters
from which the inference should properly be drawn that the
relevant risk was obvious and serious, then other
considerations would arguably apply.      The word "obvious," said
Mr. Kentridge, was not the same as "reasonably foreseeable" and
connotes more than a risk which was reasonably foreseeable.
The meanings suggested were "perfectly e v i d e n t , " "stares one in
the face," "immediately apparent."
          As Mr. Carman developed the submission later, the
words "serious" and "obvious" he said, goes to the level of
what is foreseeable.     He argued that the proper test was

             iSetogate ^Reporters Htb.
whether or not the risk, and I say of (The Herald of Free
Enterprise) sailing with her bow doors open with the existing
system would be "immediately apparent," and of "such high
degree" that it was likely to occur.
           Nearly 50 years before Caldwell Lord Atkin clearly had
in mind both elements in Lord Diplock's future definition of
recklessness, that is to say, the requisite degree of foresight
and the circumstances which give rise to the breach of the duty
of care.     I do not read Lord Atkin's words in the case of
Andrews as amounting to an acceptance of the criterion of
reasonable foreseeability of the risk followed by "a high
degree of negligence in the means adopted to avoid the risk".
The passage in which he thus expressed himself is to be found
at page 583 of the report where he said:     "Here again, I think
with respect, that the expressions used are not —     indeed they
properly were not intended to be a precise definition of the
crime.     I do not myself find the connotations of mens rea
helpful in distinguishing between degrees of negligence, nor do
the ideas of crime and punishment in themself carry a jury much
further in deciding whether in a particular case the degree of
negligence shown is a crime that deserves punishment.
            "The substance of the j udgment," I interpolate, Lord
Atkin is here again referring to Bateman "is most valuable and
in my opinion is correct.     In practice, it has generally been
adopted by judges in charging juries in all cases of
manslaughter by negligence, whether in driving vehicles or
otherwise.     The principle to be observed is that cases of
manslaughter in driving motor cars are in instances of a
general rule, applicable to all charges of homicide by
negligence.     Simple lack of care such as will constitute civil
                              18
              JJetogate Reporters l i b .
liability is not enough.    For the purposes of the criminal law,
there are degrees of negligence and a very high degree of
negligence is required to be proved before the felony is
established.    Probably of all the epithets that can be applied,
'reckless' most nearly covers the case.
         "It is difficult to visualize a case of death caused
by reckless driving in the connotation of that term in ordinary
speech w hich would not justify a conviction for manslaughter,
but it is probably not all embracing, for 'reckless' suggests
an indifference to risk, whereas the accused may have
appreciated the risk and intended to avoid it and yet had shown
such a high degree of negligence in the means adopted to avoid
the risk, as would justify a conviction.    If the principle of
Bateman's case is observed, it will appear that the law of
manslaughter has not changed by the introduce of motor vehicles
on the road.    Death caused by their negligent driving, though
unhappily m uc h more frequent is to be treated in law as death
caused by any other form of negligence and juries should be
directed accordingly."
          In reading these words of Lord Atkin, I understand
him to have identified not mere indifference to risk, as the
sole criterion for crimial liability in manslaughter and which
I do not equate with a failure to think about a risk which is
reasonably foreseeable, which is, of course, the criterion of
liability in the civil law of negligence.    In my judgment, Lord
Diplock, who was, I respectfully think, a master of the English
language, did not use the words "obvious and serious" as
synonyms to describe a risk which was reasonably foreseeable.
Had he done so, he would have fallen foul of the very thing
which he had himself said in the Queen against Sheppard, a case

               jSetogate Reporters
in the House of Lords which was decided only a year before
Caldwell.    The reference to Sheppard is 1981 appeal cases at
page 394, and while I am fully mindful that the offence being
considered in that case was an offence of willful neglect under
the Children and Young Persons Act of 1933, it is nevertheless
right to remind ourselves of the way in which Lord Diplock came
to express himself in the context of what I have just been
saying.
            At page 404 Lord Diplock said:        "The concept of the
reasonable man as providing the standard by which the liability
of real persons for their actual conduct is to be determined,
is a concept of civil law, particularly in relation to the tort
of negligence; the obtrusion into criminal law as relevant to
criminal liability, though not unknown (for example in reducing
murder to manslaughter) is exceptional and should not lightly
be extended."    He then refers to Andrews and the Director of
Public Prosecutions and continued:       "If failure to use the
hypothetical powers of observation and ratiocination and
foresight of consequences possessed by this admirable but
purely notional exemplar is to constitute an ingredient of a
criminal offence, it must surely form not part of the actus
reus but part of the mens rea."    At page 405 he said:                  "As
regards the second state of mind, this imports the concept of
recklessness which is a common concept in mens rea in criminal
law.   It is not to be confused with negligence in the civil law
of tort," and he again referred to Andrews.
            From this excursion into the authorities, I now seek
to encapsulate the reasons for the indicative ruling which I
have already announced.     Thus while   L a w re n c e /C a ld w e ll   have
 resulted in a redefinition of the ingredients of the common law
                              20
               i&etogate Reporters l i b .
offence of manslaughter and the terms in which the jury must be
directed, I can find no warrant in those cases or in Seymour,
Kong Cheuk Kwan for the proposition inherent, if not expressed
in Mr. Jeffreys' submission that this re-definition has in any
way diminished the fundamental ingredients of the common law
offence of manslaughter.        Emphatically it should be reaffirmed
that simple negligence at common law is not and never has been
sufficient to support a charge of m a n s l a u g h t e r .   I have come to
this conclusion, despite Mr. Jeffreys argument to the contrary,
which was that, as the consequence of the decisions in
Caldwell, Lawrence, Seymour and Kong Cheuk Kwan, Lord Atkins'
description of what was comprehended by the word "reckless,"
was what most nearly covered "the very high degree of
negligence ... required to be proved before (manslaughter) is
established", was what Lord Roskill had achieved in his speech
and opinion in the last two mentioned cases.             Mr. Jeffreys went
on to propound that it is the nature of the breach in any given
case that differentiates the fault element in manslaughter from
that involved in simple negligence.           Of course, if Mr.
Jeffreys' submission is correct, first Parliament and then the
judges have modified the test of manslaughter identified by
Lord Atkin in that well-known passage of his speech in Andrews
that I have already quoted.
            It should not be overlooked that Lord Atkin will have
had clearly in mind the principles encompassed by the tort of
negligence at common law, since Andrews was decided only five
years or so after the landmark case of Donoghue and Stevenson,
1932 AC at page 562.
           The argument proceeds that because of the decision in
regard to recklessness for the purposes of the Criminal Damage

              jSetogate Reporters Htb.
Act 1971 (Caldwell) reckless for the purposes of reckless
driving in the Road Traffic Acts; (Lawrence) reckless driving,
recklessness in manslaughter,   (Seymour) there has been a
judicial, erosion of the principles which Lord Atkin so clearly
had in mind in Andrews.   Yet it is to be observed that that
case was not cited in Caldwell, let alone referred to in the
speeches, and while referred to in argument, was not referred
to in the speeches in Lawrence.
         However, reference was made to Andrews by Lord Roskill
in Seymour, see page 502, letter G of the report.
          In my judgment it is quite impossible to read this
reference to Seymour in its context as any indication of muted,
let alone express, criticism of the decision in Andrews.     It is
possible to go further.   When Lord Diplock defined "reckless"
in both Caldwell and Lawrence, he can not have been unaware of
what he said in Sheppard, a case which, as has already been
seen, was decided in the year before Caldwell.
         Again, in Sheppard, it can be seen that there was no
hint of criticism by Lord Diplock of Lord Atkins' conception of
'recklessness.'   Yet again, in Kong Cheuk Kwan, Lord Roskill
had the opportunity to indicate any modification or dissent
from what I term the essential ingredients of manslaughter, but
did not use it.
         Thus, it is that in my judgment, before a risk can
properly be said to be obvious and serious, there m u st be some
evidence upon which the jury, being p roperly directed, can find
that the particular defendant failed to observe that which was
"obvious and serious," which words themselves convey a meaning
that the defendant's perception of the existence of risk was
seriously deficient when compared to that of a reasonably

            Jjtetogate ^Reporters Htb.
    f' 2i2-
  SlftTfc
   or

l l pr&MjprthA*
prudent person engaged in the same kind of activity as that of
the defendant whose conduct is being called into question.          It
is for these reasons that I have already given an indicative
ruling that the evidence which has already been adduced and
that which may yet be given by Captains Martin, Blowers and de
Ste Croix, and by witnesses outside the eighth defendant's
organisation, assuming always that this category should fall
short of proving that the risk of an open door sailing was or
should have been obvious to the person in a position of a
master mariner; but it is necessary for me to go further and
indicate what is the position in regard to Messrs. Alcindor,
Develin and Ayers.
         So far as the first and last of these three are
concerned, the case against them in its crudest form is that
they were guilty in the circumstances as affecting them of
failing to have regard to an obvious and serious risk by not
specifying or having installed bridge indicator lights, as to
the state of the doors.     It should be remembered, however, that
the prosecution seeks to establish direct knowledge of the risk
as against Mr. Alcindor, and I do not seek to cover that
eventuality; but just as in the case of the masters, so too
with these three defendants who are identified as the shore
side of the eighth defendant's operations.        There is no
evidence that reasonably prudent marine superintendents, chief
superintendents or naval architects, would or should have
recognised that the system gave rise to an obvious and serious
risk of open door sailing.
         Since the position of the eighth d e f e n d a n t ’s is
derivative from that of the third to seventh, no separate
consideration need be given to their position.

            jjetogate Reporters Htti.
         As a footnote, in arriving at my conclusions above
stated, I have done so fully conscious of a desire to avoid a
conclusion which I sense to be unjust or inappropriate, while
at the same time having meticulously examined the relevant
authorities with a view to arriving at an interpretation that
does no violence to the principles expressed in those

a u t ho ri ti es .
                in this case, I do not perceive that it has been
necessary for me to interpret or qualify any of the principles,
but I have endeavored to extract from those cases what are the
true principles.     I a m indebted to Lord Justice Robert Goff as
he then was, in support of this approach in what he said in his
 judgment in Elliott v C. reported in (1983) 2 A ER page 1005 at

 page 1010.
             2.00 o'clock.

 JEFFREYS:     Thank you, my Lord.


                             (Court adjourned)




                 jletogate Reporters Htb.
jjetogate R e p o r t e r s Htb.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               395
  394                                                                                                                                                                R tf. T.            (H J4*-))
  LoH Scaraua                             It ra A Coap*ajr (H X.(E.))                                             [W l]
                                                                                                                                                            ^ Hi,        tlu t fff shall be guilty of a^ mis*
 judicially: and I think this was the view of the judges in those cases.                                                                          injury to health . . .                   J this »ect»o— •
 It was certainly open to question, as Lord Dunedin said in Donald A                                                                              demeanour . • • OJ F or_ipM iivfahie to                   *
 Campbell & Co. Ltd. v. Poliak [1927] A.C. 732, 757, whether this
 view was sound. In the course of his speech, he made the comment:                                                               ■
      *' The position under the Judicature Act of the Court of Appeal b
      very peculiar. When an appeal comes to them as to costs awarded                                                           ,      A ec S                             S T S E * from ^
                                                                                                                                V trition; for some days P” ™0**"* r f “ “ able to Ingest food,
      by the discretion of a judge, they cannot exercise their discretion                                                           enteritis and vomitm* and W                         ^     y i Ufe
     instead of his unless leave to appeal from his order as to costs has )                                                         Though U       m    e   b      l   o     w      intelligence, dW
     been given by him. By a long series of decisions the Court of *                                                                “•               h T I L K g h to require examination by
     Appeal has held that that does not prevent them upsetting what                                                                 not realise that he » u u * e w w a » ^       rsiia, contrary to
     the judge has done if they can And that he had no proper materials                                                          * a doctor                  tor ne*tertta«^ directed the‘ jury
     on which his discretion was exercised.”                              ,                                                      • , ^ r ^ e t « ^ t^ ^ iltw ii^ ie c tir o o ly . ^
                                                                                                                                 .. that tne w i «                      nt the facts known to tncaa
Russell L.J. in Jones v. McKie [1964] 1 W.L.R. 960, 969 also put upon                                                                reasonable                   that failure to have the child
                                                                                                                                     parents would                         unnecessary suffering or
the sub-paragraph the same construction: for he said that the Court of C
Appeal would “ entertain and allow an appeal on the footing that it ' ^                                                         -                 ■       ■     s     s         n    i       s       i        ^          •     • ■
cannot be said that any relevant discretion wasexercised at alL” And fjjy <                                                     !            Appeal upheld the conviction*. .            v               ..   .   • ..   . •
he expressed the same view, with which the other members of the court nv !
agreed, in HeUyefs case [19751 Ch. 16, 24. These cases depend upon                                                              }‘T          Lord Scarraan dtssenung). ttat to c ^ ^ » * * « » # chfld
the particular wording of the sub-paragraph and offer, I think, no '                                                            *■           of neglecting to p r o v d e adequate meaiau .          tuid to be
guidance as to the meaning of section 441 (3).                       >1D                                                        (•           contrary to the                of the A r t^ n e ju n ^        ^
   For these reasons I would allow the appeal.                   :'                                                             i).          satisfied (a) that the child <Ud m fart n e M w »                u
                                                                                                                                             time the defen^nt w « c l ^ d ^ t h j ^ m g i» ^               ^
                                                                                         Appeal allowed.                    '       ... and (b) either that                             s» medical aid were not
                                                                                                                                    '• the child’s                                                   that fact was
      Solicitors: D. Whittaker; Director of Public Prosecutions.                                                                        provided or that the <*e^e" .               th child’s health was at risk

                                                                                                          F- C             .g
                                                                                                                                     ■ ss     4 0 4   . __405* 408e-r. 412a—
                                                                                                                                                                           c. ‘»1So-e).                       &     w
                                                                                                                                                 Decision ^ o/^ e Court' of^Appeal (Criminal Division, (19W,
                                                                                                                                              70 Cr.App-R- 210 reversed.
                                            [ house of lo r d s ]

R E G IN A ............................................................................................... R esp on d en t P         ‘           T h. M M - . <— * » -'< ™ * “ 10 * *                                                »
                                                                                                                                                 Andrews v. Director at Public Prosecution* [19371 A C. 5 ».
                                                        a nd
SHEPPARD              a n d A n o t h e r ..............................................................A p p e lla n ts
                                                                                                                                         "                                                                    S , £ S ^ ii« i A.C
                                                                                                                                         :       Barra* v. Aberdeen Steam Trawlmt and Fultm t
1980 Oct. 6, 7;                                               Lord Diplock, Lord Edmund-Davies,                                                        402. H.L.(Sc). '                                       Watdhol-Aschafftnburt
     Nov. 27                                                          Lord Fraser of Tullybeitoo,
                                                                            Lord Keith of Kinkel q                                       ■                                                   *««-*•51J: l” ” 1 1 “               tR
                                                                               ■nd Lord Scannan . .
                 Children and Yount Persons— Offences aqainst—Wilful neflect—                                                            “        Heydon’s Case (1584) 3 Co-Rep. la .
                     Failure to provide necessary medical aid—Whether absolute
                     offence—Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (23 <4 24
                     Geo. 5. c. 12). s. I                                                                                                ■%.; sr sflRi                                                        « l,m11* “ •
                             By section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933: {{                                                     ■                      u«»i I W - ® , C J M
                              “ (I) 1/ any person who has attained the age of 16 yean                                                              Ret. v. Watstaffe (1S68) 10 Co* C.C. 530.
                              and has the custody, charge, or care of any child or young                                                           Rex v. Fetch (1909) 2 C r . A p p R . J 1 . C C A .
                              person under that age. wilfully . . . neglects . . . him . . •                                                       Rex v. Walker (1934) 24 Cr.App.R.              C.C.A.
                              in a manner likely to cause him unnecessary suffering or
                                                                                                                                                        ~   397
 396
                          R**. »• Sheppard (HX4EJ)                    [lfflj
                                                                                 . ^ B u t once a prim , fade case h ^ e n ^ l i s h e d the dcfenctMnay
       Sweet v. Parsley [1970J A.C 132; [1969J 2 W.L.R. 470; {I969J 1 AB
           E.R. 347. H.UE.).     • .■                                   :, M \   z L e a reasonable doubt i f to the intention to
                                                                                  because of actual failure to foresee the consequences;
    The following additional cases were cited in argument:
    Oakey v. Jackson [I9I4J I K.B. 216. D.C
    Reg. v. Chandler (1855) Dean.CC 453.                                     -
    Reg. v. Bogan (1851) 2 Den. C C 277.
    Reg. v. Boiroyd (1841) 2 M. ft. Rob. 339.                      i        "    •‘K r e s e e the consequences; that he did mean to neglect th« child or
    Reg. v. Monathan (1870) 23 L.T. 168.                             ,"    1
    R et. v. Pelham (1846) 8 Q.B. 959.                                            “ S                to             udY oung              AC. 19JJ          » .
    R et. v. Phillpot (1853) Dean.CC 179.
    R et. v. Stone {1977J Q.B. 354; {1977J 2 W.L.R. 169; [1977] 2 All E.R.                 Itd o es not impose strict liability. In sectton 1 (1) the word
         341, CA.
    Rex v. Friend (1802) Russ, ft Ry. 20.                                         - wilfully ” must import a moral element The adverb can
    Rex v. Large [1939J1 All E.R. 753. C.C.A.                                     the verb and it qualifies “ neglects.” The express**
    R ex v. Williams (1910) 4 Cr.App.R. 89. C.CA.                          C      T i t s ordinary common sense interpretation must mean iatenuoMUy.

   A ppeal from the Court of Appeal (Criminti Division).          -
   This was an appeal by James Martin Sheppard and Jennifer Christine ^ ;
Sheppard from a decision of the Court of Appeal (Lord Widgery C.J.,
Bridge L.J. and Woolf J.) dated January 15, 1980, dismissing their appeal
from their conviction at the Northampton Crown Court (Judge Gosling) j)
on November 13, 1979, on an indictment charging them with cruelty to                        * nniiing tit* {factor cuiflot come within the scctio®* ^
Martin James Sheppard, a child under the age of 16 years, contrary to
section 1 (1) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933. The appeal
was by leave of the judge. The Court of Appeal in granting leave to
appeal to the House of Lords certified the following as a point of law of                                                                 ' - r i r S w
general importance:                                                        g
     “ What is the proper direction to be given to a jury on a charge of
                                                                                   yrsss ^            7     ?       “
     wilful neglect of a child under section 1 of the Children and Young
     Persons Act 1933 as to what constitutes the necessary mens rea of the
     offence? M                                                                                           Section 37 of .he Poo. U » A m ..dm e «            >“ J
  The facts are stated in the opinions of Lord Diplock and Lord                    the practice o( the religious sect ka                Co% CCt 53a U b
Edmund-Davies.                                                  f                  followed shortly after Reg. v. Wagstaff (         rf l.        ^ ^ act
                                                                                   sufficient for a conviction if the accused knew perfectly well uiai u»
    A . T. Smith Q.C. and /. Cartwright for the appellants. It is sub­
mitted that: (1) The first ingredient of the offence is neglect to the
necessary degree; this is to be determined objectively, and the mind of
the accused is irrelevant to that. (2) “ Wilfully neglects is a separate
ingredient requiring proof of a mental element on the part of the accused.
It means intentionally and knowingly neglecting. The intention should ,,,
extend to the entirety of the actus reus defined in the statute; that is,
neglecting in a manner likely to cause unnecessary suffering or injury to
health. Alternatively it should at least go to neglecting in its ordinary
meaning of not caring properly for. (3) If the Crown prove the necessary
degree of neglect, and that the accused’s course of conduct was not
inadvertent, that is capable of raising the inference that the accused did jf       with objectivity as a test and substitu         ____________________■ la
wilfully neglect the child and of raising a prima facie case. (4) To estab­
lish this prima facie case it is not necessary for the Crown to prove that          a l l * ^ T a^              I   sS T c. 53 the a p p ro a c h ^ h ^ s h e riff-
the accused actually foresaw the consequence* of his course of c o n d u c t .
                                                                                                                                                                              399
398                                                                                                                 Ref» f*        (HJW M )
                            R**. T . Sbtppanl (H X^E.))                   {lMl]
 substitute was the one for which the appellant contends. In Scotland                                then     P“ “ “ - “ * *                            I * * ? “
there is no precisely analogous statute.                                          A
     The predecessor? of the present enactment are section 37 of the Poor
Law Amendment Act 1868. section 1 of the Prevention ofCruelty to                        [ Sate parents with little mentai capactfy.          does not call in •
Children Act 1894 and section 12 of the Children Act 1908.                              [ r i f a parent knows that a child * senoutfy iu ^         fQf ^
     R ex v. Large [1939] 1 All E R . 753, 757-758 is relied on.        vt jrl, ,> ■    Hnrtor because he does not think l            •     unreasonable by the
     A. W. Palmer Q.C. and J. H. Reidihough for the Crown. Auth­
orities outside the Act do not help in deciding this case; In different *1
contexts “ wilfully” has different meanings. There it only means de­
liberately do or omit an act. It is not equivalent to '* maliciously.*’ Once
the jury have found the actus reus of neglect they must find whether                                    s                                      —         -       —        ■     “
the parents wilfully did the act or made the omission. The prosecution                  f     unreasonable mistake                          27. 28,29-30 was aca*ewb«»
need only show the doing or not doing of an act which amounted to neg­                  I     . Reg. v. Downes (1875) 1            •            of their religious beUMS,
lect. The parent need only know that he is not providing medical aid. £                 S     the parents      «*           B^     ^      •• wilfully " im p lie s
The jury is not required to take into account whether the parent had fore- -            |     their conviction «as u p M li B             U ve h a ,
sight of the consequences of the act or omission, nor are they required
to find that the parents knew they were doing something which in law
amounted to neglect or that their action was unreasonable or wrong.
They are not required to find that the parent had an intention to neglect.
For a conviction the accused need have no more than the intention to do —
the act or make the omission. It must have crossed their mind that the
child might need medical attention, not that he does need it The Crown
                                                                                        !                                                   r s r y s a                        s         .
                                                                                        J      parents who make a d« lSi“ 1 7'           fi d (l) that any reasonable
must ask: (I) Was there neglect? (2) Was the neglect committed in a
manner likely to cause unnecessary suffering or injury to health? (3)
Was the neglect wilful?
    Conduct amounting to neglect can consist of acts or omissions. The                  iE                                     a s - / . —              •* - -            *■
test of conduct amounting to neglect is objective. One must only take E
into account existing facts known to be present, such facts as even the
most ill-informed or inaccurate person would observe by the ordinary                    »       of the harm which ensues the Act °             .. lt w0Uld be a strange
use of the senses of sight and hearing, the primary facts (e.g., knowledge              f       the parent knows is likely to cau*          ~ ^     depend, on the ore*
that an appointment with a doctor had been fixed) including such know­                  I-      interpretation of the Act to say      of , he ordinary man. U w®*
ledge as is deducible from experience gained as parents. At this stage                          sight of the accused as 0PP“ elf t® .. a objectively indicated, the w r t
the parents’ state of mind is irrelevant, e.g., their lack of faith in doctors p       e p       odd if. while in section 1 0 )            of harm ensuing « •* ele^ ?r
or their belief that certain steps should or should not be taken. At this              •U .
stage the reasonable parent’s foresight of the consequences of his acts is                      -»iiroiiy•        '•*” ,0j T                       a *               “     “J S S f .
                                                                                                 in m . requisite state J                     to r a a in,«7 » ttoehdd ■
irrelevant. If a reasonable parent would have acted otherwise the actus                          adequate food he cannot » y U » t ■*            the situation of beingJ *
reus is established.                                                                             health. Section 1 (211(W         h influence of drink and thereby suflfo-
     The next ingredient is that the act or omission must be likely to cause                     bed with an infant while under the                throughout the action
unnecessary suffering or injury, that reasonable people would have fort-
seen that it would do so—not whether these parents foresaw the likelihood °                      the actus reus is tta b e t n i J * *      a ta         than
of suffering or injury. The “ deeming” provision in section 1 (2) (a) of
 the Act of 1933 operates irrespective of the parents' foresight
     Once the actus reus is established the third element. ” wilfully ”,
 comes in. The words of Lord Russell of Killowen in Reg. v. Senior                                                                                  -        -       *—         ■-   ■

 [1899] 1 Q.B. 283, 290-291 should be applicable to each type of pro­
hibited conduct This case is concerned with inadvertence in relation to H                      H babyf iisr tthere.                   _     hoW that ignorance b no
                                                                                                              v Fetch (1909) 2 Cr.App-R- ” *“° ”V   makinf the omission.
 deliberate conduct, whether act or omission. Parents may say they did
 not realise they had to call a doctor. Once the idea had crossed their
 minds as one of the options and they were reasonine bv an obiecti'C
                                                                                                                                                                    401
 400                                                                                                               R ff. T.
                           R t f * .Sfccppwd (H J4E .))                 Ilftl]
  against the Person Act 1861, section 36 of the Malicious Injuries to Pro.          \U K                                                         m sereril o c a * * *
  perty Act 1861. (The Victorians distinguished between " w i l f u l " ^        A   :                                ^ c b .h .
  “ malicious ” : see section 35 of the Malicious Injuries to Property Act
  and section 33 of the Offences against the Person Act.) See also Rex v.             during the week immediately             ‘n*.     u t0 the jaw applicable to
  Williams (1910) 4 Cr.App.R. 89 and Rex v. Walker, 24 Cr.App.R. U7f                  th»l judge’s instruct lo n ip v en     w # ||e d (rom the verdicts
  121. There is a distinction between wilful neglect within this Act, under          * the offence charged.                  to Martin*s health had in factteen
  which the accused may not necessarily have foreseen the consequences of        r    that the jury found:                       _ nt3 to have him examined by
                                                                                      - used by the failure by each of tne                  ^       any reasonable
 his omission, and manslaughter which requires foresight or recklessness.        1
 The distinction should be maintained. Reg. v. Slone {1977] Q.B. 354,                 a doctor in the period P**®*         ordinary intelligence and not indifferent
                                                                                       parents Le. parents e"d°wed with ordinary                 from the manifest
 362 suggests that if " wilfully ” be held to impute foresight of the conse­
 quences any wilful neglect within , the Act which results in death must                 to the welfare of their                  ^ daring that period that a failure
 be manslaughter.                                                         vt             ■r t T b f i S    n   e ^       .          might well result in - n - e c e s u *
     Smith Q.C. in reply. In Rex v. Friend, Russ. A Ry. 20, it was held
 to be an indictable offence "unlawfully and injuriously" to '*neglect**         .
 to provide an apprentice girl with sufficient food. In afl cases immedi­                 poor accom m odation, particularly^* respe          tf ^    # mea,r e tacome.
 ately following it a mental element in cases of neglect was contemplated:,               Which included another (olderl duM. su                      intelligence.
 See Reg. v. Pelham (1846) 8 Q.B. 959: Reg. v. Hogan (1851) 2 Den.CC
 277; Reg. v. Phillpot (1853) Dears.CC 179; Reg. v. Chandler (1855)              '        S i y would appear, f " ..thc           or amounting to « < W en «to
                                                                                          Their real defence if it ; « e « P jb U of am       ^            ^ ^
 Dears C.C 453. See also in another context Reg. v. Hoiroyd (1841) 2                           was that «heyd.d n o tre« l'« hat y « '       and f, ilure te keep
 M. A Rob. 339 and Reg. v. Monaghan (1870) 23 L.T. 168.                  •• i             a doctor; they had o b * m * h a 1° « o ^       thU ^      due u» some
     The cases cited for the Crown are of limited value. The propositions        D        down his food, but had 8™u>ne£ '” * rone> from which they recover
 for the Crown amount to the conclusion that dull parents, whose mind has
 never been crossed by the idea that something can be doae, may act or
 omit to act with impunity, since, if they did not know anything was                       nothing to tllevtate or to ^    r y      'w o uId hive thought th tt tin*
'wrong, they could not neglect to deal with it. If the Crown is right the                      We do not know whether th e ju ry ^                examined by a doctor
 considerate parent, whose mind is crossed by the idea that something is                   explanation of the parents fail                          toid the jury that to
 wrong and who makes a decision, is in peril if he exercises his judgment        g         might be true. In his                          's £          ti were charged,
 wrongly. But Parliament has not, by the words it used, made this an                       constitute the                               that aMhe time when it was
 absolute offence. Neglect to come within the Act must be intentional                      it was unnecessary .or the Cro                      seen by a doctor, either
                                                                                            alleged the parents should have had              j ^ v e d a risk of causing
    Their Lordships took time for consideration.                                            thej in fact knew that their failure^to do » mv«^ ^             ^ ^ ^
                                                                                            him unnecessary suffering o         r      line of authority by appellate
    November 27. Lord Diplocjc. My Lords, the appellants (“ the f                           whether this was so or n o t ^oHo^ng           ..      treated the offence as
parents ”) were convicted at Northampton Crown Court of an offence
under section 1 (1) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 of                                                                                *• -       - “ * •—
wilfully neglecting their infant child, Martin, between July 1, 1978. and
January 29. 1979. in a manner likely to cause him unnecessary suffering
or injury to health.                                                                        ;    k n Z t to th« ~ » « d . « ! » « » « g g j s j g                  « V m
    The child, who had been a slow developer, died, at the age of six-                           examined was likely to cause him unnecessary
teen months, on January 28, 1979, of hypothermia associated with                             : ' to health? "                                                    ,.. •       ”•
malnutrition, a condition which increases the susceptibility of infants
to hypothermia. If Martin had received timely medical attention his                         n       *      a        *         -
life might well have been saved. For five days o r more before his                           not any question as to the P*re        themselves as boundbythe same
                                                                                                 The Court of Appeal, ^ 8 a rd jng themseWes^as                    ^
death he had probably suffered from gastro-enteritis which had caused
him to vomit up and so fail to ingest the food that had been offered to                      line of authority, felt <®mpell           Qn this subject was worthy of
him: but the details of such symptoms of serious illness as were apparent H                  expressed their opinion that he               (he parents leave to appe»l.
during the period before his death do not affect the question which falls                     review by your LordsJ'P*           0f general publicimportanceInvolved
to be decided by your Lordships in this appeal and is a question of                           They certified as the poml of law ot gene. v
law alone.                                                                                    in their decision to dismiss the appeal.
 402                                                                                                                                                          403
 Lord Dlptack               R tf. t . Stoppard (H J4E .))                  (tMt]                                  ltc^v.                         )      1^^ WpiaA
       “ What is the proper direction to be given to a jury on a charge of              •limitation fa saying that where the charge it one o f wilfully y » lccti”«
       wilful neglect of a child under section ! of the Children and Young A            t S d e . c h U d with adequate medical aid. wh.ch in appropriate « u a
       Persons Act 1933 as to what constitutes the necessary mens rea of                 K d u d e precautionary medical examination, the p n « ™ ‘ton must
       the offence? ”                                                                   wove- (I) that the child did in fact need medical aid at the Urn* «

    The relevant provisions of the section are in the following terms: :J ■             S »                                   UTS! 2 ?
      “ (1) If any person who has attained the age of 16 yean and has *
      the custody, charge, or care of any child or young persoa nnrf»r »
      that age, wilfully assaults, ill-treats, neglects, abandons, or exposes
                                                                                        351.**■■ri,t' u^ E.'srr.                                         sx       z
     him, or causes or procures him to be assaulted, ill-treated, neglected,                                     T d flfcra il conduiton, II bocomc.               »
     abandoned, or exposed, in a manner likely to cause him unnecessary '
     suffering or injury to health (including injury to or loss of sight, or :
     hearing, or limb, or organ of the body, and any mental derangement),
     that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanour, and shall be liable—
    (a) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding £100, or C
    alternatively, or in default of payment of such a fine, or in addition 'tj-         P S T ^ n c . of <hc M                - w f lf - lly -
    thereto, to imprisonment for any term not exceeding two years;                      i-assaults, ill-treats, neglects, abandons or                              the
    (2) For the purposes of this section—(a) a parent or other person v                 !»ny offence under section 1 requires men* rea,            r«nura to act that
    legally liable to maintain a child or young person shall be deemed                    part of the offender directed to the particular ad : or f a t ! ^
    to have neglected him in a manner likely to cause injury to his                     ■.constitutes the actus reus and warrants the                 „ ^ t l u r e «o
    health if he has failed to provide adequate food, clothing, medical D                 other four verbs refer to positive acts, neg c               . nntwl
    aid or lodging for him, or if, having been unable otherwise to provide              • act and the judicial explanation of the state of min<4                    ct
    such food, clothing, medical aid or lodging, he has failed to take .                i sta utory expression “ wilfully ” in relation to the doing of a positive art.
    steps to procure it to be provided under the Acts relating to the                       “ r ^ a r i i r -h olly » ' i» " !» '» " “ • I             ‘S i , *   £
    relief of the poor; . .                                                                 instant case is in the latter category, so I will                  ^
                                                                                            sidering what is meant by wilfully neglecting a child ina manner like y
A provision in the same terms as section I (I) has been on the statute
book since the Prevention of Cruelty to. and Protection of. Children Act           B
1889. It was re-enacted successively in the Prevention of Cruelty to
Children Acts 1894 and 1904, the former of which was in force when
Reg. v. Senior [1899] I Q.B. 283 was decided and the latter when Rex                        rea of the offence and the remainder as defining only the
v. Peteh (1909) 2 Cr.App.R. 71 was decided. It was again re-enacted                            ,     . _ . » fv ir i of 1933 contains in subsection (2) («) • c*
in the Children Act 1908. A statutory offence defined in these terms                        But section 1 0           between ’* wilfully ” and the compound phrase
has thus been in existence for more than ninety years.                             jr       indication of a dichotomy between wui j                       tahiry to
    Section 1 (2) (a) on the other hand has its legislative origin in section 37            hi'heaUhJ’ ^ S h i ta fo f* faflir! ” P«vMe
of the Poor Law Amendment Act 1868. This made it a summary offence
for a parent to "wilfully neglect to provide adequate food, clothing,
medical aid. or lodging for his child . . . whereby the health of such child                athe ?burden
                                                                                                     jj   of proving the required mens r e a -th e mental element 9t
shall have been or shall be likely to be seriously injured.” It was the
                                                                                             “ wilfulness ” on the part of the accused.                          ■.
only relevant provision that was in force, when Reg. v. Downes (1875)
1 Q.B.D. 25 was decided. It was repealed by the Prevention of Cruelty              Q
to, and Protection of. Children Act 1889 and for nineteen yean, which
covered the date when Reg. v. Senior [1899] I Q.B. 283 was decided,
there was no corresponding provision on the statute book until its                           p i s         z r x z r s
reappearance in its present form but without the adverb **seriously ” as
a “ deeming ” provision in the Children Act 1908.
    My Lords, the language in which the relevant provisions of the Act             ||        to me. is a pure question of objective fact to be d e te m m e d to the Ugnt
of 1933 are drafted consists of ordinary words in common use in lhe                          of W a ^ b e c c L known » Urn date of ihe trial io                  * « the
English language. If I were to approach the question of their construc­                      child’s actual state of health at the relevant time It <         ^      £ .u
tion untrammelled (as this Home is) by authority I should have little                        upon whether a reasonably careful parent, with kn
       404
       Lonl Dlpiocfc
                                 Kt*. »■ Stoppard (H X 4E .))                                                                                                        . 405
                                                                                                r jC.                       R«» v. S > iw < (B X g J)           Lm 4 Mjlidfc
     only which such a parent might reasonably be expected to ob**™
                                                                                                j^ .ith might suffer unless he were examined by a doctor and provided
     hunself. would have thought it prudent to have recourse to m e S u A
                                                                                               hrfth such curative treatment as the examination might reveal as necessary,
  I ih l r ' T r f Pt ? thf reasonable man “ providing the standard                            fgid had made a conscious decision, for whatever reason, to refrain from
    the liability of real persons for their actual conduct is to be deten T f'^
                                                                                               i arranging for such medical examination; or (2) had so refrained because
 I the nh."nep t °* ClWI Iaw’ Particu,arly     relation to the tort of n e g h W ?             I be did not care whether the child might be in need of medical treatment
   if thJ S n 5 ° Cr,mmal            0f con,or» i,T with the notional r a n S                        not.
          reasonabJe man as relevant to criminal liability, though not
                                          flAfl                  .1 ___      . -r^ •           Urj-As regards the second state of mind, this imports the concept o f'
                                                                                               Recklessness which is a common concept in mens rea in criminal law. It
                                                                                             J b not to be confused with negligence in the civil law of tort (Andrews
                                                                                             | Director of Public Prosecutions). In speaking of the first state of mind
   ,     ■ ., r     —            ii (iwwcrs oi ooservanon. ratiocination a ,J                  >I have referred to the parent’s knowledge of the existence of tome risk
           i • consequences possessed by this admirable but purely notioI^J                  je f injury to health rather than of a probability. The section speaks of ’
   exemplar is to constitute an ingredient of a criminal offend it m S
   rarely form part not of the actus reus but of the mem rea.                                |a n act or omission that is “ likely** to cause unnecessary suffering or
                                                                                                 injury to health. This word is imprecise. It is capable of covering a
   narJnt ^ h ," ,0!; hower ; r’ “ em ,0 me ,hat ,he " " c e p t of the reasonable C         (■■ whole range of possibilities from Mit's on the cards ” to “ It's more
   parent, what he would observe, what he would understand from what                 •         ; probable than not*', but having regard to the ordinary parent's lack of
   he had observed and what he would do about it, has any part to                              Fatal in diagnosis and to the very serious consequences which may result
  play in the mens rea of an offence in which the description of the ‘ '                       f from failure to provide a child with timely medical attention. It should
  mens rea is contained in the single adverb “ wilfully.” fa the context                         in my view be understood as excluding 'only what would fairly be
  of domg: to a child a positive act (assault, flMreat, Abandon or                :              described as highly unlikely.
  that a likely to have specified consequences (to cause him unnecessary *                           I turn now to the authorities. I do not find the first of them, Reg.
         nr the actual,!alth)of
                             * the
                                wUfu,,y*                                                       ; v. Downes, 1 Q.B.D. 25, very helpful The charge was one of man-
 of mind of            doer         act, ”may
                                           wh,ch must desof
                                              be capable crib« ‘h e the
                                                            bearing  ^ :
                                                                                                 daughter and involved the religious beliefs of the sect known as th e .
 narrow meaning that the wilfulness required extends only to the doing                           Peculiar People who believed that all resort to medical as opposed to-
 dLnl        a         uCt ‘u e,f Whkh in fac* rcsuI,s in ,he consequence!                       spiritual aid in illness was sinful. The statute referred to was section 37
                  e.n thou*h ,he docr thought that it would not and would                        of the Poor Law Amendment Act 1868 which has long been repealed. I
‘m T .hlT n8         V, u® d'^ had he foresccn a ™k that those consequences E                    pause on this case only to observe that it was decided at a period when
 might follow. Although this is a possible meaning of “ wilfully” it is                          judicial opinion was less hesitant than it has since become to accept that
 r e L e n c e t n ^ mCanmg evcn in rcla,ion ,0 Positive acts defined by                         Parliament intended to create absolute offences which required no mens
 reference to the consequences to which they are likely to rive rise- and                        rea on the part of the accused.
 if* in ' i T k ! X‘ ° f ‘he SCCtion’ if ,his wcrc al1 ,he adv" b “ wilfully " meant                 To the judgment of Lord Russell of Killowen C.J., in Reg. v. Senior
1 2 f t ° ,,0S- £ C!i0n ' (,) WOuld have ‘he »                        «fc«t if it ™              (1899] 1 Q.B. 283, may be ascribed the origin of the construction of
S n h w iS l    1r        o f fc n c e s . ( u n lc s s vicarious liability is involved) F      section I (1) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 that has since
 h fs S te d     f “Pf>n as constituting the offence, must be wilful in F                       been followed. This case also was one of failure by a member of the
th « S n lw T ™     Tk        ®Syn0nym in the fic,d o t criminal liability                      sect of Peculiar People to provide medical attention for his infant child.
that has now become the common term of legal art is “ voluntary.”                               In considering this judgment it is important to remember (a) that the
"nedecT "CJ / h M •*TIfuUy- ’ " ‘hC context of * Positive act. To                               section of the Act ot 1894 that the Lord Chief Justice was construing
needs- and in f “      ,0rnit *? act’ .t0 fail ,0 P^vide adequately for its                     did not contain the deeming provisions that are to be found in section #
needs, and. in the context of section 1 of ihe Children and Youn*                                1 (2) (a) of the Act of 1933; and (b) that the parent knew that the
m o 7 2 " o r I I S ' '!* ph5? ica' " eeds ra,her ,han i,s spiritual, educational. 0            child’s physical suffering might be alleviated by medical treatment but
For re ,SoBr . S                   ^       • " dealt with by other legislation.                 had deliberately refrained from having recourse to it because he thought
W e w o f £ e ? H 8.'V-n, hCuUSe • f -,he, VCrb “ ne*Iec« " ca""°«’                             to do so would be sinful as showing unwillingness to accept God’s will
n e a li-e n J                    • * cnminaI ,aw the civil law concept of                      in relation to the child.
for S v e r rI^           r US             °f ^ Ifu‘ne*lec«is              « ™ ure-                  So here there was not any question of the accused parent being
wH.vTi , w   l u ' ,0 prov,de ,he ch,Id whenever it in fact needs                             . unaware that risk to the child’s health might be involved in his failure
to i l ™ ' !   L         Cal aid '* "ccds- Such 3 failure as it seems u                         to provide it with medical aid. He deliberately refrained from having
L T rm had 7    ,Ci )L0PerlyJdeSCribed “                   “« parent “                          recourse to medical aid with his eyes open to the possible consequences
risk fthoulh if       ^ , T d 1° ,hC que5,ion whe,her 'here was some                             ‘o the child’s physical health. He broke the law because he sincerely
     (,hou8h it might fall far short of a probability) (hat the child's                         believed that to comply with its command would be sinful and would
 406                                                                                                                                                             407
Lo*4 Diplock              Reg. T. Sfccppari (O L (l))                  |J M | j           -                        I U ^ t. Skcppard
be against the interests of the child’s spiritual welfare. In an ex tempore        •’   • ■ . _ .w       tKat the child had not been seen by a doctor.
judgment directed only to a deliberate breach of the law on conscientious'
grounds, it is not surprising tbat Lord Russell of Killowen GJ. felt able
to deal with the construction of the statute shortly, at pp. 290-291:
                                                                                  A
                                                                                        ■ arjs                              ausrrtis ^                   ssaat
    “ ‘ Wilfully ’ [he said.] means that the act is done deliberately and'          -
    intentionally, not by accident or inadvertence, but so that the               y*    SH.                       i                    *>"«•
    of the person who does the act goes with i t Neglect is the want              •
    of reasonable care—that is, the omission of such steps as a reasonable        I
    parent would take, such as are usually taken in the ordinary’
    experience of mankind . . . ”                                    .      ;y
     My Lords, there was at that time no specific reference in the statiile* •
to the provision of adequate food, clothing, medical aid or lodging. The
                                                                                        S                  S                r S                  r iS
word “ neglects ’’ was quite general, qualified only by the requirement
that it must be in such a manner as to be likely to cause the child un- C               Sit        held that the word* “ through ignorance did            ne*»
necessary suffering or injury to health. One cannot quarrel with Lord( - :                                      b , tta « « * » . taut no reason lo t IW* boWta* " * •
Russell’s statement that “ neglect is the want of reasonable care " i f a ll* ;,
that means is that a reasonable parent who was mindful of the physical1
welfare of his child and possessed of knowledge of all the relevant facts
would have taken steps that the accused omitted to take, to avoid the'
risk of unnecessary suffering by the child or injury to his health. Hie q
danger of the statement is that it invites confusion between, on the one
hand, neglect and on the other hand, negligence; which calls for con­                    UdI d o ™ b ,’ >h» Horn* ta,                  .        words uitd in ■ «*>«■'
sideration not of what steps should have been taken for that purpose in
the light of the facts as they actually were, but of what steps would have
been appropriate in the light of those facts only which the accused parent
                                                                                                                            i -j - T J S z n r a i l s
either knew at the time of his omission to take them or would have
ascertained if he had been as mindful of the welfare of his child as a ®
reasonable parent would have been.
    Lord Russell’s brief explanation of the meaning of "wilfully” is
                                                                                         rsss a w
confined to positive physical acts. In relation to these he equiparates
wilful acts with acts that would now be described as '* voluntary.” I do                  it to have been inconsistent with what in s u b v e r t casei
not myself think that this was right even in relation to positive physical                treated as having been held in R * t v. Semor [1899] 1 Q.B. 1*1
acts of which the statutory definition included the characteristic that f                 the meaning of “ wilfully neglects.                   . . . _ractice of
they were likely to have certain consequences; but its meaning in relation
to positive acts is dear. I find its meaning obscure, however, in relation
to a failure to do a physical act where the failure is not deliberate or                  of treating Reg. v. Senior [1899] 1 U. •                  otfence of wilfully
intentional in the sense that consideration has been given as to whether
or not to do it and a conscious choice made not to do it. To speak of                     5222, ?d2B                                       «»
the mind going with the act is inappropriate to omissions, but the contrast
drawn between “ deliberately and intentionally” and “ by inadvertence” ®                      '   I r;'.VionV..
is at least susceptible of the meaning that if the accused has not addressed                  House to overturn a longstanding ju          ?   facj, lel, ^ 0(ten a
his mind to the question whether or not to do the physical act he is                          meaning for a statutory provision. ^       matters in which people
accused of omitting to do, his failure to do the act is not to be treated                     good maxim in promoting legal cert.inty in maUen JnwhK:n peop^
 as “ wilful.”                                                                                arrange their affairs in reliance upon     ep          ^ |he jnJUnt
     Reg. v. Senior [1899] 1 Q.B. 283. however, appears to have been                          But three reasons           "JjJJL n tary and judicial opinion has been
 treated as having decided that if the child did in fact need medical ft                      case. The climate of both parliamentary        j          offencet Qver the
 treatment, it did not matter whether the accused parent actually knew                        growin* less favourable to the recognition of a ^ l u t e offence*
or ought to have known that medical treatment was needed: he
nonetheless guilty of the offence of wilfully neglecting the child if all that                h                                                  r x f t * -
  408                                                                                                                                                             409
  U ftf Dlplocfc           R«*. T. Sheppard (H X.(E.))                                                         Rtg. v. Mwppwd ( H U U I           Lard Ttmmi B ail*

   of Parliament, and, in the case of the judiciary, is Dlustrated by the              \        persons Act 1933 as to what constitutes the necessary men* rta of
   speeches in this House in Sweet v. Parsley [1970] A .C 131 Secondly A V             \ f the offence?"              ”
  the Court of Appeal in the instant case has expressed its own feelinc                  v Martin Sheppard, who died at the age of 16 months on January 28,
  of unease about the present state of the authorities by which it regard!               1979 of hypothermia associated with malnutrition, was
  itself as bound and has granted leave to appeal in order that thn^                     the appellants’ three children- He had seemingly taken no solid food
  authorities may be reviewed by your Lordships’ House. Thirdly, and •:                  for about five day* before death and ao milk for two^ days and the
  most importantly, the common error as I believe it to have been, has                  lomnlete absence of subcutaneous fat indicated that he had lacked
  operated to the disadvantage of the accused and to correct it will ^ r e i» '          su ffic ie n t food for a substantial period. For several
  from criminal conviction those only who are free from m y moral guilt.           j     be had suffered from gastroenteritis and this had rendered him ^capaM*
      To give to section 1 (1) of the Act of 1933 the meaning which I suggest * j        5 ingesting nourishment The home was poor and the m a« room
 it bears would not encourage parents to neglect their children nor would                ja c k e d a powerpoint      And the appellants had failed to keep.three
 it reduce the deterrent to child neglect provided by the section. It would *             appointments made by the health visitor over a period of month* for
 afford no defence to parents who do not bother to observe their children's '"
 health or, having done so, do not care whether their children are receiving /•         M*The evident                        the jury to find that
 the medical examination and treatment that they need or not: it would ~ -              have been saved had he timeously received proper medical.attention, a ff
 involve the acquittal of those parents only who through ignorance or Jack ^£"?|        “ at the manifest symptoms of illness had been such tta t
of intelligence are genuinely unaware that their chad’s health may be'aT                parents would have concluded that failure to secure medical ^ for
risk if it is oot examined by a doctor to see if it needs medical treatment ’C 1:      'S a d might well result in “ unnecessary suffering or Injury
And, in view of the abhorrence which magistrates and juries feel for                    But the appellants seemed to be of low mtell.gence and in summary
cruelty to helpless children, I have every confidence that they would not _             form their case was (a) that, while they a p p r e c i a t e d that Mart m i
readily be hoodwinked by false claims by parents that it did not occur tp       ■'      physical development had been slow, this did not alarm them M » abo
them that an evidently sick child might need medical care.                              had been his father’s; (b> that, although they were a w a re th * he t»d
     In the instant case it seems likely that on the evidence the jury, if               lately been vomiting back his food, they thought that thu
given the direction which I have suggested as correct, would have con­                   no more than a passing upset which w o u l d s o o n disappear of
victed one or both of the accused; but I do not think it possible to say                 (c) that they had accordingly not realised that he " « d e
with certainty that they would. It follows that in my opinion these                      attention. Directing the jury, the learned judge said:
appeals must be allowed and that the certified question should be ®                           - I n addressing you [defence counsell put f o r ^ a r d this proposition:
answered:                                                                                     He said that if the defendants, either of them, do not kno any
     " The proper direction to be given to a jury on a charge of wilful                       better, how can they be guilty of neglect? If they do'
     neglect of a child under section 1 of the C hildren and Young Persons                     they are neglecting the child, how can they be guilty of neglect7
     Act 1933 by failing to provide adequate medical aid, a that the jury                      I hone it is quite clear on what I have told you that m m y judgment
     must be satisfied ( 1) that the child did in fact need medical aid at                             I S     1 . . . . . . YOU
     the time at which the parent is charged with failing to provide it ^                      would have done in the circumstances. Would h* o r ^ efU ,
     (the actus reus) and (2) either that the parent was aware at that                         behaved in this way? Did the defendants or either of them fail to
                                                                                               do that, for whatever reasons? If they did. lt U obfectlvehrnegfcet
     time that the child’s health might be at risk if it were not provided
     with medical aid, or that the parent's unawareness of this fact was                       by that parent, and the question remains: b it wilfuW ^ I « y.
     due to his not caring whether his child’s health were at risk or not                      so far aT w ilful* is concerned, there is no requirement that the
     (the mens rea).”                                                   •                       parent who deliberately neglects should be f° u" d.
                                                                                                the consequences. . . . The question is: a it deliberate?
                                                                        ‘ "• .0
    L oro E dmund -D a v ie s . My Lords, in November 1979 the appellants - 1: •             My Lords, the learned judge doubtless based his dire*tionon t b e « n -
were convicted at Northampton Crown Court of cruelty to their son                        known decision of the Court for Crown Cases R ^ rv e d “
Martin between July 1, 1978, and January 29, 1979, contrary to section                   118991 1 Q.B. 283. There the accused, charged with the man*“ *
1 (1) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933. By leave of the                        of his son, belonged to a sect who objected on rehgious                * S jj
single judge, they appealed to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division),                  in the medical aid which would have prolonged (and P™bablyunred)
who dismissed their appeals and, in granting them leave to come to this                  child’s life. The accused’s failure in that m p e c tw a sa n ^ e d to
House, certified the following to be a point of law of general importance:               a breach of section 1 of the Prevention of Cruelty to ^ ild re n Act          ,
     “ What Is the proper direction to be given to a jury on a charge of                 •he material pans of which were basically similar to those of ^ r io a j^ n
     wilful neglect of a child under section 1 of the Children and Young                  of the Act of 1933. The decision has ever since been cited on numerous
410                                                                                   I                          Keg, ». Aeppartf            )       U * ■* — <
Lori Edaaa4-DavlM          R tf. t . Sheppard (H-L-fE.))              |l t t ||                              i        In the result, on the authority of a Um of
occasions as authority for tbe proposition that, on charges of cruelty to
children, it is sufficient for the prosecution to establish that the chi^ A
had in fact been neglected in a manner likely to cause him unnecessary                  » w™«on me<S i t v Senior [1*99] 1 Q B. 283 (which (dated to
                                                                                          cases beginning with Reg-      "V° .. „         lt j, said that at common
suffering or injury to health, and that the state of mind of the parent or              J a statute containing no deeming P™            neglect has been established
other custodian of the child is irrelevant So to bold is to ignore the                * i        ,      » t ol l .      »         *      , £ l y » m o . b . <W t
adverb “ wilfully " qualifying the allegation of neglect and to make the '
                                                                                                    by                                      n o r . tapoM M 0» «
charge one of absolute liability. But whether Reg. v. Senior decided                    . But these consolidated appeals taa                          ~ provision la
anything of the sort is, in my judgment, questionable, for Wills J., whose              / the significance of the limit                   ■ they Involve consider­
direction was upheld on appeal, had told the jury, at p. 286:          * ‘               a tio n t (2) («) of the Art ■^ j ^ ^ o ^ L p o a t a g strict liability in
     “ . . . there could be no doubt that the prisoner bad wilfully and
     deliberately abstained from calling in medical assistance, though he
     and those about the child were aware for some considerable period
     before its death that it was in a state o f great danger, and that                   ,K I S S      Z E .                                               -***»«•
     therefore the question was narrowed down to whether his failure 'q
     to procure medical aid could be called *neglecting the child w as                    th*t                    the wholeestablished law of England (unless
                                                                                           . •• it iscontrary to the whoenacted it), to say that a
    to cause serious injury to its health.’ " (Emphasis added.)                             ' the legislation on the sub>ec* .                  without a wrongful
                                                                    */J' 'j'              , person can be guilty of            ^            ^          forbidden."
In the light of the accused’s established knowledge of the precarious '
state of his child’s health, the jury could have been in no doubt that he                      intent—without an             . / , • • « 14 Q.B.D. 667, 689).
                                                                                          • ‘ (Attorney-General v. Bradlaugh (1885) W                   •
foresaw the probable consequences of failure to summon medical aid.
The element of wilfulness was accordingly clear, and it is against that $                   It has sadly to be said that the law reports are        ^    at lu t,
background that one should read the extemporary holding of Lord                            of departures from that salutaryMW . d ’. ^ ur Lordships’ House in
Russell of Killowen C.J., at pp. 290-291:                               ' ■
                                                                                           fortunately ‘u ^ d « f«r t                        « d . St p. 148:
     “ * Wilfully ’ means that the act is done deliberately and intentionally,             Sweet v. Parsley [19701 A.C 132, where u>               |f ^    ^
     not by accident or inadvertence, but so that (he mind of the person
     who does (he act goes with it.”                                                            “ Our first duty is t0       Vn' absolute offence that is an end of
                                                                                  B             a clear intention to « e*,e *"             e. Sometimes the words
    Be that as it may, Reg. v. Senior was the starting point of a long                          the matter. But such «ses are v e ry ^            ^        de>r th .t
series of cases culminating in the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division)                          of the section which creates a pa         hef Such cases are quite
judgment in Reg. v. Lowe [1973] Q.B. 702 that, in the words of                                  mens rea is required in on' J ° ” ° mb<.r of case, there is no clear
Phillimore L.J., at p. 707:                                                                      frequent. But in a very       g ^         ^ ),as for centuries been
     “ It did not matter what [the father of the deceased child] ought to                        indication either way.      su          intend to make criminals of
                                                                                            .   . presumption that P a r l.a m e n td .d n o tin te n d o     ^     ^
     have realised as the possible consequences of his failure to call a
     doctor; the sole question was whether his failure to do so was *                           persons who were in no                         men, rea there is a
     deliberate and therebv occasioned the results referred to in section                       means that whenever * sec,'° "     effect to the will of Parliament.
     1 (1) of the Act of 1933.”                                                                 presumption th at, m OTde    * ^ ^ tQ          mens rea."
                                                                                                we must read in wore* vv*                              -      . . «
    By attaching no importance to the mental ingredient of wilfulness,
Reg. v. Lowe and all similar decisions must, in my respectful judgment,                     it b not, I think, open to ^ J ^ f ^ f b y L o r d R eV and, that being
be regarded as wrongly decided. “ Neglect ” is doubtless a state of fact                     into the third of the c*tegon«*          .       ^ the conduct a criminal
to be objectively determined, and in the circumstances of the present case                         “ the mere fact that                        t5e m cnul element of the
it was “ deemed ” by section 1 (2) (a) to be established by the un­                          'offence gives rise to some “ Pjj0!*!®. . t          162c). So regard must
challenged fact that in truth the accused had “ failed to provide adequate                   conduct proscribed ’* (P** V°r. PI? neisons charged with wilful neglect
medical aid ” for their son. But there was no “ deeming” provision in                        always be had to the stateof          . ^ ustice Act 1967 requires that the
the Prevention of Cruelty to Children Act 1894 which was under con­                           As to this, section 8 of theCnm in           . . tive investigation Into the
sideration in Reg. v, Senior [1899] I Q.B. 283: it made its debut in                          state of mind is to be ascerf.ned g ^ a                   lnto account all
Kctlfli 12 (I) of the Children Act 1008. Worthy of note It the fact fj                        mind of the person chared, an mves g:             ^ ^ enable the magistrate
that there is no uatutory “ deemin* ” about the Hiiluinrii of the neslee1                       the ettablhhed facts of the case. And 1                    defendant think
Yet the essence of the prosecutor's cate acainst thcte appellants » a*                        or jury to answer the questton: JJw rtl« '» *          ,      llwe_ ,h a t It,
                                                                                               ihe position was regarding * ’      s fe ajh at
                                                                                               it h i.a v e the matter any thought at ail?
  412                                                                                                                                                             413
 Larrf Manatf-DariM          Re*. *. Skeppard (H J^E .))                  (19a|]                                  R et. T. Sheppard (H J U U )                  n "H"
    The justice (and, with respect, the common sense) of the matter fa                    failed during the tost month to obtain          the necessary «ad
 surely that, as Professor Glanville Williams has put it (Textbook             A          medical assistance."                             ■             , . . . . . ;*
 Criminal Law (1978), p. 88):                                        '-'if.l**                In my judgment, the possibility that        a miscarriage of rustic* _haa
                                                                                        ' occurred cannot be eliminated, and I            would therefore allow these
     “ We do not run to a doctor whenever a child is a little unwell We
     invoke medical aid only when we think that a doctor is reasonably                    consolidated appeals.
     necessary and may do some good. The requirement of wilfulnea
     means, or should mean, that a parent who omits to call in the doctor                                                           My Lords, the appellants were
                                                                                              L o u d F raser of T u u .t b e i .to r
     to his child is not guilty of the offence if he does not know that the * *         '    victed of having wilfully neglected their child. Martin, u a n w n er
     child needs this assistance . .                                ■>                   likely to cause unnecessary suffering to the child, or injury to itt health,
                                                                                         contrary to the Children and Young Persons Act 1933, sectkw I, as
  But to that must be added that a parent reckless about the state of ha                 2 2 .        Martin died on January 29, 1979, a g e d l6 months a n d a
  child’s health, not caring whether or not he is at risk, cannot be heard               postmortem examination showed that he had not retained any
  to say that he never gave the matter a thought and was therefore not                   tor five days or any liquid for about two days immediately M o n he
  wilful in not calling in a doctor. In such circumstances recklessness                „ died. The defence was that the appellants had not
  constitutes mens rea no less than positive awareness of the risk involved C          C there was anything seriously the matter with hun or that he m ^ined
  in failure to act.                                                         ... ..      treatment by a doctor during the last two or three months of hi. life
     My Lords, the supremacy of this House in its unprecedented task of                  and particularly during the last week of his life.                    „ _
 interpreting section 1 of the Act of 1933 should not be regarded                             An offence under section I (1) a committed                           hiT
 fettered by its legislative ancestry or its judicial history in su b o rd in ate^'"      fully assaults, ill-treats, neglects, abandons, o t exposes a child fa !»«
 courts, as to which the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) in the ~’t '                 a re in " . manner likely to cause him u n n e c ^ r y suffcnng or f a j f j
 present case obviously felt some disquiet. That is understandable, for D              D t0 health "        Bysubsection2 (a) a parent is deemed to have
 the extensive interpretation hitherto accepted involves rejection of the                 his child in such a manner “ if he has failed to provide adequate food,
 presumption in favour of a strict construction of criminal statutes which ’              clothing medical aid or lodging for him.” In the present case It I*
grew up in the I8th century and has persisted to this day. That inter-                    dear that the accused failed to provide adequate, or any. medical care
 pretation has again found favour, this time with some of your Lordships,
but I respectfully find it unacceptable. And, notwithstanding its con­                      doubt that they did neglect him. The question is whether they <lid so
formity to that given in countless cases over the last 80 years, the £                 _            or not The word " wilfully ” in this context is ambiguous. It
direction to the jury in the present case cannot in my judgment be
upheld.                                                                                  seeing that the probable consequence of neglect is that the child will
     Nor do I consider that to depart from it would lessen the law’s protec­             suffer in jury to his health. Or it may have the more restricted meaning
tion of the welfare of children. For my part, I have confidence in the                   that the parents’ neglect was conduct which was
vigilance and ability of magistrates and juries to detect ra w of wilful                 of being conscious and free from outside pressure J ^
neglect. The stronger the objective indications of neglect, the more _                 _ intending or foreseeing the consequences. « I had to •PP™***
difficult for defendants to repel the conclusion that they must have known             * question afreshwithout reference to authority or to the history of he
of the plight of the children in their charge, or, at least, that they                   S ° , o n . my M i n ..* ,. « u ld b . »         K «>""«■ “ “
had been recklessly regardless of their welfare. And, as ray noble and                    meaning of the expression. Even so I would regard the answer as
learned friend. Lord Keith of Kinkel, has said, feckless parents who fall
into neither of those categories are not (and, in the nature of things,                   ‘ " t o fact authority is not lacking and the learned judge evid'ntly had
cannot be) deterred by the law as hitherto understood from neglecting                     regard to it. as he was bound to do. in directing the jury. He directed
their children. To perpetuate the prevailing approach cannot therefore 0                0 them that " neglect ” was not a state of mind but was conduct!
be said to be either in the children's interest or in accordance with                      it was to be judged by the objective standard of what a
justice to those having children in their charge.                                         would have done in the circumstances [as known to ‘he *PPf“«"“ *
     What verdicts the jury would have returned had they been directed                     the time]. The words in square b r a c k e t s a r e my own. but I thuik they
substantially in the terms indicated in the speech of my noble and learned                 are implied in what the judge said. He <Jjrec                  “ There is no
friend. Lord Diplock (which I respectfully adopt), must remain a matter                    nealect was “ wilful ” if it was " deliberate." and said: There is no
of conjecture. In sentencing the accused the trial judge said that it was jj            H requirement that the parent who deliberately neglects should be found
   a bad case of child neglect.” But he added that the evidence did not                     to have foreseen the consequences."                       » . « , # . wmt i
show that the parents had been persistently and deliberately cruel: that                        I do not think it would be right to cons.der the e f f e c o t h >words
neither of them had foreseen the child's death; and that, “ you simply                      -wilfully . . . neglects" in the Act of 1933 without having regard to
                                                                                                                                                                              415
 414                                                                                                              R tf. T. Shtppard (H -U E .))                       •**-*-* “ ,
 « tJ » 5 L               Re«.   t   . Sheppard (H X^E.))              [lni|                                                          m ^ itfniivH made do        otbcf milGfuU
authority and to the way the legislation on this matter has developed.               inserting - assaults "immediately after _ ^          .
It is convenient to begin with Reg. v. Wagstaffe (1868) 10 Cox C C S3o A             .Iteration in the provision-       -c o ated the case which hat ««,erm^ r
where parents were prosecuted for manslaughter of their child by neglecting              Under the Act of 1894 there             thoritv on this point—R ef.
                                                                                            regarded as the most important authorityon              ^ ^ ^
to provide proper medical attention for i t The accused belonged to the
“ Peculiar People “ sect, who believed that medical aid for the sick was • •         sm cr    [18991    I Q |> . 2 »      * J S i , d ’I11u 1>|« i « h “ r “ d “ “
unnecessary because they believed in the healing power of God. Their
faith was based on a text at chapter 5, verse 14 of the General Epistle of * 1 '^        UDheld on appeal. The juoge,          ’ hi]d h4(j been caused of
James as follows:                                                  . „           '   ^    Pbe satisfied first                   S p lW        « co o d £ £ t
                                                                                     accelerated by the want of medical us**™™*          for the child that
     **Is any sick among you? Let him call for the elders of the church;' * ''       medical aid and medicine                   have provided them. (My
     and let them pray over him. anointing him with oil ia the n«m»                  reasonably careful parents in 1*°      . accused could not be convicted
     of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the - '           5 5 * . ) H eU *.dtacled
     Lord shall raise him up; ”                                        .•*;<* .. \
                                                                                     'at m as laughter *t common                      h failure to p w id e medical aid,
  Wiles J. directed the jury that if the parents had acted in what they
 honestly believed was the child’s best interest they should be acquitted. P .
 The accused were acquitted.                                           .
     Just six months after that case the Poor Law Amendment Act 1868 -s'-*
 was passed, in July 1868, and by section 37 it created an offence “ When        >
                                                                                      l ^ t i o T ^ S c d 't h a t h e ^ acting                                      beUevedJhe use
 any parent shall wilfully neglect to provide adequate food, clothing,> v '
 medical aid, or lodging for his child . . . whereby the health of such,               conception of duty. The                              . ., m#ice u s e of it is to               *
                                                                                       of medical aid to be w r o n g because o                                 whether he believed
 child shall have been or shall be likely to be seriously injured.** There D
 seems little doubt, as Lord Russel] of Killowen C.J. said in Reg. v. Senior ^         S S f faith in the Lord.” ^ ^ * 2 , 2 3 needs of the child, but.
 [1899] 1 Q.B. 283,289, that that section was passed because the legislature           that medical aid was unneceMary                                 of prayer which i* entirely
                                                                                        having regard to his faith ia the                              in the gpjjtle of J a m e s , and
 was of opinion that circumstances such as had existed in Reg. v. Wagstaffe.
                                                                                        consistent with a Uteral reading ^                       ^ q .b .D. 25. Ithink he murthave
 10 Cox C.C. 530. were not adequately provided for by the existing law.
                                                                                        tlso to the findings in Reg. v*                            and unnecessary. Accordingly,
T h r purpose of section 37 evidently was, in my opinion, to provide that
an honest but mistaken belief that medical aid was unnecessary would not £              believed that medical aid                                     in my opinion, a            wher*
be a defence, and thus in effect to reverse the direction give by Willes J.             s«f-     » S,n,cr 11*991
                                                                                         t h e accused f o r e s a w t h e p r o b a W e » « e q
                                                                                                                                                         ol l,b tte.lect. U r i
 in Reg. v. Wagstaffe. That is how the provision was construed in Reg. v.
                                                                                       of Killowen C J. said, at pp. 290- •                      deUberately and intentionally.
 Downes (1875) 1 Q.B.D. 25. where the accused was another of the ’* Peculiar
People.” He was held to have been rightly convicted of manslaughter                        •• *Wilfully ’ means t h a t the ac                     ^ ^ mind of the person
notwithstanding an express finding by the jury that he bona fide, though                      Whobdoes
                                                                                                   , aeddtnt
                                                                                                       the actor                          ™ “ °* ■“ parent
                                                                                                               go « with . t Neglect ^ # ICM01lgbte   “ * ? would
                                                                                                                                                            '“ S
erroneously, believed that medical advice was not required for the child. .
                                                                                              —that is, the omission of su       P* rHin»fy experience of mankind
Lord Coleridge C.J. at p. 29 said that, had it not been for section 37 of
the Act of 1868, he would have entertained “ great doubt ’’ on the case
                                                                                              - t h a t is, in su ch a <*se    ^ u k e ^ necessary steps,
for the reasons stated by Willes J. in Reg. v. Wagstaffe. 10 Cox C.C 530.
Referring to section 37 he said, at p. 30: “ By wilfully neglecting, I                        means as would enable                                            children Act
understand an intentional and deliberate abstaining from providing the                       The next significant stage in the                          the provision against
medical aid. knowing it to be obtainable.” He said that the motives of                    1908 which repealed earlier legs             ^           unnecessary m tk n n t or
the accused were irrelevant, and that if he had been proceeded against .0                 neglecting a child in •               ^ JL in g provision in terms
summarily under the statute he would clearly have been liable. His                        injury to health etc. and*Jfcd a deemi                        ^ l933. S in c eW J
neglect was therefore culpable and to cause death by culpable neglect                     identical with those of               S t a t i o n which is relev,n^ r .p^ ? i
was manslaughter.                                                                         there has been no c h a n p ^ J ^ W W o n introduced *• l* »
    The Prevention of Cruelty to. and Protection of. Children Act 1889                     purposes. The effect ol 1 *                         ^     , dequ„ e food,m«di « l
repealed section 37 of the Act of 1868 and replaced it with a provision (in                opinion merely to p r o v i d e n t f« flu rew p      ^     A<x , n d to leave*be
section 1) that any person who wilfully “ ill-treats, neglects, abandons, or j |           aid etc shall constitute neglect contrary                                meant by
exposes such child . . . in a manner likely . . ." etc.. will be guilty of an              meaning of The word ^ wilfully" un.ffec«4                           m^       te f
offence. That provision was repealed and substantially re-enacted by the                   ” adequate " medical aid in «*»                         the likelihood of tojuty to
Prevention of Cruelty to Children Act 1894. section 1, which apart from                     what? - It cannot mean adequate to pre
                                                                                                                                                                   417
   416
   L'm   m n                       T-Sk*W*rt            )                     ,mjj                                   - n   v. A q H   (H L U W )            -•s&b s
                                                                                           '                   ..    m       MrMid would certainly be increased and
     the child's health, or adequate in the light of what is knows at the d u .              proof against »‘“p £ or fecU«*        children. Such parents would noI
     of the trial to have prevented injury to health, because in some casetT! A             ;io I fear might ^ ? L ^ 5 S s t e n c e of an absolute offence; they
     amount of medical aid would prevent injury to health, which is <*»«—-.               . necessarily be unaffected by the            ^          needeij medkal cue,
     in subsection ( 1) as •• including injury to or loss of sight, or hearing, or           night not be able to                  tand th ,t they must obtain medkal
     limb, or organ of the body, and any mental derangement.” To read                        but they might be quite i                     Qf jn^ealth, even though the
       adequate in such an absolute sense would mean that every parent                       care whenever the child *bowed a n y g n s (hat the climata of
    whose child died would be guilty of neglect, though not necessarily of -i-               signs might Mem to them to>\            *               „ onct WM to the
    wilful neglect That cannot be right Neglect must convey some                   ,*        opinion has          y ^ “ ™eJ ^ tT ^ not think that such change of
    tion of omission to perform a duty. In a case where in spite of the bat *-               rtcognition of absolute .offenco, but l                 tm m a conrtrectioo
    medical aid, the child suffered injury to health, or death, it would m rciv '             climate as has taken place                  . foHowed by the courts since
    be an abuse of language to say that the parent had behaved with (doo-                 • of this provision which has been consoten y              wrong. Especially la
   wilful) neglect. Moreover, it would Ihrow an unduly heavy burden on                     - T m J i which b. at the
   the word wilfully ’ in the context In my opinion “ adequate ”                   3       • these times when parental «*Pon»              relaxation of the Uw on the
         i°f food’ clothing or lodging) means such as ordinary reasonably                 . too lightly, such a s h a r p for the legislature and not for the
   careful parents would have provided in the circumstances as known to ®                 C mbject seems to me appropriate only tor me *<**»•
   the accused. TTiat agrees with the explanation of the word in the Act of V              : courts.                                . . j m unable to agree with the
   18*f. g,v.en ^ L o r d Russell of Killowen C J. in Reg. v. Senior and I n e                  • in these circumstances I w e t h a         the majority of my oobte and
   nothing in subsequent legislation to change the meaning of “ wilfully " or 4 '             direction which  has                for  this type of case. I would dtanfaa
      neglect there explained. Quite the contrary. If Parliament had wished               ' learned friends as being appropriate io t m u j y -
    ° f J‘!r,?T-c° rre5t those meanings, that could easily have beat done in the %        ■■ the appeal.
  Act of 1933, but it was not.                                             ... ,y j j
        Lord Russell s explanation has been followed in many cases since R et         •
  v. Semor [1899] 1 Q.B. 283. For example, in Rex v. Petch, 2 Cr.App.ll!              •      tag to the ordinary use of             1J      ^ b what the word means
     •I# . rC ?             d,ed of malnu,ntion, the parents were convicted of •             attention upon the: chil -        y d Young Persons Act 1933, where,
  wilful neglect through ignorance ” and that was held to be a good                          5„ section 1 (1) of the                   ” K * or injury to health shows
  verdict of guilty. In R ex v. Walker (1934) 24 Cr.App.R. 117, 122,                      ‘ however, the reference tounM C ^ary ^               ^ ^ ^       lnd        not
 i « rV ;~ ; 2PledJ h»! ” P,analion from Reg- v. Senior. In the Scottish -                 E that its ambit is limited to the phys          educationat. parents no doubt
 « s e of Clark v H.M Advocate. 1968 J.C 53, 57. the Lord Justice-Oerk E                      cover other aspects such as the morri'      .      proper care and attention
 (Grant) quoted Lord Russell’s explanation of "w ilfully” with approval
                                                                                              take widely varying views                 ^ any absolute standard, though
 and treated a defence that the consequences of the failure to provide                        for their children. It is not 1"**®“ *          J in minimum below which
 medical aid were not intended or foreseen (emphasis added) as irrelevant
 In Reg. v .I< n tr [1973] Q.B. 702. 707. Phillimore L J.. delivering the                      it might not be difficult to recogl^® .j j n jjy section 1 CO
                                                                                              no reasonably conscientious parent w o u d ^                        ^levant
 judgment of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) consisting of himself                 p K J S e r . U * deemed to consum e neglertof                   ^
 "ortheCrown"                   “ JJ" summ,ris«d with approval the argument F              P manner that the parent             led      J™ inion this deeming proviston
                                                                                               medical aid or lodging foi^bto. to y ^             CQver the largest part of
     “ It did not matter what [the accused] ought to have realised as the                      seu certain objective standanfa                      how much further the
     possible consequences of his failure to call a doctor; the sole question
     was whether his failure to do so was deliberate and thereby occasioned                     the field of neglect It n;              relation to each type of provision
                                                                                                field may extend,                                     conveys the k to <rfa .
     the results referred to in section 1 (1) of the Act of 1933."
                                                                                           -          mentioned, is that ot              ^ impUed that the child had need
    My Lords, in view of the long period for which the explanation in 0                     0 minimum standard. It is necessarily to oe
 Reg. v. Semor [1899] I Q.B. 283 had been accepted and the large number      ~                  of the provision in question. • • '         - •_          provide adequate
or cases in which it has been applied, apparently with approval, by many
learned judges, I would be very hesitant about overruling it now even if                         medical care. The word “ . ^ ' ^ ^ “ ,.• 1 1 it is related to anything,
i          i r n T ? ;» ? Ut ? ° not' The Prov«ions of what is now section                       mean no more than “ ordinarily             unnccessary suffering of iniury
l ° {. ,he * ct of 1933 u e intended by Parliament for the protection of                         I think it is related to the prw nU on of              ^     ^ «,jective
children who are unable to look after themselves and are in the care of H                      u to health, as mentioned           °         ^ - injury to health." There
             w , ? ’er2 ’* nothln* unreason»ble in their being stringent and                   H " unnecessary "q u .U fl« b o A “ » f f ^ ^ “ ^      ^     tw to p f^
»ul       r ik * f ! ? ce re^u‘red Pro°f *hat the particular parents were                        could be no question o( a ^ '" 8 ° f      wbose child neverthdess suffered
aware of the probable consequences of neglect then the difficulty of                              ordinarily competent medical care, but waose cnu
    418                                                                                                                                                               41*
    VT k m S *               R ««. T. S lw ppar* (H X 4 E .))                               ^                       R q . v, i h w or i (HLOU)                   *SMiS5
                  ‘° ! ,eav,h*, '° r example Para|V*« in « case of poliom yelij           * ih>t the court proceeded wholly on the Irrelevance of th* accused*! motive
    unnecexnrv '          health would not in the circumstances have            <A          £ r not providing medical aid. None of these cmm show any traeihof aa
    unnecessary, in the sense that it could have been prevented throu.h         ’ ‘       * Kempt to face up to the proper application of the taw to tl» situation
    provision by the parent of adequate medical care. Failure to                          k where no question of motive is in issue, but where the accused! failure
   5 b ™ T v e d CaI, Care^ ay-bC dClibera‘e- “ when (h« child’s n S t o *               : to orovide medical care is due to inability, through stupidity or ignorance.
                            k°     * “ d0"e- "'gHgent, as when the need ought            ' to appreciate the need for i t So in my opinion it a an error to treat
   ~ hfn th , n i l         bCC" perce,ved but * “ no*, or entirely blameless. « T’ ~!      anything decided or said in these cases as authoritative in that situation. I
   n/         i U. wa* not perceived but was not such as ought to hav e b £ L 'X i          Z u id er that the Court of Appeal fell into that error in Reg. V. Lowe
   perceived by an ordinary reasonable parent I would say that in all th
  cas« the parent has neglected the chad in the sense oM he*a?ute * 2 * t                £ ‘-7 i wuies^Sl that, by holding the offence created by section 1 (1) of
  L Z Z lT T k                m ,* pr0per construction of section I (2) (a) it? 5   •        the Act of 1933 not to be an absolute one but as requiring proof of the
                                                                                             t y p e of mens rea which I have described, the degree of protection against
  S i^ fr           / ,C? ,Ve,y and in the U*bt of ^ '" t s whether the p £ £ .
                                                                                          ' neglect which is thereby afforded to children would be unaec*pUWy
  f l i t Ihe c h « r l l ^ J"* yJC° mpetCnt medical “ re which « • m a E f ■£             1 diminished. In my opinion there is no substance in that consideration. IT
  £1                   " * ” ° rder l° PreVCnt unne“ ^                   or inTu* £      c a parent genuinely does not appreciate that his child has need of medical
        I turn now to consider the meaning of the adverb “ wilfullv ” wh.vi, -           \ care, then the existence of an absolute offence could have no c“ ? ,on
  «o.«m ..i qu.ufa ~ neslecB - „ d .ti,ht «h°t ™n» Z r i c L T X ? -ni                    1 his conduct, and it would not accord with ordinary concepts of justice
                                                                                          * to hold him blameworthy. I am confident that juries and summary oourtt
 nere to describe the mental element, which, in addition to the fact of         -•            can be trusted to scrutinise most carefully the gwuineness of a daim by
 £ £ > n Th * • Pr°Ved “ order 10 es,ab,ish an offence under the s u b - * ^                  an accused parent that he or she did not realise that their child I condition
 section. The primary meaning of “ wilful ” is ” deliberate ” So a ram it m '            D was such as to require medical care.                                      .     .
 who knows that hi, child needs medical care a n r d e S t e l v ^ h a t T ^ ®-                     My Lords, I agree that the question certified by the Court of Appeal
 conscious decision, refrains from calling , doctor L S u n d L . S           "               (Criminal Division) should be answered as proposed by my mMe and
                                                                                              learned friend Lord Diplock, and that the appeals should be allowed.
                 leljb! ra,lon- A parent who falls to provide medical o re         r
                                                                                               L o r d S c a r m a n . My Lords, agreeing, as I do, with thespeech delivered
                                hC d°^
 » reckless of his child s welfare. He "0 t “isrguiltv
                                        too     e Whe,her  il«offence
                                                       of an    "Sed or"oT
                                                                      n..» ■             _ by my noble and learned friend. Lord Fraser of Tullybelton, I burden
  cPa T ; hl V h “ 8enUT i y !f e i ,0 apprecia,e 'hat'his child needs medical E         E your Lordships with a speech only because the question m the appeal
      A S 3 ! i f t e w S lnadeqUaf y o r s,uPidi,y « both, is not guiltv.                 is of considerable social importance.
 of section 1 of fhe Art       .cm ^ISI°" S under the statutory predecessors                   The conduct charged against the two appellants was, as the trial judge
 Senior 118991 1 o b L i u * ofuwhlch ,he most important is Reg. v.                        put it to the jury, that " the parents failed, each of them, to provide
 the situation where a' n!! L ‘       ,ha,. none of them was concerned with                adequate medical care for their infant son, Martin." The parents knew
                                                                                            that a doctor was available and would come, if called. They also knew
 medical care Thev               * “ 8CnU'neI? unaware ,hat h“         needed
                                                                                         F (hat their child was ill, off his food and that he was totally rejecting rood
 J 3 X * . ^ s . w . - a s                                  i s r z z s .F                  for the two days before his death. Failure in such circumstances to obtain
                                                                                            any medical aid was dearly a neglect of the child. The live Issue in
                                                                                            the appeal is whether the neglect was “ wilful.”
                                                                                                The trial judge directed the jury as to the law as follows. He said that
                                                                                                  “ A person for the purposes of this charge neglects a child if be
                                                                                         n        omits to take such steps in all the circumstances of the case as a
                                                                                                  reasonable parent would take.” He then put two questions to the
^          A              ifsr.i.'iiSfif ??iu,yty . r                                             jury: “ Did this [i.e. the conduct of the parents]
                                                                                                  objectively speaking? Was it deliberate neglect? I said £ libf™te
                               . '" “ " “ .“‘I '           S    “ « Jlo l .id ™                   because that is what * wilful ’ means. . . . The prosecutioni do^not
                                                                                                  have to prove that the defendants foresaw any result from neglect.
                                                                                          H       This direction, as the trial judge recognised, put out of court the
                                                                                              defence; which had been urged upon the jury that, whatever.
standing how the                 ° , t1aT           1 have difficulty in under-               circumstances known to the appellants, a reasonable parent might!have
                                                                                              thought or done, these parents honestly believed that medical aid was
                                                                                                                                                                     421
   420                                                                                                                                                     M     S ow*
                                                                                                               R tf. i . Sheppard         >
   LoH Scaraaa             R»f- »- Shtppard <H.L.<E.>)                 {i n i |
                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                               , t , d s Paoierwerke Waldhol-Aschaffenburg
  unnecessary. He dealt with the defence in perfectly dear language, which         Black           C '          t
                                                                                                               h e       woSls of Lord Reid at p. 614:
  I now quote:                                                              0 ^    A.G. [1975] A.C 591. I quote                    ^          the • mischief *
        “ In addressing you Mr. Smith put forward this proposition. He                 “ It has always been said to be imP° , . to remedy. The word
        said that if the defendants, either of them, do not know any better            which the Act was a.pp‘ r' 2 d 'ex" d it in this way. In addition
                                                                                       • mischief ’ is traditional- I woulId e:ipn^      me<J tQ ^ taowB to
       how can they be guilty of neglect? If they do not know they are’
       neglecting the child how can they be guilty of neglect? Members
       of the jury, I hope it is quite clear on what I have told you that          :•                                                     n s s js z f z s
       in my judgment that is not the law. You ask yourselves whether ®
       this particular behaviour that you are at the time considering amounts             to have intended to remedy by the Act.
       to neglect. That is to say, you ask yourself what a reasonable parent
      would have done in the circumstances. Would he or she have                         An M I C * *                                                      “r
                                                                                                                                                            ‘?       X
      behaved in this way? Did the defendants or either of them fail to do        ■; provide sufficient food.             whom the defendant was oWi**d
      that for whatever reasons? If they did, it is objectively neglect by           unable to provide for himsdf, and o        neglect injured the health
      that parent, and the question remains: is it wilful? As I say, so far C        by duty or contract to provi .        pleading Guidance and Fractfct.
      as ‘ wilful* is concerned, there is no requirement that the parent             of t h a t person: see Archbcld C n m , ^ ^ ^     ^       Neg|e*     ,
      who deliberately neglects should be found to have foreseen the “               40th ed (1979). Chapter 1. para. 3             _       tnd> if la con-
      consequences.'*
      Notwithstanding the attractive invocation of general principle to be          -                                              j   r t s s i *
  found in the speeches of my noble and learned friends, Lord Diplock and
  Lord Edmund-Davics, I have come to the conclusion that upon the true ®
                                                                                     ja s S f a s -                            -r s s r w a r s
                                                                                     r « before >K« «»• “ £ 2 ? ?
  construction of section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 the           defendants in that case belonged to a sect a t           *                 in cases of
  trial judge s direction was correct in law. In my judgment, the conduct "          People” one of w h o s e tenets was not to
  must be intentional. But the word does not import into the statutory                illness but to trust in Providence. Th y                        prayers to th« Lord.
  offcnce the requirement of foresight or recklessness as to the consequences         They called in the elders of the sect. an                                 tJ h#d Uen
  of what was done or not done (as the case may be).                                  The child died. No doctor had been called11 .               ^            wmeJ j m d
      The section has a long history. It was drafted in the 19th century. No E
 doubt its language is today a little old-fashioned. The section has been
 frequently considered by the courts, who have, since 1898, consistently
 construed it in the sense of the trial judge's direction in this case. Can so          s ’t n r r . : 2            ,          -         * - * ■ <h' ch,u
 strong and dear a current of judicial interpretation have escaped the                  acquitted.                                        1868. A few months Inter
 notice of Parliament on the occasions since 1898, or. which it has had
 under consideration the law relating to the protection and welfare of -
 children? The most notable of these occasions, so far as concerns the
 statutory offence which the House now has under consideration, were
 when Parliament passed into law the Children Act 1908, and the Children                     clothing, medical aid, or lodging for tus                         tQ ^ Kriously
 and Young Persons Act 1932. which together with the Act of 1908 and
 certain other enactments was consolidated into the Children and Young                                                                                          ~
Persons Act 1933.
     It is not possible, in my judgment, to achieve a true interpretation of G
the section without a knowledge of the circumstances in which it entered
the law or the history of its judicial treatment thereafter. I am content
on this aspect of the matter to adopt gratefully what my noble and learned               t u - x z         s        i      ^           s s m i s                    r ? £
friend. Lord Fraser of Tullybelton. has said, adding only a few comments                  K W a S '-, c m . 10
of my own.                                                                                opinion U»1 cU cum sm e* s u d .u o u s W l.ii™
     First, what was the mischief which the section, when first enacted, was u
intended to remedy? This has always been an important consideration
in construing a statute: H eydoni Case (1584) 3 Co.Rep. 7a. A modern
affirmation of the principle is to be found in the decision of this House in
                                                                                                                                                                                         423
422                                                                                                   ‘ .                             M.T. a w r i <RUfc»                   ^       11
U r i 5cm     —                   Re*. ». Sheppard (H J4E .))                                [IN I]
                                                                                                       £     *, .*«, *».*» * - —                     —      ■ * :?,*
though erroneously, believed that medical advice was not required. '» He '
also believed that it was wrong to call in medical aid. He was convicted.
His appeal against conviction was dismissed. Lord Coleridge C J. laid at
                                                                                                       failure to provide adequate                        “ X br o a d r a S of the 18*9
the beginning of his judgment (p. 29) that, apart from the statute, he would                           duced the 1868 fomulauon while                    - deeming ” provision which has
have paid the greatest consideration to the observations of Willes J. Jn                               and 1894 formulation; Mid did so by                                 relevant words
Reg. v. Wagstaffe, 10 Cox C C 530 but he interpreted the statutory words -rv
“ wilfully neglect ” in the sense of Man intentional and deliberate abstain-                                                   s r s c
ing from providing the medical aid, knowing it to be obtainable ” (p. 30),
and added: “ If he had been proceeded against summarily under the                                      -     - I      tor the ptirpows <rf         - * » • ff iS »
statute be would clearly have been liable.** BramweU B.’s short judgment,                                    s m s s A a s s i                              ***            «-*• -
at p. 30. is so revealing as to the meaning put upon the word “ wilfully ” .                                 m e d ic a l   aid. or lodging for the child                       r         ..
by the 19th century judges and legislators that I quote it in full:
     MI am of the same opinion. I agree with my Lord Coleridge as to                                       * * « « « «.
     the difficulty which would have existed had it not been for the ^                                  the meaning that the judges*" * *} ^ i . , ; n« to the protection and wd-
                                                                                                       - In 1932 Parliament renewed t h e taw r e i a u ^ g ^ ^ ^ ^            ^
     statute. But the statute imposes an absotute duty upon p a re n ts ,^ -
     whatever their conscientious scruples may be. The prisoner, there-                               « fare of children. The QuiIdren                 1933 parliament paaed the
     fore, wilfully—not maliciously, but intentionally, disobeyed the’law £ ;                          • untouched section 12 of the Act of I9M. » ^             Act , 933. action I
     and death ensued in consequence. It is, therefore, m anslaughter.".' i'.
                                                                                                      • of which. With nunor drafting cnangc*.
This decision is a d ea r indication that section 37 was interpreted by ,                              ; of 1908.                     , . . , ard Frlsef of Tullybelton, has shown,
the judges as being intended to strengthen the law protecting children by rj)                         i . As my noble and learnedfnen ,                  wbat has been ^nerally
introducing a statutory offence to which, if the need for medical aid were                            T the c a s e law has ever                           section in its 1894 enact-
proved, it would be no defence that the parent honestly believed it was not                              considered to be the interpretation p     po             2g3 I            not
    The range of conduct covered by the statutory offence was widened by                                 ment by the court « Semor j c a s e l l ^ ^ parUamenUry intervention
the Prevention of Cruelty to, and Protection of. Children Act 1889. The                                   disturb this view of the * ^ ^ L Pt? ^ n g th e n the law’s protection of
Act made no reference to adequate food, clothing, medical aid. or lodging,                            _ from its incepuon in 1868 has been                  t q .b .D. 25, interpreted
but by section 1 formulated the offence in wide terms which have not since g                          ® children. In 1875 the                           m a d e a statutory offence as
been substantially changed. The offence remained one of wilfulness. The                                   the wilful neglect which Parliament      ^        q( consequences was not
Act of 1889 was followed by a re-enactment in section 1 of the Prevention                                 excluding the “ honest beliefd®('nce-       dopted ^ e same interpretation
of Cruelty to Children Act 1S94. In Reg. v. Senior [1899] 1 Q.B. 283                                      a requirement of the offence. The,           u ^d en ed and re-fonnulated
which was dedded under the Act of 1894. two points were taken by the                                       of wilful neglect after the ofl“ ,ce ^ t ^     had the courts
defence: first that, owing to the changed wording of the offence, mere                                 :? in 1899 and                                 would not have been amended.
omission to provide medical aid was not neglect, and secondly, that the
offence required an intention to neglect the child—or. in other words, that
an honest belief by the defendant that he was not neglecting the child
constituted a defence. The defendant was convicted and appealed in a                                   t.
Crown case reserved to a Divisional Court presided over by Lord Russell of                               ‘ of criminal responsibility.             . vy mv noble and teamed friends. .
Killowen C J. The court had no difficulty in construing the new offence                                        I do not share the v           *       w               puaM , who, though
so as to include within it the omission to provide medical aid. The issue,                              _ Lord Edmund-Davies and                       wel{ar0 yet fail through stupidity
upon which the court’s decision has ever since been treated as authoritative. “0                        ® not reckless or indifferent to            J ^ d i c a l S . will not be deterred
                                                                                                         ' or immaturity to a p p r e d ^ the need ror        ^        ^             power
was as to the meaning of **wilfully neglects.” The learned Chief Justice
put it thus, at pp. 290-291:                                                                                by a criminal sanction. Tbey u                   concentrate and sharpen the
                                                                                                          - of the law. T h e e x ^                      reason that in some «acepdo.-J
     •* *Wilfully ’ means that the act is done deliberately and intentionally,                              minds of men and women, u a im uu
     not by accident or inadvertence, but so that the mind of the pereon                                    ■reas the law accepts strictJ** ^           y j, j have reached is that t*»
     who does the act goes with it. Neglect is the want of' reasonable
     care—that is. the omission of such steps as a reasonable parent would H
     take, such as are usually taken in the ordinary experience of man­
     kind—that is. in such a case as the present, provided the parent had
      fM -U        «•   *«« « « • I   if   < •«   •* "   •«*   *   '   « •• •   •   » • »»
                                                                                                             K sLStfSt S J J S t S . 3.-—
424                                                                                                                  q._                                  t]X A jrX r.A c M (U a ))
L lH S a m i                      Reg. v. Sheppard (H JUE.))                                  (1N 1| '
                                                                                                                               . _ .                . Iha Act Acas had " the general duty of pro-
the defendant had, would not have failed to provide medical aid. I would, * i
therefore, dismiss the appeals.                                       <■ - A                                     -
                                                                                                                           ing and the development and. ^where necessary, reionn »
                                                                           Appeals allowed. ,                                                                                         a.

    Solicitors: Burnhams, Wellingborough; Director of Public Prosecution^ ' - -                                  .         lection 12 « ■ ■                                                                          «»

                                                                                           F. C.
                                                                                                   •o B



                                      [H o u se OF LORDS]

UNITED KINGDOM ASSOCIATION OF                                                                      -c C
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEERS a n d A n o th e r                                 .     R e sp o n d e n ts -
                                                AND                                                —        ’■
ADVISORY. CONCILIATION AND                                                                                           ;     c o lle c tiv e    b a rg a in in g   a rr a n g e m e n ts .   (2 )   w o u ld   k   m

   ARBITRATION S E R V IC E ...................................................... A p p e l la n t s                       mentation                               "Sdl 3 K
1979    Nov. 29;                                         Lord Wilberforce, Lord Diplock. D
                                                                                                                            X ^ ^ ^ t C b y r S a ^ u ^ « d^agm g to the industry.
        Dec. 3. 4;                                   Lord Edmund-Davies. Lord Keith o(
1980    Feb. 14                                               Kinkel and Lord Sca/man                                                                  w aT . S S
                                                                                                                            discharge          iu    duty under section 12 (1) and (4) to r*P°
               Trade Union— Recognition issue— Reference to Acas— Union
                   refused recognition by employers having existing nationally                                              granted ^                    “ ra K
                   agreed collective bargaining arrangements— Acas reporting on
                   issue— Report having regard to possible damage to industrial                         g
                   relations— Duties of Acas in preparing report—Court s powers                                             V S )        ii    th a t   it   had unduly stressed                    its   general duty of
                   o f judicial review— Validity of report— Employment Protection
                   Act 1975 (c. 71). ss. 1 (2). 12 (4 )1
                         The plaintiffs, a small trade union catering for qualified
                                                                                                                             s r s i i s sL s rs s C i                                                               —
                     professional engineers (“ U.K.-A.P.E.’") bad on a Dumber of
                     occasions since 1972 sought recognition for the purpose of                                              I’STtS S                              L l                     ——“•
                     collective bargaining on behalf of a group of their members                        _
                     employed by an engineering company. The company, whose                             r                                                           -W-l.                  «• ■ W 0'"*
                     established collective bargaining arrangements operated                                                 the court's judicial review of a r e p o r t by Acas on a recogm
                     nationally throughout the industry between a federation of                                              tion issue dependedAOn the^Act g a b t a t a i ^ ^ ^
                     employers and a confederation of trade unions with sections
                     representing the technical staff, refused recognition as tending                                         K          wbstitu« its^own                  ^ £ £ £ b k
                     to further fragmentation of bargaining units and possible
                     industrial disharmony. In September 1976 the plaintiffs                                                  invalidate            mrrvicc with a proper appreciation of
                     obtained a certificate as an independent trade union under                         _                     ^ S t o T ^          - J have n j g - j . i J t i t
                     section 8 of the Employment Protection Act 1975. and for-                          v
                     mally referred the recognition issue under section 11 J o the
                     Advisory. Conciliation and Arbitration Service (“ Acas "). By

   1 Em ploym ent Protection Act 1975. J. t : “ (2) The Service 'h a lt be c h a rte d » ith                                   leading to fragmentation of them.                  M t0
the general duly of prom oting the improvement of industrial relations, and in par­
ticular of encouraging the extension of collective bargaining and the development                                              industrial re**11®?*   ^ c^conclusion to which no reason-
and. w here necessary, reform of collective bargaining m achinery.”                          rt                                 the
                                                                                                                                ableapplication d,d n°* in
                                                                                                                                     body experienced    . ^ ^industrial
                                                                                                                                                                u j t ^ r e l relation*
                                                                                                                                                                              a t i o n s could
                                                                                                                                                                                          cu    come (P°“ -
   S. 12:“ (4) If the issue has not been settled and the reference not withdrawn n                                              pp 435r-o . 442A-C. e - r . 443A-e. 445              ’■        W L . R 570;
the Service shall prepare a written report setting out its findings, anv advice in
connection with those findings and any recommendation for recognition and the                                                         Decision of            the
reasons for it. or. » h e r e no such recommendation is made, the reasons lo r not                                               [I979| 1 C.R. 303; ( 1979) 2 All E.R. 478 reveraea.
m aking any recommendation.**
                                                                                                            AH England La w Reports          15M ay1987
All England L a w Reports   8 M a y 1987




128                                        All England Law Reports             [1987] 2 AUER                QBD                                       R v West London Coroner                        129

authorities; so the plaintiffs could still recover a proportionate part o f the value for
insurance purposes o f the diamonds stolen. He also contended that the plaintiffs could 3               3            R v West London Coroner, ex parte Gray
recover the full value o f those few diamonds stolen which were not from the February                                             and others
parcel but from the November parcel, because there was no under valuation in November.
On those questions o f partial recovery { express no opinion at all.                                                                             and another application
(3) Public policy                                                                                            q u e e n ’s b e n c h d i v i s i o n
    The only separate argument under this head which has not already been considered                b   b WATKINS LJ AND ROCH J
arises from the European Community legislation. Counsel for the insurers observes that                       1 5 , l 6 , 1 7 , 1 9 DECEMBER 1 9 8 6
the German law as to turnover equalisation tax is maintained pursuant to EC Council
Directive 77/388, with which all member states are bound to comply. Any failure to                           Coroner - Inquest - Verdict - Unlawful killing - Unlawful killing by neglect - Recklessness -
comply with it may be relied on by an individual in a dispute w ith the revenue                              Standard of care - Allegation of lack of care by police - Directions to be given to jury.
authorities in his own country: see Direct Cosmetics Ltd v Customs and Excise Comrs [19S5]
STC479.                                                                               c                 c Coroner - Inquest -V erd ict - Recording of ju ry’s verdict by coroner - Coroner’s duty to record
    From those premises counsel for the insurers makes this submission: It would be                       all words whichform essential part of verdict.
 against public policy to treat a harmonised law in its application in one member state
 differently from its application in another member state.                                                Coroner - Inquest - Directions to jury - Questions by jury - Questions ai to law by jury answered
    I must admit that 1 am uncertain as to the impact o f that submission on the present                  in writing by coroner in absence of counsel - Coroner supplying jury with copy of his notes for
 case. Nobody has suggested that the German law on turnover equalisation tax means                      ^ sutnming up - Whether coroner acting properly in answering questions in absence 0) counsel
 anything different in England from what it means in Germany. To be o f significance in             d
 the present case the submission would have to be that harmonised law o f any member                       Following the deceased’s death in police custody allegations were made against various
 state should be both recognised and enforced in all other member states. As to that I                     police officers concerning their use o f force against the deceased during his arrest and
 make three observations.                                                                                  removal into custody and their failure to sum m on an ambulance promptly when he
     (i) It would make no difference in the present case. I have held that this court must                 became unconscious. At the inquest the coroner gave no directions to the jury as to the
 consider German law, subject possibly to the exception o f foreign revenue law. The claim                 definition of unlawful killing or the requirements necessary for a verdict o f unlawful
 o f the plaintiffs nevertheless succeeds because the connection between activities which           v      killing. After the retirement of the jury and in the absence ot counsel, the coroner
 were illegal by German law and the insurance contract is not sufficient to render that                    supplied the jury, at their request, with a copy o f the notes which he had made to assist
 contract tainted and therefore unenforceable. . ,                                                         him in summing up and which had formed the basis o f his directions on the law. The
     (ii) The submission goes too far. It would mean that taxes payable under a harmonised                 foreman of the jury gave the jury’s verdict as‘unlawful killing’ and added that the verdict
 law and penalties for breach o f it could be recovered here. But the Civil jurisdiction and               was intended by the jury to cover manslaughter by neglect attributed to the degree o f
 Judgments Act 1982, enacted pursuant to Community law, applies to civil and                        ,    f care the deceased received after he was overpowered. The coroner recorded the verdict as
  commercial matters, and expressly excludes revenue, customs and administrative                           being simply ‘unlawful killing’. The police officers against w hom the allegations had
  matters: see also the speech o f Lord Templeman in Williams & Humbert Ltd v W & H                        been made sought orders o f certiorari to quash the verdict and mandamus ordering a
  Trademarks (Jersey) Ltd [1986] 1 All ER 129 at 134, [1986] AC 368 at 428: 'But at present                new inquest to be held, contending (i) that the coroner’s directions to the jury were
  the international rule with regard to the non-enforcement o f revenue and penal laws is                   inadequate as to both the meaning of ‘unlawful killing’ and the standard o f proof
  absolute.’                                                                                                required, (ii) that the coroner had been wrong not to record the additional words spoken
      (iii) It is a matter for political decision whether harmonised laws o f other member               g by the foreman, (iii) that the verdict appeared to place civil liability on the police force
  states should be directly enforceable here, and for legislation. I express no opinion                     contrary to r 42“ o f the Coroners Rules 1984, which provided that the verdict should not
  whatever as to what the decision should be. But until that decision is taken and legislation              be framed in such a way as to appear to determine any question o f criminal liability on
  enacted, these courts must employ the existing connecting factors recognised by the rules                  the part of a named person or any question of civil liability, and (iv) that the coroner had
  o f conflict o f laws in determining when effect will and will not be given to foreign law.                been wrong to give his notes to the jury.
      There must be judgment for the plaintiffs for $ U S i42 ,173-90.
                                                                                                            h H e l d - T h e verdict w ould be quashed and a new inquest ordered, for the following
  Judgment for the plaintiffs.                                                                                reasons—
                                                                                                                 (1)          When directing the jury as to the standard o f proof required, a coroner ought to
  Solicitors: Ince & Co (for the plaintiffs); Clyde & Co (for the insurers).                                  direct the jury that they had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt if they wished to
                                                                                                              bring in a verdict w hich involved a finding that a criminal offence had been committed
                                                                     K Mydeen Esq      Barrister.             and that for other verdicts (except an open verdict) they had to be catisfied on the balance
                                                                                                            / o f probabilities. Furthermore, when directing a jury on manslaughter comprising
                                                                                                              unlawful killing alleged to have occurred because o f neglect on the part of police, the
                                                                                                              coroner was required to direct the jury on four matters: firstly that they had to be
                                                                                                              satisfied, on the evidence, o f four ingredients, namely (a) that the police were under a
AH England L a w Reports   15 M a y 1987                                                                 All England La w Reports   15 M a y 1 98 7




130                 _________ All England Law Reports________ [1987] 2 AIIER                             QBD                         R v West London Coroner (Watkins LJ)                       131

duty to have regard to the heal th and welfare o f the deceased, (b) that in the circumstances          R v Cardiff Coroner, e x p Thomas [1970] 3 All ER 469, [1970] 1 WLR 1475. DC.
there was a failure to do what should have been done for the health and welfare o f the          a   3 R v Cato[i976] 1 All ER 260, [1976] 1 WLR 110, CA.
deceased, (c) that the failure amounted to a substantial cause o f death and (d) that the               R v Devon County Coroner, ex p Glover (1984) 149 JP 208.
failure amounted to recklessness; secondly that the test for ‘recklessness’ was whether a               R v Great Western Rly Co (Directors) (1888) 20 QBD 410, DC.
police officer, having regard to his duty, was indifferent to an obvious and serious risk to            R v Hampshire CC, e x p Ellerton [1985] 1 All ER 599, [1985] 1 WLR 749, CA.
the health and welfare o f the deceased or, recognising that risk to be present, deliberately           R v Huntbach, expLockley[ 1944] 2 All ER 453, [1944] KB606.
chose to run that risk by doing nothing about it; thirdly that a failure to appreciate that             R v Lamb [1967] 2 All ER 1282, [1967] 2 QB 981, CA.
there was such a risk was not by itself sufficient to amount to recklessness; and fourthly       b   /j R v Lawrence [1981] 1 All ER 974, [1982] AC 510, HL.
that the jury could only return a verdict of unlawful killing if they could attribute the               R v Lowe [1973] 1 All ER 805, [ 1973 ] QB 702, CA
unlawful conduct to a single police officer but that on no account should they name or                  R v Secretary of State for the Home Dept, ex p Khawaja [1983] 1 All ER 765, [1984] AC 74,
identify any such police officer. Since the coroner had not given those directions but had                   HL.
 instead given the impression that the jury were entitled to find a verdict o f unlawful                  R v Seymour [ 1983] 2. All ER 1058, [1983] 2 AC493 , HL.
killing if they were satisfied that by aggregating the conduct o f two or more officers                   Southall v Cheshire County News Co Ltd (1912) 5 BWCC 251, CA.
 there had been unlawful conduct, and since he had not directed the jury on the standard         0   C
o f proof required, his directions were inadequate (see p 136 c to j, p 137 (J t o g and p 139            A p p licatio ns for ju d ic ia l review
fh , post).                                                                                               Pc G R Gray, Pc D M Thompson, Pc M B Howard, Chief Insp T Duncan, Insp C Morris,
    (2) When recording the verdict o f the jury the coroner was required to eliminate                     Sgt R Kent, Insp R Catling and SgtJ Kynaston applied, with the leave o f Mann J given on
 irrelevant matter and only record what his good sense and experience led h im to conclude                28 May 1986, for judicial review by way of (i) an order o f certiorari to quash the verdict
 was the jury’s formal verdict, being one which the jury were entitled in law to find, but                and inquisition concerning the death o f John William Mikkelsen returned at West
 in so doing he was required to include any words spoken by the foreman which were an            d   d    London Coroners’ Court on 27 March 1986, (ii) an order o f certiorari to quash so much
 essential part o f a clearly expressed verdict. Moreover, a verdict which did not give the               of the verdict and inquisition as infringed r 42 o f the Coroners Rules 1984, SI 1984/552,
 appearance of identifying anyone, by name or otherwise, as blameworthy for the cause                     (iii) an order of mandamus directing that a new inquest be held and (iv) a declaration
 of death did not contravene r 42 o f the 1984 rules. Since the additional words spoken by                that the standard o f proof required for unlawful killing was proof beyond reasonable
 the foreman o f the jury were an essential part o f the verdict and since a verdict so                   doubt or such other standard as the court thought just. The facts are set out in the
 recorded would not have contravened r 42 the coroner had been wrong not to record                        judgment of Watkins LJ.
 those additional words (see p 138 c to e and p 139 fh , post).                                  e   e
    Per curiam. Questions by the jury as to law should normally be dealt with orally and                  R Alunjones for the applicants Gray, Thompson and Howard.
 in the presence of counsel. The practice o f answering questions in writing should be                    Edmund Lawson for the applicants Duncan, Morris, Kent, Catling and Kynaston.
 resorted to sparingly but if the coroner wishes to answer the jury’s questions in writing,               Kieran Coonan for the coroner.
 he should do so with circumspection, consulting counsel beforehand and show ing them                     Michael BeloffQC and Oscar del Fabbro for the next o f kin and friends o f the deceased.
 the note before it goes into the jury room (see p 137 j to p 138 b and p 139 f h , post).       ^
                                                                                                     f                                                                                    Cur adv vult
N otes
For proceedings and evidence at a coroner’s inquest, see 9 Halsbury’s Laws (4th edn) paras                 19 December. The follow ing judgments were delivered.
1110-1111, 1120-1122, 1161, and for cases on the subject, see 13 Digest (Reissue) 179—
182, 193, 1j 1S—1563,1708-1717.                                                                            WATKINS LJ.       On 16 July 1985 at the West Middlesex Hospital John William
                                                                                                         Mikkelsen died. He was 34 years of age. He was a large coloured man known to use six
Cases referre d to in ju d g m e n t                                                             &    9 other names at different times. He was a dispatch rider by occupation. Immediately
R v City of London Coroner, ex p Barber [ 1975] 3 All ER 538, [1975] 1 WLR 1310, DC.                     before his death he was a resident o f West London and a mem ber o f the so-called Hell’s
R v South London Coroner, e x p Ruddock (8 July 1982, unreported), DC.                                   Angels. His death was given wide publicity in the press, by broadcast and by television.
R v Surrey Coroner, ex p Campbell [ 1982] 2 All ER 545, [ 1982] QB 6 6 1, [ 1982] 2 WLR 626,             Allegations began to be made o f a most serious nature against a large number o f police
  DC.                                                                                                    officers of the use o f violence against Mikkelsen, of mishandling him , o f failing to bring
                                                                                                       1 medical attention to h im and o f neglecting in proper time to obtain an ambulance so
 Cases also cited                                                                                ^       that he could be taken to hospital and there receive suitable medical attention and
 Andrews v DPP [1937] 2 All ER 552, [1937] AC 576, HL.                                                   treatment.
 A^am v Secretary o f State for the Home Dept [1973] 2 All ER 765, [1974] AC 18, HL; affg                    On the night o f Mikkelsen’s death a formal police investigation into the circumstances
   sub nom R v Governor o f Pentonville Prison, ex p A%am [ 197 3] 2 All ER 741, [ 1974] AC              o f it began. A number o f police officers were served with a notice under reg 7 o f the
    18, CA.                                                                                              Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985, SI 1985/518. Disciplinary procedures are still in
 Bender vZent (owners) [1909] 2 KB 41, CA.                                                       /     ; contemplation by the Commissioner o f Police o f the Metropolis. Accordingly, although
 Davis (deed), Re [1967] 1 All ER 688, [1968] 1 QB 72, CA.                                               the Director o f Public Prosecutions has now indicated that no police officer will be
 DeHow’sWiHTrusts,Re[1964] 1 All ER 771, [1964] 1 W LR451.                                                prosecuted for a criminal offence, a substantial number o f police officers, from the rank
 Evans (Richard) & Co Ltd v Astley [ 1911 ] AC 674, HL.                                                   o f chief inspector downwards, have been and remain suspended from duty since the
 Hornalv Neuberger Products Ltd [1956] 3 All ER 970, [1957] 1 QB 247, CA.                                 inquest to which I shall soon be referring. Whether suspension o f anyone, which as seems
 R vBateman (1925) 94 LJKB 791, [1925] All ER Rep 45, CCA.                                                inevitable will go on for a considerable tim e yet, was ever justified, only tim e will tell.
 All England L a w Reports   15M ay1987
                                                                                                         All England L a w Reports   15 May 1987




 132                                  All England Law Reports            [1987] 2 All ER
                                                                                                         QBD                         R v West London Coroner (Watkins LJ)                         133
    The events which brought these officers to their unhappy situation and Mikkelsen to
 his death began in the late evening o f 15 July 1985. Pcs Peacock and Renton were on g                        “unlawfully killed”. The foreman after delivering these two words then
 duty near a public house in Bedfont, Middlesex, when they saw Mikkelsen and two other             g           spontaneously appeared to add (and I paraphrase) that this verdict was intended (by
 members o f the Hell’s Angels, named Alan Krafft and Griffon, behaving in a rather                             the Jury) to cover the circumstances o f manslaughter by neglect from the time the
unruly manner. All three o f them got into a motor car. The officers suspected that it                          deceased was overpowered. This may have been added by the Jury in order to dispel
belonged to none o f them and decided to arrest the driver and his passengers for                               any suggestion that the verdict o f “unlawful killing” could reflect an acceptance by
unlawfully taking or being carried in the car. It was driven away at a fast speed followed                      them that the deceased had been m urdered. . . I for m y part did not understand the
by the constables in their car. The constables’ suspicions were in fact unfounded but b                        jury foreman’s entire words to constitute the formal verdict but such words are
genuinely held at the time. The two cars stopped in the nearby Bedfont Close, where the            b           impossible to ignore when faced with what otherwise m ight have appeared to have
parents o f Krafft lived. Krafft was arrested. An attempt was made to take him to the                           been a non-specific verdict which without more m ight have been damaging to the
police car. It was resisted and a very violent scene ensued, in the course o f which Pc                         applicants by its very ambiguity.’
Peacock drew his truncheon and struck both Mikkelsen and Krafft once on the head with                    To these observations of the coroner 1 shall be returning in due course.
it.
                                                                                                             Pcs Gray, Thompson and Howard have leave to m ove for judicial review o f the
     Reinforcements were called for. They arrived. Mikkelsen was overpowered. He               C   c     coroner’s inquest. They seek orders o f certiorari to quash the verdict and inquisition,
 became unconscious or lapsed into a drunken stupor. A police district support unit came                 mandamus ordering a new inquest and a declaration as to the standard o f proof required
 to the scene containing a number o f other officers. Mikkelsen and others, including                    for the return o f a verdict of unlawful killing. These officers were involved in the
 Krafft’s father, were put in this and taken to Hounslow police station. The van arrived
                                                                                                         detention and the removal to custody o f Mikkelsen after his arrest. They were recognised
 there at 12.10 am. Mikkelsen was put on the floor o f the charge room where he remained
                                                                                                         by the coroner as interested persons. They all gave evidence at the inquest, as did the
 until taken to hospital. A pool of clear vomit was seen near his mouth on the floor at one              arresting officer. The grounds on w hich they rely for the relief they seek are: (1) the
 stage. At 12.19 a doctor was called for and ten minutes later an ambulance. At i2 .3 7 th e   d   (■j   verdict o f the jury was framed in such a way as to appear to determine a question o f civil
 ambulance arrived. The ambulance attendant found Mikkelsen to have a good pulse and                     liability in contravention of r4 2 o f the Coroners Rules 1984, SI 1984/552; (2) the
 to be breathing. His pulse had previously been checked in the charge room by one or                     coroner’s directions to the jury on the meaning o f ‘unlawful killing’ were wrong in law,
 more police officers. The comparatively short journey to the hospital from the police                   inadequate and confusing; (3) the directions on the standard o f proof necessary to return
station was not regarded as an emergency, so the blue light was not used. On arrival at                  a verdict o f unlawful killing were wrong; and (4) the finding o f unlawful killing was not
 the hospital a nurse felt Mikkelsen’s pulse. It was present, although weak, and he was                  supported by the evidence,
thought to appear quite normal. However, when a short time later he was rolled onto a          e   e          Chief Insp Duncan, Insp Morris, Sgt Kent, Insp Catling and Sgt Kynaston also have
hospital trolley bed, it was seen that he was not breathing. He had no pulse. Resuscitation              leave to move for judicial review o f the coroner’s inquest. The relief they seek is similar
o f him was immediately attempted. It was unsuccessful'and at 1.20 am he was                             to that sought by the officers already mentioned. They were concerned in one way or
pronounced dead.
                                                                                                         another and at various times with events after arrest and up to the removal o f Mikkelsen
    Examination o f him later on revealed, among many other things, that at the time o f                 to hospital. The grounds which they seek to rely on are, broadly speaking, similar to
the fight in Bedfont Close he had a blood-alcohol reading o f 190 to 195 m g o f alcohol per             those already mentioned. They also contend that the directions given to the jury by the
 100 ml o f blood, calculated from a reading taken on examination o f 172 mg. His blood        ^   f     coroner as to the law were defective and confusing, that he failed to leave to them at least
also contained traces o f cannabis and amphetamines. This recital o f events is deliberately
                                                                                                         one other verdict which was open to them on the evidence and that there was a material
brief and shorne o f much detail and o f allegation and counter-allegation. Subsequently,
                                                                                                          irregularity introduced after the jury’s retirement, in that, in the absence o f counsel for
various persons were charged with offences against the arresting police constable. They
                                                                                                          the interested parties, the coroner supplied to the jury at their request a copy o f his typed
appeared at a magistrates’ court, where the charges against them were dismissed.
                                                                                                          notes entitled ‘Conclusions as to the type o f death’ which had formed the basis o f his
    Meanwhile, an inquest opened by Dr Burton, the coroner for the western district o f                   directions as to the law. In any event, it is said that such notes were apt to confuse.
Greater London, on 23 July 1985 lay adjourned. It was resumed with a jury on 17 March          ^
                                                                                                   9          We heard first the submissions o f counsel for Pcs Gray, Thompson and Howard. They
 1985 and concluded, after a nine-day hearing, on 27 March 1986. According to the
                                                                                                          were interrupted early on by counsel for the friends o f Mikkelsen, w ho told us that he
inquisition, the cause of death was cerebral anoxia due to inhalation o f stomach contents.
                                                                                                          would not be seeking to oppose the applications to quash the verdict and inquisition and
The time, place and circumstances at or in which the injury was sustained are stated to
                                                                                                          for a fresh inquest. This, he said, was because he regards the coroner’s directions on the
be that Mikkelsen was arrested on 15 July 1985 and taken to Hounslow police station.
                                                                                                          law o f manslaughter as critically defective. Counsel for the coroner, w ho has adopted a
He was transferred to the West Middlesex hospital and there certified dead. The                h           wholly proper, neutral and helpful role in this hearing, does not dissent from that view.
conclusion o f the jury as to death is stated to be that he was unlawfully killed. Those
                                                                                                    h         I think it right to preface consideration o f the excellent submissions which we have
words did not represent everything the foreman o f the jury said when announcing
                                                                                                           listened to by reciting the words used by Lord Lane CJ in R v South London Coroner, ex p
verdict. That is common ground between counsel w ho have appeared before us for                           Ruddock (8 July 1982, unreported) in giving the judgment o f the court, o f which I was a
friends o f Mikkelsen, some o f the police officers and the coroner. Although recollections
                                                                                                           member. Lord Lane CJ said:
o f what was actually said differ slightly, the words ‘unlawfully killed attributed to the
degree o f care after he was overpowered’ represent what the foreman was heard to say by       /                   ‘The coroner’s task in a case such as this is a formidable one, and no one would
all present, as near as may be.                                                                    j             dispute that; that is quite apart from the difficulties which inevitably arise when
    The coroner’s version o f it, as appears from his first affidavit, is:                                       feelings are running high and the spectators are emotionally involved and vocal.
                                                                                                                 Once again it should not be forgotten that an inquest is a fact-finding exercise and
         The transcript when available will no doubt demonstrate the point with greater                          not a method o f apportioning guilt. The procedure and rules o f evidence which are
      clarity but the verdict which was recorded by me in writing was quite simply                               suitable for one are unsuitable for the other. In an inquest it should never be
                                                                                                                 forgotten that there are no parties, there is no indictment, there is no prosecution,
                                                                                                            All England L a w Reports   15 M a y 1987
All England Law Reports   15 M a y 1 98 7




                                                                                                            QBD                         R v West London Coroner (Watkins LJ)                              135
134                                     All England Law Reports            [1987] 2 All ER
                                                                                                                     include the finding of any person guilty o f the murder, manslaughter or infanticide;
      there is no defence, there is no trial, simply an attempt to establish facts. It is an           l            and accordingly a coroner’s inquisition shall in no case charge a person with any of
      inquisitorial process, a process o f investigation quite unlike a criminal trial where a
                                                                                                                        those offences.’
      the prosecutor accuses and the accused defends, the judge holding the balance or the
      ring, whichever metaphor one chooses to use.’                                                      Prior to this enactment a coroner’s jury could, and sometimes did, charge and commit a
                                                                                                         person for trial on charges so serious as murder and manslaughter.
  There is no suggestion that at this inquest the spectators were vocal. That apart,                       Power was given by Parliament for the making o f rules. The relevant rules are the
everything there said is applicable to it. I would add that it is the coroner who calls the
                                                                                                       ^ Coroners Rules 1984. Rule 22(1) provides:
witnesses and questions them. The role o f a witness’s representative is confined to asking ,
questions after the coroner has finished with the witness. He is not allowed to address                                   ‘No witness at an inquest shall be obliged to answer any question tending to
the jury as to the evidence. Advocacy has therefore almost no influence, no part in the                                 incriminate himself.’
proceedings. This is in marked contrast to the criminal trial. The ordinary rules o f                        Rule 36, dealing with matters to be ascertained at an inquest, provides:
evidence do not apply. This enlarges the scope o f the inquiry but may well, among the
other matters I have referred to, detract from the value o f the verdict, which cannot be                               ‘(1) The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be directed solely to
regarded as conclusive, at any rate if it is to the effect that a crime has been committed.            J            ascertaining the following matters, namely— (a) w ho the deceased was; (b) how,
The coroner has the central and dominant role. He has powers at com m on law and he is                               when and where the deceased came by his death . . .
bound by statutes and rules, the provisions o f which he must observe scrupulously in                                   (2)    Neither the coroner nor the jury shall express any opinion on any other
conducting the hearing.                                                                                              matters.’
   The main provisions which it is necessary here to refer to are the following. I turn first                   O u t   of the window went the rider. Rule 40 provides:
to the governing Act, the Coroners Act 1887. By s 4, so far as is material, it is provided:
                                                                                                       d                   ‘No person shall be allowed to address the coroner or the jury as to the facts.’
         ‘The coroner shall, at the first sitting o f the inquest, examine on oath touching d
       the death all persons who tender their evidence respecting the facts and all persons                     Rule 41 provides:
       having knowledge o f the facts w hom he thinks it expedient to examine.’                                            ‘Where the coroner sits w ith a jury, he shall sum up the evidence to the jury and
 By sub-s (3) it is provided:                                                                                            direct them as to the la w . . . and shall draw their attention to R u le . . . 42.’

         ‘After hearing the evidence the jury shall give their verdict, and certify it by an           e Rule 42 is important. Its provisions are these:
       inquisition in writing, setting forth, so far as such particulars have been proved to e                             ‘N o verdict shall be framed in such a way as to appear to determine any question
       them, who the deceased was, and how, when, and where the deceased came by his                                     of— (a) criminal liability on the part o f a named person, or (b) civil liability.’
       death. . . ’
                                                                                                                Attached to these rules is a precedent for an inquisition (see Sch 4, Form 22). There are
 By s 6(1) it is provided:                                                                                   notes to the precedent. In those notes one finds a recital o f the kinds o f verdict which a
         ‘Where Her Majesty’s High Court o f Justice, upon application made by or under                    f coroner’s jury is entitled to return. They include death from natural causes, suicide, self­
       the authority o f the Attorney General, is satisfied . . . (b.) where an inquest has been             induced abortion, accident, misadventure, unlawful killing, murder, infanticide and an
       held by a coroner that by reason o f fraud, rejection o f evidence, irregularity of                   open verdict.
       proceedings, insufficiency o f inquiry, or otherwise, it is necessary or desirable, in                   With that synopsis of the coroner’s powers in mind, I turn to examine the issues raised,
       the interests of justice, that another inquest should be held, the court. . . may quash               the main of which must cause us, it is argued, to quash the verdict and inquisition (our
       the inquisition on that inquest.’                                                                     power to do that is beyond doubt) and to order, as we may, a fresh inquisition before
                                                                                                           g another coroner and before another jury.
    Section 13(1) and (2) o f the Coroners (Amendment) Act 1926 provides:                          g             I choose as the first issue to com m ent on the coroner’s directions on the law o f unlawful
          ‘(1) Subject to the provisions o f this section, a coroner within whose jurisdiction                killing. I begin with three short extracts from the eight or nine pages o f notes the coroner
        the dead body of a person is lying, may, in lieu o f sum m oning a jury in the manner                 made to assist him in sum m ing up. The first extract reads thus:
        required by section three o f the Coroners Act, 1887, for the purpose o f inquiring                                  'Unlawfully killed. Covers both murder and manslaughter. Murder requires a
        into the death o f that person, hold an inq uest. . . without a jury.                               a             deliberate attempt to kill or cause grievous bodily harm. Many technicalities, but
           (2) If it appears to the coroner either before he proceeds to hold an inquest or in ^                          not relevant when the same verdict covers manslaughter as well. Manslaughter
        the course of an inquest begun without a jury, that there is reason to suspect. . . ( / )                         comprises two types o f hom icide in this case. Firstly, the force used in arresting
        that the death occurred while the deceased was in police custody, or resulted from                                Mikkelsen at Bedfont Close— if that was the cause o f his death. Secondly the degree
        an injury caused by a police officer in the purported execution o f his duty; he shall                            o f care given to him after he was overpowered.’
        proceed to summon a jury in the manner required by the Coroners Act, 1887 . . . ’
                                                                                                                  The second extract from the notes to w hich I refer, reads:
 This provision is obviously mandatory, dependent for effect on injury causing death.
 Whether the cause o f death in the present case comes within the definition o f injury, /                 1                 ‘After Mikkelsen was cuffed and had stopped struggling. Could there be
 however loosely regarded, depends partly on definition and partly on the evidence.                                       manslaughter by neglect? The negligence must go beyond the mere matter of
   Section 56 o f the Criminal Law Act 1977 provides by sub-s (1):                                                        compensation between subjects and must show such disregard for the life and safety
                                                                                                                          o f others as to amount to a crime against the state and conduct deserving
         ‘At a coroner’s inquest touching the death o f a person who came by his death by                                 punishment. This verdict does have to use the word “crime”— because that is what
        murder, manslaughter or infanticide, the purpose o f the proceedings shall not
AH England L a w Reports   15M ay1987
                                                                                                             All England La w Reports   15 M a y 1987




136                                     All England Law Reports             [1987] 2 All ER                  QBD                        R v West London Coroner (Watkins LJ)                           137

      makes it unlawful killing. Anything less than that is a matter o f damages and is not
                                                                                                             I turn now to the standard o f proof. We heard much argument about this. There is a
      a coroners verdict.’                                                                          g
                                                                                                        g lack o f direct authority on the point. We were referred to cases on suicide going back
Finally, the coroner turned to the types o f verdict. He said:                                            into the last century, all o f which emphasise the presumption against suicide, and the
                                                                                                          requirement o f rebutting that presumption. Suicide was then a crime. It no longer is.
        ‘Open verdict. Misadventure (with recommendations). Lack of care o f add                          But it is still a drastic action which often leaves in its wake serious social, economic and
      aggravated by lack o f care— "problems”— ask. Abuse o f drugs— alcohol— not                         other consequences.
      supported by doctors. Homicide by an unlawful act or by neglect. Needs heavy                           Lord Widgery CJ in R v City o f London Coroner, exp Barber [1975] 3 All ER 538 at 540,
      burden of proof and you have to be certain that there could not have been self                b   b [1975] 1 WLR 1310 at 1313 said:
      defence and you have to remember the right to use reasonable force in making a
      lawful arrest.’                                                                                                ‘If that is a fair statement o f the coroner’s approach, and I sincerely hope it is
    The interesting feature o f the first extract is that the jury, in what counsel for the                       because I have no desire to be unfair to him, it seems to m e to fail to recognise what
police officers say was part o f its verdict, followed words which appear in this part o f the                    is perhaps one o f the most important rules that coroners should bear in mind in
coroner’s notes. They were enabled to do that because at their request the coroner sent                           cases o f this class, namely that suicide must never be presumed. If a person dies a
the notes into the jury after they had retired. That is a matter which I will deal with later           c         violent death, the possibility o f suicide may be there for all to see, but it must not be
on. What is o f more significance is that nowhere in the sum m ing up is there to be found                         presumed merely because it seems on the face of it to be a likely explanation. Suicide
the definition o f manslaughter, that is unlawful killing. At no point did the coroner                             must be proved by evidence, and if it is not proved by evidence, it is the duty o f the
direct the jury that to find a verdict o f manslaughter they had to be satisfied that the act                     coroner not to find suicide, but to find an open verdict. I approach this case, applying
or omission o f a single person must amount to unlawful conduct which was a substantial                           a stringent test, and asking m yself whether on the evidence which was given in this
                                                                                                                  case any reasonable coroner could have reached the conclusion that the proper
cause o f death. The jury were left with the impression that they might be satisfied that
there was material unlawful conduct, act or neglect, by aggregating the conduct o f two
                                                                                                        d         answer was suicide.’
or more o f the officers. One cannot avoid the feeling, I think, that this is probably what
                                                                                                                It will be noted that Lord W idgery CJ alluded to the stringent test, but without
has happened. Thus, said counsel for Pcs Gray, Thompson and Howard, with justification                       reference to what may be called the conventional standards o f proof. I cannot believe,
in m y view, the verdict has had a blunderbuss effect, meaning that shot went off in all
                                                                                                             however, that he was regarding proof o f suicide as other than beyond a reasonable doubt.
directions, striking police officers involved indiscriminately.
                                                                                                             I so hold that that was and remains the standard. It is unthinkable, in m y estimation,
    I have much sympathy with the coroner, for he was dealing with a kind o f                       e
                                                                                                        e    that anything less will do. So it is in respect o f a criminal offence. I regard as equally
manslaughter, namely unlawful killing by neglect, which is seldom met with. Moreover,
                                                                                                             unthinkable, if not more so, that a jury should find the commission, although not
save in the hands o f an experienced judge, it is not a simple matter to direct a jury on. It
                                                                                                             identifying the offender, of a criminal offence without being satisfied beyond a reasonable
is not surprising therefore to find that the coroner is criticised also for his less than correct            doubt.
and helpful references at various times to neglect, giving the impression here and there
                                                                                                                 As for the other verdicts open to a jury, the balance o f probabilities test is surely
that j ust plain neglect would do.
                                                                                                             appropriate save in respect, of course, o f the open verdict. This standard should be left to
    Other criticisms have also been voiced as to this all-important direction, but I have, .1       f   1    the jury without any of the refined qualifications placed on it by some judges who have
think, said enough to indicate that the jury were gravely misdirected and cannot have
                                                                                                             spoken to some such effect as ‘the m ore serious the allegation the higher the degree of
been otherwise than confused by what they were told about this branch o f the law and,
                                                                                                             probability required’. These refinements would only serve to confuse juries and, in the
o f course, by what they had read from the notes w hich were handed in to them. This by                      context o f a jury’s role, are, I say w ith great respect to those who have given expression to
itself must, it seems to me, inevitably cause the jury’s verdict to be quashed. What the
                                                                                                             them, I think, meaningless. Such matter as that led the coroner astray in this case, by
jury should have been told was that when considering manslaughter by neglect they
                                                                                                             providing the jury with no plain standard o f proof to be guided by. He cannot be blamed
would have to be satisfied on the evidence o f these four ingredients o f the offence: (i)          g   g    for that, but it is another factor w hich must cause this verdict to be quashed.
that a police officer had the duty o f regarding the health and welfare o f Mikkelsen; (2)
                                                                                                                 I said that I would deal with the complaint, for that is what it amounts to, that the
that he failed to do what in the circumstances he ought to have done for the health and
                                                                                                             coroner’s notes, his aide-memoire, w ere handed to the jury. This took place during the
welfare o f Mikkelsen; (3) that his failure was a substantial cause o f Mikkelsen’s death;                   absence o f counsel, who were out o f the building where the inquest was held at lunch.
and (4) that in failing to act for the benefit o f Mikkelsen’s health and welfare he acted
                                                                                                             When counsel returned the coroner told them what he had done. No one suggests he
recklessly. It should be explained that to act recklessly means that there was an obvious
                                                                                                             acceded to the jury’s request with no m otive save a desire to be as helpful as he could to
and serious risk to the health and welfare o f Mikkelsen to which that police officer,              h   "    them, but I am driven by the considerable bulk o f the notes, the lack o f clarity in many
having regard to his duty, was indifferent or that, recognising that risk to be present, he                  places, the misdirections at others and the general layout, intelligible no doubt to the
deliberately chose to run the risk by doing nothing about it. It should be emphasised,                       coroner but not, I imagine, to the jury, to say that to put to them a document amounting
however, that a failure to appreciate that there was such a risk would not by itself be
                                                                                                              to eight or nine pages o f closely typed directions on many matters was an error. The
sufficient to amount to recklessness.
                                                                                                             effect o f it cannot have provided the jury with clear guidance on a number o f essential
    Further, the jury should have been directed that they could return a verdict o f
                                                                                                         .   matters which was accurate in law. That, for reasons I have explained, it could not have
 unlawful killing only if they could attribute those ingredients to a single police officer,        /   I    done. On the contrary, I think it tended to heap confusion on confusion.
whom they should on no account name or otherwise identify. In this context, the jury
                                                                                                                 If there was som e direction or other which was not clear to the jury, the coroner
should consider the position o f each officer in turn, following Mikkelsen’s arrest, as to his
                                                                                                             should, in the presence of counsel, have asked them, the jury, what it was, and should
duty, if any, to care for Mikkelsen’s health and welfare and the opportunity given to him,
                                                                                                             have assisted them with it by repeating orally, perhaps w ith amplification, what he had
having regard to the length o f time he was with Mikkelsen and other relevant
                                                                                                             already told them on the point, or given them entirely fresh instructions or directions if
 circumstances, to discharge it.
                                                                                                              necessary. He ought to have proceeded to do this after discussion with counsel who,
All England L a w Reports   15 M a y 1 98 7
                                                                                                            All England L a w Reports   15 M a y 1987




138                                       All England Law Reports              [1987] 2 All ER
                                                                                                            QBD                         R v West London Coroner (Watkins LJ)                            139
undoubtedly, would have been o f considerable help to him, It is not unknown in
criminal trials for judges to answer the jury’s questions as to the law in writing, or even               well used to coping with this problem and I have no doubt do so successfully. I am firmly
to anticipate the possible need by a jury for that, with a written direction on a point or              a o f the opinion that r 42 is intra vires.
points o f law. But this is a practice which, for good reason, is sparingly resorted to. When                 Finally, the evidence. The jury’s finding o f unlawful killing by neglect is, it is
it is, it must be handled with circumspection, the judge being mindful o f the need to                    submitted on behalf o f the police officers, against the weight o f the evidence. It used to
consult with counsel beforehand, and to show them the note before it goes into the jury                   be said, and maybe by some still is, that insufficiency o f evidence is no ground for
room.                                                                                                     quashing a coroner’s jury’s verdict. I cannot subscribe to that. The development of
    We have heard submissions on the coroner’s decision to record as the verdict merely                   judicial review to its present state w ith its devotion to, amongst other things, natural
the words ‘unlawful killing’. I can understand his anxiety to record a verdict which did                b justice cannot possibly allow verdicts by juries at inquests to stand which are based on no
not offend against r 42 o f the Coroners Rules 1984. Coroners quite often, for very good                  or wholly insufficient evidence. By analogy, I see nothing in s 6 o f the 1887 Act which
reason, have to refrain from putting on the inquisition all that the foreman says when                    runs counter to that.
announcing the jury’s conclusion. By rule he is prevented from doing that. He has to                          However, that is not the position here, in m y opinion. I express no view on the
eliminate irrelevant matter and only record what his good sense and experience leads                      strength o f the evidence, except to say that another jury may not have found it compelling
him to conclude is the formal verdict, being one which the jury are entitled in law to                    enough, especially i f properly directed, to have found a verdict of unlawful killing. There
find.                                                                                                   C were o f course verdicts other than an open verdict which the jury could have returned. I
    Here, however, I regret to say that the coroner’s judgm ent was at fault,. Whichever                  have already referred to some, at least, o f those. In m y opinion, a number o f those could
version o f what the foreman said be right, it is clear from all o f them that the jury found             have been left to this jury in the circumstances but were not. Whether there was material
neglect at no time before Mikkelsen was overpowered. By that time, the fight involving                    at this inquest fit to be left to a jury to consider a verdict o f unlawful killing by neglect, I
the use o f the truncheon during arrest was over and the arrest effective. It is equally clear            prefer to express no opinion bearing in m ind what might happen hereafter. I think
that the jury were attributing unlawful killing to no other cause than neglect. It is the                 differently with regard to all that took place on arrest. Without going into that evidence
jury’s function to find the cause o f death while avoiding placing criminal responsibility              “ in detail, the medical aspects of it especially, I am in no doubt that I would have directed
or civil liability on anyone. Here, the cause found, as I have previously indicated, included             the jury that it would have been unsafe, wrong even, to find that the arresting officers
the additional words spoken by the foreman, which were, in m y opinion, an essential                      misconducted themselves in a difficult situation in any sense whatsoever.
part o f a clearly expressed verdict and ought to have been recorded on the inquisition.                      So, this verdict has to be quashed. What then must be done? Further relief lies also
The implication placed on them by the coroner, as expressed in his affidavit, is, I think,                within the discretion o f this court. Albeit w ith very considerable reluctance and with the
misguided.                                                                                                provisions o f s 13 o f the 1926 Act in m ind, I see no alternative but to order a fresh inquest
   Counsel for Pcs Gray, Thompson and Howard submitted strenuously that the verdict                       before another coroner and jury. I would also make the declaration as to the standard o f
as recorded offended against r 42, for it was framed, he says, so as to place civil liability             proof in accordance with what I have said as to that in this judgment.
on the Commissioner o f Police o f the Metropolis, or to give the appearance o f doing so. I
disagree. The verdict, neither as recorded nor as it should have been recorded on the                     R O C H J . I agree that the verdict o f the coroner’s jury in this case should be quashed and
inquisition, is not, in m y view, so framed. Interested parties may look at the circumstances             that a fresh inquest in front o f a new coroner be ordered. I concur in the making of the
o f the case and seek to draw from them and the verdict an inference or inferences as to                ! declaration as to the standard of proof in coroners’ inquests.
blameworthiness on someone’s part for causing death. That is almost inevitable. It can                       I add one com m ent to the judgment w hich Watkins LJ has just delivered, on the form
be neither avoided nor legislated against. So long as on the face o f the inquisition the                 of inquisition (see the Coroners Rules 1984, SI 1984/552, Sch 4, Form 22). It is made in
verdict does not give the appearance o f identifying by name or otherwise anyone as                       the hope that those responsible for the framing o f these forms m ight give further
blameworthy for the cause o f death, r 42 is complied with. It was complied with by this                  consideration to the wording of one part o f the form and that a redrafting m ight assist a
coroner. It would have been complied with had he recorded the verdict as, in my view,                     coroner’s jury to concentrate on the matter which they are required to consider. It is the
he should have done.                                                                                    g fifth entry on the form which at present reads: ‘Time, place and circumstances at or in
    It was also submitted that s 4 o f the 1887 Act and r 42 cannot co-exist. The rule is ultra           which injury was sustained.’ It seems to m e that it should be: 'Time, place and
vires, it is said. This has been said before, notably in R v Surrey Coroner, ex p Campbell                circumstances at or in which death was sustained’, and that if that amendment were
[1982] 2 All ER 545, [1982] QB 661. In giving the judgm ent o f the court I said ([1982] 2                made the wording would then conform to the wording o f r 36( 1)(b) o f the 1984 rules.
All ER 545 at 555, [1982] QB 661 at 676):                                                                    Having made that comment, I concur in the judgm ent which Watkins LJ has just
                                                                                                          given.
          ‘Be that as it may, it is our view that on the facts o f this case a verdict o f ‘‘lack o f
       care” would not have contravened r 33 [that is the predecessor to r 42]. It is therefore
                                                                                                        h
                                                                                                            Applications granted. Verdict quashed. Order fo r afresh inquest before another coroner and jury.
       not necessary for us to decide whether the rule is ultra vires. But, we think we ought               Declaration as to the standard of proof granted accordingly.
       nevertheless to express our conclusion on this point, which is that counsel for the
       applicant’s submission on it is ill-founded. Such conflict as may in any given                       Solicitors: Edward Fail Neale & Co, Twickenham (for the applicants Gray, Thompson and
       circumstance appear to arise between r 33 and the duty to inquire “how” must be                      Howard); Russell Jones & Walker (for the applicants Duncan, Morris, Kent, Catling and
       resolved in favour o f the statutory duty to inquire whatever the consequences o f               j   Kynaston); Beachcrofts (for the coroner); Powell Magrath & Spencer (for the next o f kin o f
       this may be.’                                                                                        the deceased).
    I accept that instances may arise where observing the statutory duty may carry the risk
o f a clash between s 4 and r 42. But careful framing o f the verdict consistent, o f course,                                                                                      DilysTausz      Barrister.
with the jury’s conclusion should, and indeed must, avoid that. Coroners by now are
                                                                                                                                                                            QBD                                       R v West London Coroner
    Digest of cases included in this part                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ^
    COBONER - inquest - Verdict - Lack of care - When appropriate - D irections to jury
         R v S o u th w a r k C o ron er, ex p H i c k s ......................................... '.............................................. DC
                                                                                                                                                                                         f   West Londo? Coroner;--ex’parte Gray,.
    CORONER - Inquest - Verdict - Unlawful killing by neglect - Directions to jury - Recording of                                                                                               "      and others"" v
       verdict - Answers to questions by jury
       R v W e s t to n d o n C o ro n er, ex p G r a y ....................................................................................^                                                    and/another application
    INSURANCE - Insurance business carried on without authority of Secretary of State -
       Reclassification of classes of insurance business - Aviation contingency business earned on                                                                          Q U E E N ^ l l i e H DIVISION
       as part of marine aviation and transport business                                                                                                            ^       W A T H « l |;a N 0 ROCH J '          '             ‘ '                      :       ' '
       P h o en ix G en eral In su ran ce C o o f G reece SA ¥ A d ra in istra tia A sig u rarilo r d® S t a t                                   CA     152   f .           15,              9 De c e m b e r 1 9 8 6   '       '                    '                 .

    PRACTICE - Pre-trial relief - Interim payment - Alternative claims in defat and damages
       S h e a rso n L ehm an Bros Inc v M a c la in e W a ts o n & C o L t d ................................................CA                        181
                                                                                                                                                              ;>■           Coroner'inquest - Verdict - Unlawful killing - Unlawful killing by neglect - Recklessness -
                                                                                                                                                                            S ta n d a rio f care-Allegation oflack o f care by police-Directions to be given to jury.

                                                                                                                                                                            Coroner-Inquest - Verdict - Recording o f ju r y ’s verdict by coroner - Coroner’s duty to record
                                                                                                                                                                            all w oris’whickform essential part o f verdict.                                         .

                                                                                                                                                                      Coroner-Inquest - Directions toju r y - Questions by ju ry - Questions as to law byju ry answered
                                                                                                                                                                      in writing by coroner in absence o f counsel - Coroner supplying ju ry with copy o f his notes fo r
                                                                                                                                                                    ^ summing up - Whether coroner acting properly in answering questions in absence o f counsel.

                                                                                                                                                                     Following the deceased’s death in police custody allegations were made against various
                                                                                                                                                                     police officers concerning their use o f force against the deceased during his arrest and
                                                                                                                                                                     rem oval Into custody and th e ir failure to sum m on an am bulance prom ptly w hen he
                                                                                                                                                                     became unconscious. At the inquest the coroner gave no directions to the jury as to the
                                                                                                                                                                 . e definition o f unlawful killing or the requirements necessary for a verdict o f unlawful
                                                                                                                                                                     killing. After the retirement of the jury and in the absence o f counsel, the coroner
                                                                                                                                                                     supplied the jury, at their request, with a copy of the notes which he had made to assist
                                                                                                                                                                     him in summing up and which had form ed the basis of his directions on the law. The
                                                                                                                                                                     foreman o f the jury gave the jury’s verdict as ‘unlawful killing’ and added that the verdict
                                                                                                                                                                     was intended by the jury to cover manslaughter by neglect attributed to the degree of
                                                                                                                                                                   f care the deceased received after he was overpowered. The coroner recorded the verdict as
                                                                                                                                                                     being simply ‘unlawful killing’. The police officers against whom the allegations had
                                                                                                                                                                     been made sought orders o f certiorari to quash the verdict and mandamus ordering a
                                                                                                                                                                     n ew 'in q u est;to be held, contending (i) that the coroner’s directions to the jury were
                                                                                                                                                                v, inadequate as to both the meaning o f ‘unlawful killing’ and the standard o f proof
                                                                                                                                                                     required, fu) that the coroner had been wrong not to record the additional words spoken
                                                                                                                                                                     by the foreman, (iii) that the verdict appeared to place civil liability on the police force
                                                                                                                                                                     contrarjfilb r 42“ o f the Coroners Rules 1984, which provided that the verdict should not
                                                                                                                                                                     be                such a way as to appear to determine any question o f criminal liability on
                                                                                                                                                                     th e |> a il|jfa named person or any question o f civil liability, and (iv) that the coroner had
                                                                                                                                                                            been wrong to give his notes to the jury.                           "                          .

                                                                                                                                                                    h H e M J The verdict would be quashed and a new inquest ordered, for th e following
;          .■   •
                                                                                                                                                                      reasons—                                              ;
                     ■■■                                                                                                                                                 (1)        When directing the jury as to the standard o f proof required, a coroner ought to
       :            ''
                     ■ :■                                                                                                                                             direct tSfffiry that they had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt if they wished to
                                                                                                                                                                      bring in a verdict w hich involved a finding that a criminal offence had been committed
                                                                                                                                                                    ' and that for other verdicts (except an open verdict) they had to be satisfiedon th e balance
                                                                                                                                                                    t o f probabilities. Furtherm ore, when directing a ju r y o n ./m anslaughter:comprisiifg'
                                                                                                                                                                      unlawful killing alleged to have occurred because o f neglect' oti'tlie;part.of-p6iice» th e
                                                                                                                                                                      coroner was required to direct the jury on four, matters: firstly:th a t 'th e y had id'b e '
                                                                                                                                                                      satisfied, on the evidence, o f four ingredients, namely (a) that the police were under a
       T t * SrtJt# o f c a s e s re p o rte d in p a rts 1 to 3 a n d th e noter-up for this part a p p e a r inside                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                        .   a Rule 42 is set out at p 135 c, post
 130           f .     - ■'      A il E n g la n d L a w R e p o r ts        1 1 9 8 7 1 2 AH ER
                          .                                                  qp                                                             R v W estJ|jpdon Coroner (Watkins LJ)                              131
..duty to faayexegard to the health and welfare o f the deceased, (b) that in the circumstances                           R-v Cardiff Coroner, ex p Thomas [ 1970] 3 All ER 469, [1970] 1 WLR 1475, D C
  A cre 'was.iCailBretO do whatshould have-beeri done 'forthe health and welfare o f the a                           , ; R i a l t o [1976] I All ER 260, [1976] I WLR 110, CA.
  deceased, (c) that the failure amounted to a substantial cause o f death and (d) that the                            .. R i m m t County Coroner, e x p Glover ( 1 9 8 4 ) I 4 9 j p 208.
  M arc' amounted to recklessness; secondly that the test for ‘recklessness’ was whether a                           ■ ■             Western R ly Co (Directors) (1888) 20 QBD 410, DC.
  police officer, 'having regard ■to his duty, was indifferent to. an obvious and serious risk to                    ;' R * $ m p sh ire CC,expEllerton [1985] 1 All ER 599, [1985] 1 W LR 749, CA. . -
  the health and welfare o f the deceased or,‘recognising that risk' to be present, deliberately                      . R sM m tback, ex pLocldey [ 1 9 4 4 ] 2 Ail ER 453, [1944] KB 606.
  A o s e t g run that risk by'doing nothing about it; thirdly that a failure to appreciate that,                    '• i* e M f c [ i 9 6 7 ] 2 All ER 1282, [1967] 2 QB 981, CA. ■
  tfiere'was such a risk was not by itself sufficient to amount to recklessness; and fourthly b                      * ^ ''? I ^ wrence[ I 9 8 ij 1 All ER 974, [1982] AC 510, HL.
  that the jury could only return a verdict o f unlawful killing if they could attribute the                              R T tfw e [i9 7 3 ] 1 All ER 805, [1973] QB 702, CA
   unlawful conduct to a single police officer but that on no account should they name or                                 R y Secretary of State for the Home Dept, ex p Khawaja [1983] 1 All ER 765, [1984] AC 74,
  identify any such police officer. Since the coroner had not given those directions but had                              HL*
   instead given the impression that the jury were entitled to find a verdict o f unlawful                     ,.     R.y.Seymottr [1983] 2 All ER 1058, [1983] 2 AC 493, HL.
   killing if they were satisfied that by aggregating the conduct o f two or more officers                     .'     Souildl v Cheshire County News Co Ltd (1912) 5 BWCC 251, CA.
   there had been unlawful conduct, and since he had not directed the jury on the standard C                    C
   o f proof required, his directions were inadequate (see p 136 c toj, p 13 7 d to g and p 139                /      A pp lication s for ju d ic ia l r e v ie w
  f h , post).                                                                                                  '     Pc G R Gray, Pc D M Thompson, Pc M B Howard, Chief Insp T Duncan, Insp C Morris,
       (2)     When recording the verdict o f the jury the coroner was required to eliminate                          Sgt R Kent, Insp R Catling and Sgt J Kynaston applied, with the leave o f MannJ given on
   irrelevant matter and only record what his good sense and experience led him to conclude                            28 May 1986, for judicial review by way o f (i) an order o f certiorari to quash the verdict
   was the jury’s formal verdict, being one which the jury were entitled in law to find, but                          an£^ inquisition concerning the death o f John William Mikkelsen returned at West
   in so doing he was required to include any words spoken by the foreman which were an “                             London Coroners Court on 27 March 1986, (ii) an order o f certiorari to quash so much
   essential part o f a clearly expressed verdict. Moreover, a verdict which did not give the                         o f the verdict and inquisition as infringed r 42 o f the Coroners Rules 1984, SI 1984/552,
   appearance o f identifying anyone, by name or otherwise, as blameworthy for the cause                              (iii) an order o f mandamus directing that a new inquest be held and (iv) a declaration
   o f death did not contravene r 42 of the 1984 rules. Since the additional words spoken by                          that the standard of proof required for unlawful killing was proof beyond reasonable
   the foreman o f the jury were an essential part o f the verdict and since a verdict so                             doubt or such other standard as the court thought just. The facts are set out in the
   recorded would not have contravened r 42 the coroner had been wrong not to record                                  judgment o f Watkins LJ.
   those additional words (see p 138 c to e and p 139 fh , post).                                 6             e
       Per curiam. Questions by the jury as to law should normally be dealt with orally and                           R A im Jones for the applicants Gray, Thompson and Howard.
   in the presence o f counsel. The practice o f answering questions in writing should be                             Edmund Lawson for the applicants Duncan, Morris, Kent, Catling and Kynaston.
   resorted to sparingly but if the coroner wishes to answer the jury’s questions in writing,                         Kieran Coonan for the coroner.
   he should do so with circumspection, consulting counsel beforehand and showing them                                Michael BeloffQC and Oscar del Fabbro for the next ofkin and friends o f the deceased.
   the note before it goes into the jury room (see p 137; to p 138 b and p 139 fh , post).        ^
                                                                                                               :■ . '                                                                                Cur adv vult
 N o te s             . .             .   .   .
 For proceedings and evidence at a coroner’s inquest, see 9 Halsbury’s Laws (4th edn) paras                    &      ^ December. The following judgments were delivered.
 i t io - i i 11 , 1120-1122, 1161, and for cases on the subject, see 13 Digest (Reissue) 1 79-
 182, 193, 1 5 1 S -I J 6 3 ,1708-1717. ,                                                                             W A T K IN S LJ. On 16 July 1985 at the West Middlesex Hospital John William
                                                                                                                      Mik&lseh died. He was 34 years o f age. He was a large coloured man known to use six
 Cases referred to In ju d g m e n t.                               .                                  ^              other names at different times. He was a dispatch rider by occupation. Immediately
 R v City o f London Coroner, ex p Barber [1975] 3 All ER 538,[1975] 1 WLR 1310, DC.
                                                                                                                      before his death he was a resident o f West London and a member o f the so-called Hell’s
:R v South London C orsm r,ex pRttMock(S July 1982, unreported), D C .. '
                                                                                                                      A ngek His death was given w ide publicity in the press, by broadcast and by television.
 R v Surrey Coroner, e x p Campbell [ 1982] 2 All ER 545, [ 1982] QB 661, [1982] 2 WLR 626,
                                                                                                                      Allegations began to be made o f a most serious nature against a large number o f police
    DC                                                                                                                officers o f the use o f violence against Mikkelsen, o f mishandling him, o f failing to bring
                                                                                                                    j medical attention to h im and o f neglecting in proper tim e to obtain an ambulance'so
   C ases a lso c ite d                                                        '   ■' ' . . . . . .                   that he could be taken to hospital and there receive suitable medical attentieir and ■
■' Andrews v                                                                                                         treatment.     -                  -            '   ■.   -
   Azam v Secretary o f State for the Home Dept [1973] 2 .Alt, ER 765. [ 1974] AC 18,. HL; affg
                                                                                                                        O a the night o f Mikkelsen’s death a formal police investigation into the circumstances
      sub mom R v Governor ofPentonville Prison, ex p A^am [1973] 2 All ER 741. .[1974] AC                 .
                                                                                                                     or i t began. A number o f police officers were served with a notice under reg 7 ■of'jibe
                                                                                                                     Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985, SI 1985/518. Disciplinary procedures .are>aii In
 Sender v Zent (owners) [ 1909] 2 KB 41, CA.          ;    '            . ,                       ..   j
                                                                                                                     contemplation by the Commissioner o f Police o f the Metropolis. Accordingly, although
 Davis (deed), Re [1967] 1 All ER 688, [1968] 1 QB 72, CA.               .             . .
                                                                                                                     the Director o f Public Prosecutions has now indicated that no police officer will be
 'Dellow’s W i l T r lists, R e[1964] 1 All ER 771, [1964] 1 WLR 4 5 1-
                                                                                                                     prosecuted for a criminal offence, a substantial number o f police officers, from the rank
 Evans (Richard) & Co Ltdv'Astleyf 1911] AC 674, HL.
                                                                                                                     of/cltief inspector downwards, have been and remain suspended from duty since the
 Hornal v Neuberger Products Ltd [1956] 3 All ER 970, [1957] 1 QB 247, CA.
                                                                                                                     inquest to which I shall soon be referring. Whether suspension of anyone, which as seems
 R v Bateman (1925) 94 LjKB 791, [1925] All ER Rep 45, CCA.                                   .
                                                                                                                     inevitable will go on for a considerable time yet, was ever justified, only time will tell.
 132                             AMEngland Law Reports <                    [ 1987] 2 Ai! ER                      QBD        .           R v West London Coroner (Watkins LJ)                                      133

       T he events w hich b ro u g h t these officers to their unhappy situation S t Mikkelsen to                       “unlawfully killed”. The f l K . after delivering these tw o '' words then
   his death began in th e late evening o f 15 July 1985, Pcs Peacock and R enton were on            3      g            spontaneously appeared to add (and I paraphrase) that this verdict was intended (by
   d uty near a public house in Bedfont, Middlesex, w hen they saw M ikkelsen and tw o other                             the Jury) to cover the circum stances o f manslaughter by neglect fro m the tim e the
   m em bers o f the Hell’s Angels, nam ed Alan Krafft and Griffen, behaving in a rather                    .       , deceased was overpowered. This may have been added by the Jury in order to dispel
   u n ru ly m anner. All three o f th e m got into a m o tor car. T he officers suspected that it              . . . . ang:. suggestion that the verdict o f “unlawful killing” could reflect an acceptance by
   belonged to none o f th e m and decided to arrest the driver and his passengers for                    .'f:: . . . them that the deceased had been murdered . . . I for m y part did not understand the
   unlawfully taking o r being carried in th e car. it was driven away at a fast speed followed            V::/     ■ ju ry foreman’s entire words to constitute the formal verdict but such words are
   by th e constables in th e ir car. The constables’ suspicions were in fact unfounded b u t        b    \b '           impossible to ignore w hen faced with what otherwise m ight have appeared to have
   genuinely held at th e tim e. The tw o cars stopped in th e nearby Bedfont Close, w here the                         .SceB.a non-specific verdict which without more might have been damaging to the
   parents of Krafft lived. Krafft was arrested. An attem pt was made to take h im to the                                applicants by its very ambiguity.’ ,
   police car. it was resisted and a very violent scene ensued, in the course of which Pc
                                                                                                                  To these Observations o f the coroner I shall be returning in due course.
   Peacock drew his truncheon and struck both M ikkelsen and Krafft once on the head with
                                                                                                                     Pcs Gray, Thompson and Howard have leave to move for judicial review o f the
   it.                                                                                                      c     corontf’s inquest. They seek orders o f certiorari to quash the verdict and inquisition,
       Reinforcements were called for. They arrived. Mikkelsen was overpowered. He                   C
                                                                                                                  mandamus ordering a new inquest and a declaration as to the standard o f proof required
   became unconscious or lapsed into a drunken stupor. A police district support unit came
                                                                                                                  for the return o f a verdict o f unlawful killing. These officers were involved in the
   to the scene containing a number of other officers. Mikkelsen and others, including
                                                                                                                  detention and the removal to custody o f Mikkelsen after his arrest. They were recognised
   Krafft’s father, were put in this and taken to Hounslow police station. The van arrived
                                                                                                                  by the coroner as interested persons. They all gave evidence at the inquest, as did the
   there at 12.10 am. Mikkelsen was put on the floor o f the charge room where he remained
                                                                                                                  arresting officer. The grounds on which they rely for the relief they seek are: (1) the
   until taken to hospital. A pool o f clear vomit was seen near his mouth on the floor at one
                                                                                                            I/    verdict o f the jury was framed in such a way as to appear to determine a question o f civil
   stage. At 12.19 a doctor was called for and ten minutes later an ambulance. At 12.37 the          “
                                                                                                                  liability in contravention of r 42 o f the Coroners Rules 1984, SI 1984/552; (2) the
   ambulance arrived. The ambulance attendant found Mikkelsen to have a good pulse and
                                                                                                                  coroners directions to the jury on the meaning o f ‘unlawful killing5were wrong in law,
    to be breathing. His pulse had previously been checked in the charge room by one or
                                                                                                                  inadequate and confusing; (3) the directions on the standard o f proof necessary to return
    more police officers. The comparatively short journey to the hospital from the police
                                                                                                                  a verdict o f unlawful killing were wrong; and (4) the finding o f unlawful killing was not
    station was not regarded as an emergency, so the blue light was not used. On arrival at
                                                                                                                  supported by the evidence.
    the hospital a nurse felt Mikkelsen’s pulse. It was present, although weak, and he was           ^
                                                                                                             e      Chief Insp Duncan, Insp M orris, Sgt Kent, Insp Catling and Sgt Kynaston also have
    thought to appear quite normal. However, when a short time later he was rolled onto a
                                                                                                                  leave to move for judicial review o f the coroner’s inquest. The relief they seek is similar
    hospital trolley bed, it was seen that he was not breathing. He had no pulse. Resuscitation
                                                                                                                  to that sought by the officers already mentioned. They were concerned in one way or
    of him was immediately attempted. It was unsuccessful and at 1.20 am he was
                                                                                                                  another and at various times w ith events after arrest and up to the removal o f Mikkelsen
    pronounced dead.                                                                                              to hospital. The grounds which they seek to rely on are, broadly speaking, similar to
       Examination o f him later on revealed, among many other things, that at the time of
                                                                                                                  those already mentioned. They also contend that the directions given to the jury by the
    the fight in Bedfont Close he had a blood-alcohol reading o f 190 to 195 mg of alcohol per       ^
                                                                                                            f     coroner as to the law were defective and confusing, that he failed to leave to them at least
     100 m l of blood, calculated from a reading taken on examination of 172 mg. His blood
                                                                                                                  one other verdict which was open to them on the evidence and that there was a material
    also contained traces o f cannabis and amphetamines. This recital of events is deliberately
                                                                                                           A      irregularity introduced after the jury s retirement, in that, in the absence o f counsel for
    brief and shorne o f m uch detail and o f allegation and counter-allegation. Subsequently,
                                                                                                           .;     the interested parties, the coroner supplied to the jury at their request a copy o f his typed
    various persons were charged with offences against the arresting police constable. They
                                                                                                           i'.i   notes entitled ‘Conclusions as to the type o f death’ which had formed the basis o f his
    appeared at a magistrates’ court, where th e charges against them were dismissed.
                                                                                                                  directions as to the law. In any event, it is said that such notes were apt to confuse,
     . Meanwhile, an inquest opened by Dr Burton, the coroner for the western district o f           g
                                                                                                           iff       W e.heard first the submissions o f counsel for Pcs Gray, Thompson and Howard. They
    G reater London, on 23 July 1985 lay adjourned. It was resumed with a jury on 17 March
                                                                                                                  w ere’ffiifrrupted early on by counsel for the friends o f Mikkelsen, who told us that he
     1^85 and concluded, after a nine^day hearing, on 27 March 1986. According to the
                                                                                                                  woulijRjet he seeking to oppose the applications to quash the verdict and inquisition and
    inquisition, the cause o f death was cerebral anoxia due to inhalation o f stomach contents.
                                                                                                                  for a fresh inquest. This, he said, was because he regards the coroner’s directions on the
: . The tim e, place and circumstances at or in which th e injury was sustained are stated to
                                                                                                                  law o f manslaughter as critically defective. Counsel for the coroner, w ho has adopted a
    be that Mikkelsen was arrested on 15 July 1985 and taken to Hounslow police station.             .
                                                                                                                  wholly proper, neutral and helpful role in this hearing, does not dissent from that view.
    H e was transferred to the West Middlesex hospital and there certified dead. The                 /j
                                                                                                             "      I th in k it right to preface consideration o f the excellent subm issions which we have
    conclusion o f the jury as to death is stated to be that he was unlawfully killed. Those
                                                                                                                  listened to by reciting the words used by Lord Lane GJ;in R v Smth:Lmdon Coromry ex:p
    words did not represent everything the foreman o f the jury said when announcing
                                                                                                                  Ruddock (8 July 1982, Bnreported).;i i|, giving, th e ju d g m e n t o f the'cou rt, o f w hich I was.a
    v erd ict That .is com m on g ro u n d .-feween'.counsel ;'who-have appeared .'before'us for
                                                                                                                  member. Lord Lane Q said:
    friends o f Mikkelsen, som e o f the poliee officers and the coroner. Although recollections
    o f what was actually said differ slightly, the words ‘unlawfully killed attributed to the                                 “The coroner’s/task in a case such .as this is a formidable one, and no one. w ould
    degree o f care after he was overpowered’ represent what the foreman was heard to say by         j     j             „ dispute that; that is quite apart from the difficulties which inevitably arise when
    all present, as' near as m ay b e ...                 : •                                                               feelings are running high and the spectators are emotionally involved and yocal.
        The coroner’s version o f it, as appears from his first affidavit, is: :     . . -                                  Once again it should not be forgotten that an inquest is a fact-finding exercise and
                                                                                                                                        3d o f apportioning guilt. The procedure and rules o f evidence which are
          ‘The transcript when available will no doubt demonstrate the point with greater                         ...'.'’'A        le for one are unsuitable for the other. In an inquest it should never be
       clarity b ut the verdict which was recorded by m e in writing was quite sim ply                                      forgotten that there a re n o parties, there-is n© Indictm ent, there is n o prosecution,
                               Ail England Law Reports              ^   ': [1987] 2 All ER                QBD                  R v West London Coroner (Watkins LJ)                                 135
134
                                                                                                              include th e finding o f a r ^ ^ r s o n guilty o f the murder, manslaughter or infanticide;
     there is n o .defence, th e re is no trial, sim ply an attem p t to^K blish facts. It is an
                                                                                                     g        and accordingly a coroner’s inquisition shall in no case charge a person w ith any o f
     inquisitorial process, a process o f investigation quite u n lik e a crim in al trial w here
                                                                                                              those offences.’ .                              _ ..         , ,
  ■ ■ th e prosecutor accuses and the accused defends, th e ju d g e h olding the balance Or the
      ring, w hichever m etaph or one chooses to use.’ -    "                                          Prior to this enactment a coroner’s jury could, and sometimes did, charge and com m it a
                                                                                                       peison for trial on charges so serious as murder and manslaughter.     \
   T here is'n o 'su g g estio n th at at this inquest th e spectators w ere vocal. T hat apart,
                                                                                                         Power was given by Parliament for the making o f rules. The relevant rules are the
everything th e re said is applicable to it. I w ould add th a t it is the coroner w ho calls the
                                                                                                     ^ Coroners Rules 1984. Rule 22(1) provides:               . ‘     .   ' .
witnesses an d questions th em . T he role of a w itness’s representative is confined to asking
questions after th e coroner has finished w ith the' witness. He is n o t allowed to address                    ‘No witness at an inquest shall be obliged to answer any question tending to
th e ju ry as to th e evidence. Advocacy has therefore alm ost no influence, no part in the                   incriminate himself.’
proceedings. This is in m arked contrast to th e crim inal trial. The ordinary rules o f
                                                                                                          Rule 36, dealing with matters to be ascertained at an inquest, provides:
evidence do not apply. This enlarges the scope o f th e inquiry b u t m ay well, am ong the
other matters I have referred to, detract from the value o f the verdict, which cannot be                        ‘(1) The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be directed solely to
regarded as conclusive, at any rate if it is to the effect that a crim e has been committed.          C   -   ascertaining the following matters, namely— (a) who the deceased was; (b) how,
The coroner has the central and dominant role. He has powers at comm on law and he is                         when and where the deceased came by his death . . .
bound by statutes and rules, the provisions o f which he must observe scrupulously in                            (2)    Neither the coroner nor the jury shall express any opinion on any other
conducting the hearing.                              : :                                                      matters.’
    The main provisions which it is necessary here to refer to are the following. I turn first
                                                                                                     i : O o t o f the w indow w en t th e rider. Rule 40 provides:
to the governing Act, the Coroners Act 1887. By s 4, so far as is material, it is provided.
                                                                                                      d          ‘No person shall be allowed to address the coroner or the jury as to the facts.’
        ‘The coroner shall, at the first sitting o f the inquest, examine on oath touching
      the death all persons who tender their evidence respecting the facts and all persons           f,-' Rule 4 1 provides:
      having knowledge o f the facts whom he thinks it expedient to examine.’
                                                                                                                  ‘Where the coroner sits with a jury, he shall sum up the evidence to the jury and
By sub-s (3) it is provided:                                                                                   direct them as to the law . . . and shall draw their attention to R u le. . . 42.’
        ‘After hearing the evidence the jury shall give their verdict, and certify it by an           g Rule 42 is important. Its provisions are these:
      inquisition in writing, setting forth, so far as such particulars have been proved to
                                                                                                                 ‘No verdict shall be framed in such a way as to appear to determine any question
      them, who the deceased was, and how, when, and where the deceased came by his
                                                                                                               of—(a) criminal liability on the part o f a named person, or (b) civil liability.’
      death. .
                                                                                                             Attached to these rules is a precedent for an inquisition (see Sch 4, Form 22). There are
By s 6( 1) it is provided:                                                                                notes to the precedent. In those notes one finds a recital o f the kinds o f verdict which a
         ‘Where Her Majesty’s High Court of justice, upon application m ade by or under                f coroner’s jury is entitled to return. They include death from natural causes, suicide, self-
       the authority o f the Attorney General, is satisfied . . . (b.) where an inquest has been     iii induced abortion, accident, misadventure, unlawful killing, m urder, infanticide and an
       held by a coroner that by reason of fraud, rejection o f evidence, irregularity of                 open verdict.
       proceedings, insufficiency o f inquiry, or otherwise, it is necessary or desirable, in                W ith that synopsis o f the coroner’s powers in mind, I turn to exam ine the issues raised,
       the interests o f justice, that another inquest should be held, the court. . . m ay quash          the main o f which must cause us, it is argued, to quash the verdict and inquisition (our
       the inquisition on th a t inquest.*                                                                power to do that is beyond doubt) and to order, as w e may, a fresh inquisition before
                                                                                                       9 another coroner and before another jury.
   Section 13(1) and (2) o f the Coroners (Amendment) Act 1926 provides:
                                                                                                             I choose as the first issue to comment on the coroner’s directions on the law o f unlawful
          ‘(1) Subject to the provisions o f this section, a coroner within whose jurisdiction            killing. I begin with three short extracts from the eight or nine pages o f notes the coroner
      the dead body o f a person is lying, may, in lieu o f sum m oning a jury in the manner              m ade to assist .him in sum m ing up. The first extract reads thus:
   '' required by section three o f the Coroners Act,71887, for th e purpose of inquiring
                                                                                                                   ‘Unlawfully killed. Covers both murder and manslaughter. Murder requires a
      into th e death o f that person, hold an inquest i7 . w ith o u t a jury.
                                                                                                               . sliberate attempt to kill or cause grievous bodily harm. Many technicalities, but
      ' ' {2} If it appears to the coroner either before he proceeds to hold an inquest o r in
                                                                                                               not relevant when the same verdict covers manslaughter as well. Manslaughter
      the course o f an inquest begun w ithout a|iny^that there is reason to suspect.... ( / )
                                                                                                                 jm prises tw o types o f hom icide in th is case. Firstly, th e force'used in a rrestin g
      that th e death occurred w hile the deceased was in police custody, o r resulted from
                                                                                                               Mikkelsen at Bedfont Close— i f th a t w as th e cause o f his death. Secondly the degree
      an in jury caused'by'a police officer in th e p urp orted execution o f M s du ty ; he shall
                                                                                                              :o f care given to h im after he was overpowered.’
      proceed to su m m o n a jury, in th e m anner req u ired by th e Cororteis-Act, 1887      ■
                                                                                                                 and extract fro m the notes to w hich I refer, reads:
 T his provision is obviously m andatory, dependent for effect on in ju ry pausing death.
 W h eth er th e cause o f death in the present case’com es w ith in the definition o f injury,                   A fter M ikkelsen was cuffed "'"and h ad stopped straggling." Could mere be
 how ever loosely regarded, depends partly on definitw n a n d partly on the evidence.,                        m anslaughter by! neglect? The negligence m u st go. beyond the-.mere m a tte r o f
 ' Section 56 o f th e C rim inal Law Act 1977 provides by sub-s (1):                                          compensation between subjects and must show such disregard for the life and safety
                                                                                                                  others as to amount to a crime against the state and conduct' deserving
         ‘At a co ro n ers inquest touching the death o f a person who cam e by his death by
                                                                                                               punishment. This verdict does have to use the word “crim e”— because that is what
       m urder, manslaughter or infanticide, the purpose o f the proceedings shall not
136                                                                               pya/j^ftisttfV'                                            ft v West London Coroner (Watkins LJ)                                        137

  . "makes it u n la w M 'M lin g ; A nything less th a n that is a m ^ ^ o f dam ages a n d is .not,;                       tu rn now to the s t a n d ^ f c f proof. We heard m uch argument about this. There is a
    a coroners verdicti'v-^-;■           ;                        v                                   '-3                   ‘ o f direct authority o a m e point. We were referred to cases on suicide going back
Finally, th e coroner tu rn e d to th e types o f verdict. H e said:                                             fjBI| ';ifje-Iast:.oentHry,-ail o f which emphasise the presumption against suicide, and the
                                                                                                                              Srement o f rebutting that presumption. Suicide was then a crime. It no longer is.
  ’   ‘Open .v erd ict.’'M isadventure (with recom m endations). Lack o f care o f add                               p o t i t is still a drastic action which often leaves in its wake serious social, economic and
    aggravated by lack o f care— "problem s”— ask. Abuse o f drags— alcohol— not                                      other consequences.
  ' supported h y doctors. H om icide by an unlaw ful act or by neglect. Needs' heavy                                  \ Lord Widgery CJ in R v City of London Coroner, e x p Barber [ 1975] 3 All ER 538 at 540,
    burden o f p ro o f and you have to be certain that there could not have been self                       b        [ 1 9 7 5 ] 1. W LR 1J i o a t 1313 said:                                          '
    defence a n d you h av e to rem em b er th e rig h t to use reasonable-force in m aking a
    law ful arrest.’ '                                                '                                                         . ‘If that is a fair statem ent o f the coroner’s approach, and I sincerely hope it is
                                                                                                                     ■'}:C, •. because I have no' desire to be u nfair to h im , it seems to m e to fail to recognise w hat
    The interesting feature o f th e first extract is that th e jury, in w hat counsel, fo r.th e                              is perhaps one o f the most important rules that coroners should bear in mind in
police officers say was part o f its verdict, follow ed w ords w hich appear in this part o f the                              cases o f this class, namely that suicide must never be presumed. If a person dies a
coroner’s notes. T hey w ere enabled to do that because at their request the coroner sent c                                 ; violent death, the possibility o f suicide may be there for all to see, but it must n o t be
the notes into th e ju ry after they had retired. T hat is a m atter w hich I w ill deal w ith later                           presumed merely because it seems on the face o f it to be a likely explanation. Suicide
on. W hat is o f m o re significance is that now here in the su m m ing up is there to be found                      J|;'-.' must be proved by evidence, and if it is not proved by evidence, it is the duty o f the
the definition o f m anslaughter, th at is unlaw ful killing. At no point did the coroner                            ig, coroner not to find suicide, but to find an open verdict. I approach this case, applying
direct the ju ry th a t to find a verdict o f m anslaughter they had to be satisfied that the act                              a stringent test, and asking myself whether on the evidence which was.given in this
or omission o f a single person must am o u n t to unlaw ful conduct w hich was a substantial                        £ , case any reasonable coroner could have reached the conclusion that the proper
cause o f death. T he ju ry w ere left w ith the im pression that they m ig h t be satisfied that                              answer was suicide.’                        _
there was m aterial unlaw ful conduct, act or neglect, by aggregating the conduct o f two
or m ore o f th e officers. O ne cannot avoid th e feeling, I think, that this is probably w hat                        J'_ It will be noted that Lord Widgery CJ alluded to the stringent test, but without
has happened. Thus, said counsel for Pcs Gray, Thom pson and Howard, w ith justification                                 reference to what may be called the conventional standards o f proof. I cannot believe,
in my view, th e verdict has had a blunderbuss effect, m eaning that shot w ent off in all                               however, that he was regarding proof o f suicide as other than beyond a reasonable doubt.
directions, strik in g police officers involved indiscrim inately.                                               I'-:- I so hold that that was and remains the standard. It is unthinkable, in my estimation,
    1 have m u c h sym pathy w ith the coroner, for he was dealing w ith a kind o f e                              e that anything less will do. So it is in respect o f a criminal offence. I regard as equally
 m anslaughter, nam ely unlaw ful killing by neglect, w hich is seldom m et w ith. Moreover,                       . unthinkable, if not more so, that a jury should find the commission, although not
save in the hands o f an experienced judge, it is not a sim ple m atter to direct a ju ry on. It                 : ■ identifying the offender, o f a crim inal offence without being satisfied beyond a reasonable
 is not surprising therefore to find that the coroner is criticised also for his less than correct                       doubt.
 and helpful references at various times to neglect, giving the impression here and there                                 . As for the other verdicts open to a jury, the balance o f probabilities test is surely
 that just plain neglect would do.                                                                               f appropriate save in respect, of course, o f the open verdict. This standard should be left to
    Other criticisms have also been voiced as to this all-important direction, but I have, I f                   -■f the jury without any o f the refined qualifications placed on it by some judges who have
 think, said enough to indicate that the jury were gravely misdirected and cannot have                                   spoken to some such effect as ‘the more serious the allegation the higher the degree o f
 been otherwise than confused by what they were told about this branch o f the law and,                                  probability required’. These refinements would only serve to confuse juries and, in the
 of course, by what they had read from the notes which were handed in to them. This by                                   context o f a jury’s role, are, I say with great respect to those who have given expression to
 itself must, it seems to me, inevitably cause the jury’s verdict to be quashed What the                                 them, I think, meaningless. Such matter as that led the coroner astray in this case, by
 jury should have been told was that when considering manslaughter by neglect they                                    ■ ' yoviding the jury with no plain standard o f proof to be guided by. He cannot be blamed
 would have to be satisfied on the evidence o f these four ingredients o f the offence: (i)                                ir that, but it is another factor which must cause this verdict to be quashed.
 that a police officer had the duty o f regarding the health and welfare o f Mikkelsen, (2)                                 I said that I would deal with the complaint, for that is what it amounts to, that the
 that he failed to do what in the circumstances he ought to have done for the health and                                   kroner’s notes, his aide-memoire, were handed to the jury. This took place during the
 welfare of Mikkelsen; (3) that his failure was a substantial cause o f Mikkelsen’s death;                                     nee o f counsel, who were out o f the building where the inquest was held at lunch,
 and (4) that in foiling to act for the benefit o f Mikkelsen s health and welfare he acted                                   eii counsel returned the coroner told them what he had done. No one suggests he
 recklessly. It should b e explained that to act r e ile s s ly m eans that there was m .o|>'floas\                           ded to the jury’s request with no motive save a desire to be as helpful as he could to
 and serious risk to the health and welfare o f M ikkelsen to which that police officer,                                           but I am driven by the considerable bulk o f the notes, the lack o f clarity "in m any
 having' regard to his duty, was indifferent oj; that, recognising that risk to be present, he                                ss,-' the-; m isdirections 'a t others/and the general layout, intelligible n o doubt to the
 deliberately chose to ru n th e risk b y doing n o th in g about it. It should be er        0
                                                                                             m p & ,,                         ■mer'iset not, I imagine, to th e ju iy j'td ’s ay that'to p ut to them a docum ent am o u n tin g
 however, that a failure to appreciate that there was such a risk w ould not by itself be                                      ighi'.or n in e pages o f closely’‘typed directio n s -on m an y m atters was ..an error. T he
            ' amOui                                                                                                            •* i t can n o th av e provided th e ju ry w ith clear guidance o n a :n u m b e r o f 'essential
                                                                         c o v M -ie m m a w r d t e r o f                       i§-which'was-accurate in la # .’ T hat, fo r reasons I have explained,';it--coiild‘n dt-'have
 unlaw ful killing only i f th e y could attrib u te th o se ingredients to a .single police officer,                            >€M :the -contrary, I think it tended-®' heap confusion o n confusion.’ ;k >'             : :
  »hppi;.they should'orj. n'6 .a                                  identify. In this context, the jury                       If there was some direction or other which was not clear to the jury, -the coroner
 sfip iio co nsid er th e positlt                            following Mikkelsen’s arrest, as to his                      L~uld, in the presence o f counsel,:have,.asked them, th e jury,, w hat it was, and should
 doty, if any, to care For M i                               ' re and the opportunity given'to M m ,                          e assisted them with it by repeating orally, perhaps with amplification, what he had
 having regard to the length                   he was with Mikkelsen and other relevant                               --already told them on the point, or given them entirely fresh instructions or directions if
 circumstances, to discharge it.                                                                                        necessary. He ought to have proceeded to do this after discussion with counsel who,
138                               AH England Law Reports'                          [1987] 2 Ail ER                                         R v West London Coroner (Watkins LJ)                                          139
undoubtedly, w ould have b een o f considerable h elp to h im . It 8 W o t u n k no w n in                           w d l used to coping w ith this p rJ S e rn and I have no doubt do so successfully. I am firm ly
crim inal trials for ju dg es to answ er the jury’s questions as to th e law. in w ritin g, o r even                o fth e opinion th a t ¥ ‘42:is iiitra vires.               ■ ?■■■ -'V, -.          V"
to anticipate th e possible need by a ju ry for that, with a written direction on a p oint or                           Finally, the evidence. The jury’s finding o f unlawful killing by neglect is, it is
points o f law. But th is is a practice w hich, for good reason, is sparingly resorted to. W hen                     submitted on behalf o f the police officers, against the weight o f the evidence. It used to
it is, it m ust be handled w ith circumspection, the ju d g e .being m in d fu l o f th e need to                               and maybe by some still is, that insufficiency, of evidence is no ground for
consult w ith counsel beforehand, and to show them th e n ote before it goes in to th e ju ry                                   ; a coroner’s jury’s verdict. I cannot subscribe to that. The development o f
room .                                                                                                                         review to its present state with its devotion to, amongst other things, natural
    W e have heard subm issions on th e coroner’s decision, to record as the verdict m erely                        justice cannot possibly allow verdicts by juries at inquests to stand which are based on no
the words ‘unlaw ful killing’. 1 can understand his anxiety to record a verdict w hich did                          o r wholly insufficient evidence. By analogy, I see nothing in s 6 o f the 1887 Act which
n o t offend against r 42 o f th e C oroners Rules 1984. C oroners q uite often, for very good                   ■ raqifcounter to that.
reason, have to refrain from p u ttin g on the inquisition all th a t th e forem an says w hen                          However, that is not the position here, in my opinion. I express no view on the
announcing the ju ry ’s conclusion. By rule he is prevented from doing that. He has to                              strength o f the evidence, except to say that anotherjury may not have found it compelling
eliminate irrelevant matter and only record what his good sense and experience leads                             : enough, especially if properly directed, to have found a verdict o f unlawful killing. There
 h im to conclude is the formal verdict, being one which the jury are entitled in law to                            w e fe o f course verdicts other than an open verdict which the jury could have returned. I
 find. -                        '       ■                 '      ' .                         _                      have already referred to some, at least, o f those. In my opinion, a number o f those could
    Here, however, I regret to say that the coroner s judgm ent was at fault. Whichever                          ■ t iv flje e n left to this jury in the circumstances but were not. Whether there was material
 version o f what the foreman said be right, it is clear fro m all o f them that the jury found                     aylJils inquest fit to be left to a jury to consider a verdict o f unlawful killing by neglect, I
 neglect at no tim e before Mikkelsen was overpowered. By that time, the fight involving                         : '.prefer to express no opinion bearing in m ind w hat m ight happen hereafter. I think
 the use of the truncheon during arrest was over and the arrest effective. It is equally clear                      differently with regard to all that took place on arrest. Without going into that evidence
 that the jury were attributing unlawful killing to no other cause than neglect. It is the                          in detail, the medical aspects o f it especially, I am in no doubt that I w ould have directed
jury’s function to find the cause o f death while avoiding placing criminal responsibility                          the jury that it would have been unsafe, wrong even, to find that the arresting officers
 or civil liability on anyone. Here, the cause found, as I have previously indicated, included                      m isconducted themselves in a difficult situation in any sense whatsoever.
 the additional words spoken by the foreman, which were, in my opinion, an essential                                   So, this verdict has to be quashed. What then must be done? Further relief lies also
 part o f a clearly expressed verdict and ought to have been recorded on th e inquisition.                          within the discretion o f this court. Albeit with very considerable reluctance and w ith the
 The implication placed on them by the coroner, as expressed in his affidavit, is, I think,                         provisions of s 13 o f the 1926 Act in mind, I see no alternative but to order a fresh inquest
 misguided.                                                                                                         before another coroner and jury. I would also make the declaration as to the standard o f
     Counsel for Pcs Gray, Thompson and Howard submitted strenuously that the verdict                               proo f in accordance with what 1 have said as to that in this judgment.
 as recorded offended against r 42, for it was framed, he says, so as to place civil liability
 on the Commissioner o f Police o f the Metropolis, or to give the appearance o f doing so. I                      K O C H J. I agree that the verdict o f the coroner’s jury in this case should be quashed and
‘disagree. The verdict, neither as recorded nor as it should have been recorded on the                             that a fresh inquest in front o f a new coroner be ordered. I concur in the making o f the
 inquisition, is not, in m y view, so framed. Interested parties may look at the circumstances                     declaration as to the standard of proof in coroners’ inquests.
 of the case and seek to draw from them and the verdict an inference or inferences as to                               I add one comment to the judgm ent which Watkins LJ has just delivered, on the form
  blameworthiness on someone’s part for causing death. That is almost inevitable. It can                           o |in q u isitio n (see the Coroners Rules 1 9 8 4 , SI 1 9 8 4 / 5 5 2 ., Sch 4, Form 22). It is made in
 be neither avoided nor legislated against. So long as on the face o f the inquisition the                       .th e hope that those responsible for the framing o f these form s m ight give further
  verdict does not give the appearance o f identifying by name or otherwise anyone as                                          ation to the wording o f one p art o f the form and that a redrafting might assist a
 blameworthy for the cause o f death, r 42 is complied with. It was complied with by this                                     s jury to concentrate on the matter which they are required to consider. It is the
 coroner. It would have been complied with had he recorded the verdict as, in m y view,                                          ’ on the form which at present reads: ‘Tim e, place and circumstances at or in
  he should have done.                                                                         ■                                       was sustained.’ It seems to m e that it should be: ‘Time, place and
  . It was also submitted that s 4 o f the 1887 Act and r 42 cannot co-exist. The rule is ultra                                  nces at or in which death was sustained’, and that if that amendment were
  vires, it is said. This has been said before, notably in .R v Surrey Coroner, ex p Campbell                                  : wording would then conform to the wording o f r 36(i)(b) o f the 1984 rules,
 [1982] 2 All ER 545,11982] QB 661. In giving th e ju d g m e n t o f the court'I said ([1982J.2                               g m ade that comment, I concur in the judgment which Watkins LJ has just
  A U E R 54 5at 555,£1982]Q B 661 at’6 7 6 ): " "                                   \
■             Be -that as it may, it is our view that on tfaefactS'-of this case a verdict o f “lack o f
           care” would not tjavc'ContravcHedr 33 .[that istfae-predecKsor tor. 42]. It is therefore                            granted. Verdict quashed. Order fo r afresh inquest before another coronermkjury.
■                              ■us-to<fcdde.wltt^hCTthe.n3fc:is'.Bltra vires. But, w e th in k w e o u g h t                   as to the standard of proof granted accordingly. .
           ne¥atheIeK . 4 0 -.expresS>nr conclusion-on A p p o in t,.w h ic h is th a t counsel for. the
           applicaBt?s,sn lin iissio n :on "it. isill-fo u n d ed . S u d i conflict .as m ay in a n y given                      m ri fa i.N m le & Co, T w ickenham (For the applicants Gray, Thompson an-
    ■      circum stance appear to arise betw een r 3 3 and the,.duty to inquire “how ” -must-be                               ImseUJones & .Walker (for the applicants Duncan, Morris, Kent, & tlih jg ’and
    ■ ■' - resolved in favour o f the statutory duty to inquire whatever the consequences o f J                                Beachcrofts (for the coroner); Powell Magrath & Spencer (for the next o f kin o f
'■■■ ,.0. th is m ay be.*                                                                               t:"- .
     I     accept that instances may arise where observing the .statutory duty may carry the risk
                                                                                                                                                                                               Dilys Tausz      Barrister.
 o f a clash between s 4 and r 42. But careful framing o f the verdict consistent, o f course,
 w ith the jury’s conclusion should, and indeed must, avoid that. Coroners by now are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vr/'   .
                   552      [Ap e . 24, 1937] ALL ENG LAND LAW REPORTS ANNOTATED                                         [Vol. 2                H.L:]         ANDREW S v. PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS DIRECTO R                                       553

                   com pany an y legal right to the money, the consequence is th a t, as                                                        but not for manslaughter. The judgm ent herein considers fully the question o f
                   between the assured and the insurance company, the only persons who                                                          manslaughter by negligent driving.
                   have any right are the assured and his wife. They can deal w ith it as they                                                    As t o R e c k l e s s o r D a n g e r o u s D r i v i n g , see H A LSB U R Y , Supp. Street and
                                                                                                                                                Aerial Traffic, para. 683; and f o r C a s e s , see DIG EST, Supp., Street and Aerial
                   please, an d surrender the policy, or otherwise deal with it, w ithout any
                                                                                                                                                Traffic, Nos. 222a-222?\
                   reference to the infant, and I propose to make a declaration accordingly.                                                      As t o M a n s l a u g h t e r b y N e g l i g e n c e , see H A LSB U R Y , Hailsham Edn.,
                   The plaintiff m ust pay the costs.                                              ^                                            Vol. 9, pp. 441-446, paras. 759, 760 ; and f o r C a s e s , see D IGEST, Vol. 15, pp. 798-
                      Solicitors : Clarke, <fc Go. (for th e plaintiff and the second defendant) ;                                              802, Nos. 8630-8700.]
                   Douglas F eam <fc Co. (for the first defendant).
                                                                                                                                                Cases referred to :
                                            r R/m nr^d by W . K . S c r i v e n e r , E s q ., Barrister-at-Law.]                                  (1) R . v. Williamson (1807), 3 C. & P . 6 3 5 ;         14 D igest 377, 3972.
             D ictum o f L oed At k in a t 555, 556
             applied in B. v Low® [1973] 1 A ll              _______________________                                                               (2) R . v. Bateman (1925), 19 Cr. App. Rep. 8 ; D igest Supp. ; 94 L .J. K .B . 791 ;
             E R 805                                                                                                                  g
                                                                                                                                           B              133 L.T, 730.
                       A N D R E W S v. D IR E C T O R O F P U B L IC PR O SE C U T IO N S.                                                        (3) C a sh illv. T f r ^ ( 1 8 o 6 ) ,6 E .& B . 891 ; 29 D igest 14, 178 ; 27 L.T. O.S. 283.

                   [H ouse of L ords (Lord A tkin, Viscount Finlay, Lord Thankerton, Lord
                                                                                                                                               A p p e a l from an order of the Court of Criminal Appeal dismissing an
                       W right, M.R., and Lord Roche), M a rc h 8, 9, A p ril 22, 1937.]
                                                                                                                                             appeal b y the present appellant against a conviction of manslaughter
                       C rim in a l L a w — M an slau ghter— R eckless d riv in g o f motor car— Ju d g e's direction                 C    C at Leeds Assizes. The facts are set out in the judgment. The words
                               to j u r y — R o a d Traffic A c t* 1930 (e. 43), s. I I — R oad T raffic A c t, 1934
                                                                                                                                             of the summing-up of DU P a k c q , J., complained of were as follows :
 A p p l L d . R. v.! (c- * > ),« . 34.
^OV[i9 7 3 j 2 w .L .R .1         T h e a p p ella n t w a s c o n v ic te d o f m an slau gh ter resu ltin g from th e                           If you thought that, although Andrews drove recklessly and although he drove at
            481, C .A .' reck less a n d d an gerou s d r iv in g o f a m otor car. H e a p p ealed a g a in st                                 a speed or in a manner dangerous to the public w ithin the words of [Road Traffic
                               h is c o n v ic tio n , on th e grou n d s th a t t h e ju d g e m isd irected t h e ju ry                       Act, 1930, s. 11], it was not because o f that th a t Craven w as killed, the law would
                                                                                                                                                entitle you to convict him not of manslaughter but o f dangerous driving. B u t in
  a      n d r v 1 ^ *** f i l i n g th e m th a t, i f t h e a p p ella n t w as d riv in g reck lessly w ith in                     T)   D    this case la m bound to tell you that, if you think that he w as driving recklessly and
 tS X                   '! t h e                   o f t h e R oad Traffic A c t, 1930, s. 11, and b ecau se h e w as                           in a dangerous manner within the meaning of those words and it w as because of
       [1973] Q.B. 7A2, ( so d o in g som eon e w as k illed , th e n th e a p p ellan t w as g u ilty o f man*                                 that th at Craven was killed, then it is your bounden d u ty to convict him of
                          1 sla u g h ter ; (ii) in te llin g th e m th a t, if t h e y th o u g h t th a t th e a p p ellan t                  manslaughter.
 ,'                        , w as d r iv in g reck lessly an d in a m an n er d an gerou s w ith in t h e w ords
 1Atkin0 applied.0TL. 1 ° /               R o a d Traffic A c t, 1930, s. 11, an d i t w as becau se o f th a t th a t                             The Road Traffic Act, 1930, s. 11, provides :
IV’ nSwi i w t ■> ■                  person w a s k illed , i t w a s th e ir b ou n d en d u ty to c o n v ic t th e a p p ellan t
!              16 9 ,'cA * '        marlslau g h te r ; (ill) in fa ilin g to te ll th e m th a t, u nless t h e a p p ella n t       E    •p      (1) I f any person drives a motor vehicle on a road recklessly, or at a speed or
                                                                                                                                                in a manner which is dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances
                            i ha d b een p roved g u ilty o f n e g lig e n c e ca u sin g th e d ea th , an d o f su ch
                                                                                                                                                o f the case, including the nature, condition, and use o f the road, and the am ount
 \ D i e t a of Lord J n e g lig e n c e ca u sin g th e d ea th as w e n t b ey o n d a m ere m a tter o f com -                               of traffic which is actually at the time, or which m ight reasonably be expected to
 i k Stone*          *      I P en sa tio n b etw een su b jects, an d sh ow ed su ch disregard for t h e life                                  be, on the road, he shall be liable [to certain penalties].
 ;     [1977] Q.B.354. j an d s a f e t y o f oth ers as to a m o u n t to a crim e a g a in st th e S ta te and con-
 <                        j 1 d u c t d ese rv in g p u n ish m e n t, t h e y sh o u ld n o t find h im g u ilty o f m an-                        The Road Traffic Act, 1934, s. 34 provides :
 g ^ G W n o r of i sla u g h ter ; and (iv ) in fa ilin g to te ll th e m th a t, i f th e ap p ellan t w as m erely                 _
  Holloway Prison, t p roved g u ilty o f reck less or d an gerou s d riv in g as defined b y th e R oad                              ™    F      Upon the trial of a person who is indicted for manslaughter in connection w ith the
                   .l.R» i Traffic A c t, 1930, s. 11, and fo u n d b y su ch reckless or d an gerou s d riv in g                               driving o f a motor vehicle by him, it shall be lawful for the jury, if they are satisfied
                                                                                                                                                that he is guilty o f an offence under sect. 11 o f the principal Act (which relates to
i         450,                 to h a v e ca u sed t h e d ea th o f som eon e, t h e y sh ou ld n o t find h im g u ilty
                                                                                                                                                reckless or dangerous driving) to find him guilty of that offence, whether or n o t the
* R° v^Governor of ^ m a n s*a u S h ter ■—■                                                                                                    requiremente o f sect. 21 of the principal A ct (which relates to notice of prosecutions)
      Holloway Prison,            H e l d : (i) t h e effect o f t h e su m m in g u p as a w h ole w as th a t t h e tru e                     have been satisfied as respects that offence.
                        6 2 4 lu estio n w a s u ltim a te ly le ft to th e ju r y , w h o se v erd ict w as in e v ita b le
          [1983] AA-6M        . (n ^ h e eviden(Jei
                                                                                                                                           q   G. Russell Vick, K.C., and G. S. Waller for the appellant.
                            (ii)       th e sta tu to r y offence o f d an gerou s d riv in g m a y b e co m m itted ,
                         though, t h e n eg lig en ce is n o t o f su ch a d egree as w ould a m o u n t to m a n ­                            The Solicitor-General (Sir Terence O'Connor, K .C .), Arthur M orley, K .C .,
                         sla u g h te r i f d ea th en su es.                                                                                and G, W, Wrangham for the Crown.
                    [EDITORIAL NOTE. The provisions o f the Road Traffic Act, 1930, s, 11, have
                                                                                                                                               Russell Vick, K . C , ; It appears to be clear th at an unlawful act causing
                  caused a difficulty since it has been argued that, if the facts come w ithin that section,                                 death justifies a verdict of manslaughter, but it is not clear what amounts
                  they ju stify a verdict o f manslaughter. I t has been from time to time suggested FT                                    U to an unlawful act. In every case in which an improper w ay of doing a
                  that a conviction under the section m ight be justified in a case where the negligence                                     lawful act has formed the basis of a charge of manslaughter, the degree
                  was n ot o f a sufficiently high degree to warrant a verdict o f manslaughter. The
                                                                                                                                             of impropriety has always been a material factor. Whether or n ot the
                  m atter was argued in R , v. Stringer, [1933] 1 K .B. 704; Digest Supp., but not
                  finally determined. The m atter was again touched upon in R , v. Leach, [1937]
                                                                                                                                             degree of negligence is sufficient to constitute manslaughter is a question
                  1 All E .R , 319, and now the H ouse o f Lords have finally determined that there m ay                                     for the jury, but, in the present case, the judge’s summing up m eant in
                  be cases where the degree o f negligence warrants a conviction for dangerous driving,                                      effect that that question had been withdrawn from the jury.
                        j Applied.        .    ;
                        1R . v. Governor of    j
                        1Holloway Prison,      ,
                        i Rx p. Jennings       (
                        i            i W.L.R. ,
                                                                                                  H . L . ] ^ N D R E W S v. PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS D IR E C T O R   (L ord A t k in )   555
554   [A nt. 24 , 1 937]   ALL ENGLAND LAW BKJPOBTS ANNOTATED                [V o l. 2
                                                                                               of definition, for it concerns homicide in so m any a n d so varying con­
    Waller, following for th e appellant, d e alt w ith th e possible in te rp re ta ­
                                                                                               ditions. F ro m th e early days, when an y homicide involved penalty,
tions w hich could be given to th e R o ad Traffic A ct, 1934, s. 34.
                                                                                               th e law has gradually evolved “ th ro u gh successive differentiations an d
   TJie Solicitor-G eneral: The sum m ing-up as a whole showed th a t th e
                                                                                               in tegratio n s ” u n til it recognises m urder on th e one hand, based m ainly,
ju d g e’s direction to th e ju ry upon th e degree of culpability atta ch in g
                                                                                               th ou g h n o t exclusively, on an in ten tio n to kill, an d m anslaughter on th e
to th e crime of m anslaughter was right. Sect. 34 of th e A ct of 1934 has
                                                                                             A other hand, based mainly, though n o t exclusively, on th e absence of
th e effect of enabling an a c t of dangerous d riving to be punished in circuin- A
                                                                                               in ten tio n to kill, b u t w ith the presence of a n elem ent of “ unlawfulness ”
stances w here it is n o t connected w ith d eath , e.g., where it tak es place
                                                                                                which is th e elusive factor. In the present case it is necessary to consider
a t a tim e antecedent to th e death. In a n y even t, where a ju ry finds
                                                                                                m anslaughter only from th e point of view of an unintentional killing
recklessness of behaviour there is a degree of culpability sufficient to
                                                                                                caused b y negligence, i.e., the omission of a d u ty to ta k e care. I do n o t
establish th e crime of m anslaughter. T his m a y n o t be applicable to a
                                                                                             B propose to discuss the developm ent of th is branch of the subject as
case of dangerous, as distinct from reckless, driving.                                 B
                                                                                                tre a te d in th e successive treatises of Coke, H ale, F oster an d E ast, an d
   Russell V ick, in reply.
                                                                                                in th e ju d g m en ts of th e courts to be found eith er in directions to juries
                                                                                                by in d iv id ual judges, or in the more considered pronouncem ents of th e
      L o r d A t k in : My Lords, th is is a n ap p eal under th e necessary
                                                                                                body of judges which preceded th e form al C ourt of Crown Cases Reserved.
certificate of th e A ttorney-G eneral from an o rd er of th e Court of C rim inal
                                                                                             C E xpressions will be found which indicate th a t to cause d ea th b y a n y lack
A ppeal dismissing a n appeal by th e a p p ella n t from conviction a n d               C
                                                                                                of due care will am ount to m anslaughter ; b u t, as m anners softened an d
sentence on a charge of m anslaughter. T h e ap p e lla n t was tried before
                                                                                                th e law becam e m ore humane, a narrow er criterion appeared. A fter all,
DU P a r c q , J ., a t Leeds Assizes in Dec., 1936, a n d , being convicted, was
                                                                                                 m an slau g hter is a felony, an d was capital, a n d men shrank from a tta c h ­
sentenced to be im prisoned for 1£> m onths, a n d w as disqualified for life
                                                                                                 ing th e serious consequences of a conviction for felony to results pro-
from holding a m otor-driving licence.
                                                                                              D duced b y m ere inadvertence. The stric ter view becam e a p p a ren t in
   H e was indicted fo r m anslaughter, th e p articu lars of offence being              D
                                                                                                 prosecutions of medical men, or men who professed medical or surgical
th a t on Ju n e 27, 1936, he unlaw fully killed W illiam B urton Craven.
                                                                                                 skill, for m an slau gh ter by reason of negligence. As a n instance I will
T he appeal is based solely on an alleged m isdirection, an d no issue is
                                                                                                 cite R. v. W iU ia m so n (1), where a m an who practised as an accoucheur,
raised as to th e facts, w hich can be sta te d sh o rtly . The appellant, a
                                                                                                 owing to a m istake in his observation of th e ac tu al sym ptom s, inflicted
m an aged 37, was em ployed b y th e Leeds C orporation tra n sp o rt d e p a rt­
                                                                                              E on a p a tie n t terrible injuries from w hich she died. L o r d E l l e n -
m e n t a t its D onisthorpe garage. On S a tu rd a y , Ju n e 27, a t a b o u t         E
10.30 p.m ., he was directed to ta k e a van to assist a corporation om nibus                       u o ro u g h said :
which had broken down a t W hingate, a b o u t 3 to 4 miles away. A bout                             ■Co substantiate th a t chare.; [of manslaughter] the prisoner must have been
                                                                                                   guilty of criminal misconduct, arising either from the grossest ignorance or the
10.45 a m an nam ed Binks was driving a saloon car down th e Tong R oad                            most criminal inattention.
aw ay from Leeds a t abo u t 10 miles an hour. H e noticed ab o u t 30 yards
                                                                                              F The w ord “ crim inal in any a tte m p t to define a crime is p erhaps n o t
ahead th e deceased, Craven, crossing th e ro a d from Binks’ n ear side.                F
                                                                                                th e m o st helpful, bu t it is plain th a t L o r d E l u e n b o r o u g h
The road is a b o u t 29 ft. wide. The ap p ellan t, driving fast, over 30 miles
                                                                                                m eant to in d icate to th e jury a high degree of negligence. So a t a m uch
a n hour, overtook B inks’ car, and, driving well over on th e off side of
                                                                                                la te r d a te in R . v. B a tem a n (2), a charge of m anslaughter was m ade
th e road, ra n into Craven, who was th e n w ith in 3 or 4 paces of th e kerb.
                                                                                                ag ain st a qualified medical p ractitioner in circum stances sim ilar to those
H e was carried on th e bonnet for a sh o rt period, throw n forw ard and
                                                                                              G of W illia m s o n ’s case (1). In a considered ju d g m en t of th e court, L o r d
ru n over by th e van. The appellant, who im m ediately after th e accident              G
                                                                                                 H e w a r t , L .C .J., after pointing o u t th a t, in a civil case, once negligence
nearly ra n into a pedal cyclist,, did n o t stop. H e retu rn ed to th e garage
                                                                                                 is p roved th e degree of negligence is irrelevan t, said, a t p. 11 .
a fte r 11, statin g th a t he h ad n o t found th e om nibus. W hen challenged
a day or tw o later, he denied th a t he had trav elled along th e Tong R oad                        •   In a criminal court, on the contrary, the amount and degree o f negligence are the
                                                                                                    determining question. There must be mens rca.
on th e S atu rd ay night. A t th e trial, he said he was unable to rem em ber
th e journ ey a t all. There was no d ispute th a t in fa ct th e appellant              H     H A fter citing Cashill v. Wright (3), a civil case, L o r d H e w a r t , L .C .J.,
was driving th e v an which killed Craven.            T he ro a d was well lighted                   proceeds :
an d there were people about. On these facte th e re would appear to have                              In explaining to juries the test which they should apply to determine whether
                                                                                                     the negligence, in the particular case, amounted or did not amount to a crime, judges
been a very clear case of m anslaughter, a n d th e only question th a t arises                      have used m any epithets, such as “ culpable,” “ criminal,        gross,    wlck.ed>
is w h eth er the judge correctly directed th e ju ry .                                              “ clear ” “ com plete.” But, whatever epithet be used and whether an epithet
                                                                                                     be used or not, m order to establish criminal liability the facts must be such that,
   My Lords, of all crimes m anslaughter ap p ears to afford m ost difficulties
556   [Apb. 24, 1937] A LL EN G LA N D L A ^ P    e   PO R T S A N N O T A TE D   [Vol. 2           H .L .] ^ p ) R E W S   V.   PU B L IC PRO SECU TIO N S D IR E C T O R   (L o rd A tk in )   557

in the opinion o f the jury, the negligence o f the accused went beyond a mere matter              a t a speed or in a m anner dangerous to th e public, an d cause d eath , an d
o f compensation between subjects and showed such disregard for the life and safety
o f others, as to amount to a crime against the State and conduct deserving
                                                                                                   y e t n o t be guilty of m anslaughter. The legislature ap p ears to recognise
punishment.                                                                                        th is b y th e provision in th e R oad Traffic Act, 1934, s. 34, th a t, on an
 H ere, again, I th in k , w ith respect, th a t th e expressions used are not,                    in d ictm en t for m anslaughter, a m an m ay be convicted of dangerous
indeed th e y p ro bab ly were n o t inten d ed to be, a precise definition of the                 driving. B ut, a p a rt altogether from a n y inference to be d raw n from
crime. I do n o t myself find th e connotations of m ens rea helpful in                     A    A sect. 34, I entertain no d o u b t th a t th e sta tu to ry offence of dangerous
 distinguishing betw een degrees of negligence, nor do th e ideas of crime                         driving m ay be com m itted, though th e negligence is n o t of such a degree
a n d pu n ish m en t in them selves ca rry a ju ry m uch fu rth e r in deciding                    as would am o un t to m anslaughter if d eath ensued. As a n instance, in
w hether, in a p articu lar case, th e degree of negligence show n is a crime,                      th e course of argum ent it was suggested th a t a m an m ig h t execute th e
an d deserves punishm ent. B u t th e substance of th e ju d g m e n t is m ost                     dangerous manoeuvre of draw ing o ut to pass a vehicle in fro n t w ith
valuable, and, in m y opinion, is correct. In practice, it has generally                    B    B a n o th e r vehicle meeting him, a n d be able to show th a t he would have
been ad o p ted b y judges in charging juries in all cases of m anslaughter                         succeeded in his calculated inten tio n b u t for some increase of speed in
b y negligence, w hether in d riv in g vehicles or otherwise. The principle                         th e vehicles in fro n t : a case v e ry doubtfully of m anslaughter, b u t very
to be observed is th a t cases of m an slau g h ter in driving m otor cars are                      p ro b ab ly of dangerous driving. I cannot th in k of a n y th in g worse for
b u t instances of a general rule applicable to all charges of hom icide by                         users of th e ro ad th a n th e conception th a t no one could be convicted
negligence. Simple lack of care such as will co n stitu te civil liab ility                 C    0 of dangerous driving unless his negligence was so g reat th a t, if he h ad
is n o t enough. F o r purposes of th e crim inal law th e re are degrees of                        caused d eath, he m ust have been convicted of m anslaughter. I t th e re ­
negligence, a n d a very high degree of negligence is req uired to be proved                        fore would ap p ear th a t, in directing th e ju ry in a case of m anslaughter,
before th e felony is established. P ro b ab ly of all th e e p ith e ts th a t can                 th e judge should in th e first instance charge the m su b sta n tia lly in accord­
be applied “ reckless ” m ost nearly covers th e case. I t is difficult to                          ance w ith th e general law, i.e., requiring the high degree of negligence
visualise a case of d eath caused b y “ reckless ” driving, in th e connota-                1)   D indicated in Batem an’s case (2), a n d th e n explain th a t such degree of
tio n of th a t term in o rd inary speech, which would n o t ju s tify a con­                        negligence is n o t necessarily th e same as th a t w hich is req uired for th e
viction for m anslaughter, b u t i t is p ro bably n o t all-em bracing, for                         offence of dangerous driving, a n d th e n indicate to th e m th e conditions
“ reckless ” suggests an indifference to risk, whereas th e accused m ay                             u n d er w hich th e y m ight acq u it of m anslaughter an d convict of dangerous
h av e ap p reciated th e risk, a n d in ten d ed to avoid it, an d y e t show n in                  driving. A direction th a t all th e y had to consider was w h eth er death
th e m eans ad o p ted to avoid th e risk such a high degree of negligence as               E    E was caused b y dangerous driving w ith in .th e R oad Traffic A ct, 1930, s. 11,
w ould ju stify a conviction. If th e principle of B atem an’s case (2) is                           a n d no more, would, in m y opinion, be a misdirection.
observed, it will appear th a t th e law of m anslaughter has n o t changed                              I n dealing w ith the sum m ing-up in th e present case, I feel bound to
b y th e in tro d uction of m otor vehicles on th e road. D eath caused by                           say, w ith every respect to the learned an d very careful judge, th a t there
th e ir negligent driving, th ou g h u n h a p p ily m uch more freq u en t, is to be                are passages which are open to criticism. In p articu lar, a t th e beginning;
tre a te d in law as d ea th caused b y a n y oth er form of negligence, a n d              F     F of his charge to the jury , he began w ith th e state m en t th a t, if a m an
ju ries should be directed accordingly.                                                              kills a no ther in th e course of doing an unlaw ful act, he is g u ilty of m a n ­
    If th is view be adopted, it will be easier for judges to disentangle th e m ­                   slaughter, an d th e n proceeded to ascertain w hat th e unlaw ful ac t was
selves from th e meshes of th e R o ad Traffic Acts. Those A cts have                                 b y considering th e R oad Traffic Act, 1930, s. 11. If th e sum m ing-up
provisions w hich regulate th e degree of care to be ta k e n in d riving m otor                      rested there, th ere w ould have been misdirection. T here is a n obvious
vehicles. T hey have no direct reference to causing d e ath b y negligence.                 G     G difference in th e law of m anslaughter between doing a n unlaw ful a c t
T h eir prohibitions, while directed, no do u bt, to cases of negligent driving,                      a n d doing a lawful act w ith a degree of carelessness w hich th e legislature
w hich, if d eath be caused, w ould ju s tify convictions for m anslaughter,                          m akes criminal. If it were otherwise, a m an who, while d riv in g w ith ou t
e x te n d to degrees of negligence of less g ravity. Sect. 12 of th e R oad                          due care and attentio n, killed another, would ex necessitate com m it
Traffic A ct imposes a p en alty for d riv ing w ith ou t due care or atten tio n .                   m anslaughter. B u t as th e sum m ing-up proceeded th e learned judge
T his w ould ap p aren tly cover all degrees of negligence. Sect. 11 im poses               H     H reverted to, a n d I th in k rested th e case on, th e principles w hich have
a p e n a lty for driving recklessly, or a t a speed or in a m anner w hich is                         been ju s t stated . On m an y occasions he directed th e a tte n tio n of th e
dangerous to th e public. T here can be no d o u b t th a t th is section covers                       ju ry to th e recklessness an d high degree of negligence w hich th e prosecu­
d riv in g w ith such a high degree of negligence as th a t, if d e a th were                          tio n alleged to have been proved, an d w hich w ould ju stify th em in
caused, th e offender w ould h av e com m itted m anslaughter. B u t the                               convicting the accused. On consideration of th e sum m ing-up as a whole,
converse is n o t true, an d it is perfectly possible th a t a m an m ay drive                         I am satisfied th a t th e tru e question was u ltim a te ly left to th e jury ,
 558    [A p b . 24, 1937]   ALL ENGLAND                 REPO RTS ANNOTATED [Vol. 2                     C .A .l^             WILLIAMS v. WILLIAMS & NATHAN                                       559

and th a t, on the evidence, the verdict was inevitable. For these reasons                                  ™         W IL L IA M S v. W IL L IA M S A N D N A TH A N .
I came to the conclusion th a t the appeal should be dismissed.
                                                                                                        [ C o u r t o f A p p e a l (Greer an d Scott,    L.JJ., an d F in lay , J.), A p r i l 2 2 ,
                                                                                                             1937.]
     L o r d T h a n k e r t o n : My Lords, I have had the privilege of con­
sidering the opinion which has ju st been delivered by the noble Lord                                   E xecution— W ron gfu l a n d irregu lar execution— W r it of possession— Judgm ent
on the woolsack, and I desire to express my complete concurrence in it. A                          A        in respect of whole p rem ises— P o rtio n alleged protected b y Ren t A c ts—
                                                                                                             F a ilu re of lan dlord to w a rn sheriff's officer o f protection— Whether officer
                                                                                                             landlord's agent.
     L o r d W r ig h t , M.R. : My Lords, I also agree, and I am asked by my
                                                                                                                T h e first d efen d a n t h ad o b ta in ed a w rit o f possession in respect o f
noble and learned friend, V is c o u n t F i n l a y , who has also had the                                  a house ; th e second defendant, who was a sheriff’s officer, proceeding
privilege of considering the opinion which has ju st been delivered, t .                                     under this w rit, evicted the plaintiff, who alleged th a t the portion of
say th a t he agrees.                                                         ]g                   t>       the house th a t he occupied was controlled under the R ent Restrictions
                                                                                                             Acts. The plaintiff brought an action against the landlord and the
                                                                                                             sheriff’s officer for damages for trespass. The landlord was present at
       L ord R oche      : My Lords, I also concur.                                                          the tim e of the eviction b u t did not tell the officer th a t part of the
                                                                                                             house was controlled :—
                                                                                                                H e l d : (i) th e landlord, a lth o u g h p resen t a t th e ev ictio n , had n o t
  A ppeal dismissed.
                                                                                                             tak en a n y p a rt in it, or g iv e n th e sheriff’s officer a n y su ch d irection s as
  Solicitors : C. Butcher   Sim on Burns, agents for Morrish, Nelson & C                           C        w ould m a k e h im h is a g e n t. H e w a s therefore n o t liable.
Co., Leeds (for the appellant) ; Director of Public Prosecutions (for the                                       (ii) th e sh eriff’s officer w a s, in th e course o f h is d u ty , ex ecu tin g a
Crown).                                                                                                      ju d g m en t o f th e cou rt, an d so w as n o t liab le in an a ctio n for d am ages,
                                                                                                             how ever w ro n g th e ju d g m en t m ig h t h a v e been .
                     {Reported b y M i c h a e l M a r c u s , E s q ., B a rrister-a t-L a w .]
                                                                                                           [EDITORIAL NOTE. Where a landlord or other party instructs a sheriff’s officer
                                                                                                   D     to do som ething not covered by the judgment, he m ay make the officer his agent
                                                                                                        and so be liable in trespass. An attem pt is here made to fix the landlord with such
                                                                                                        liability by reason o f his om ission to tell the sheriff’s officer that part o f the premises
                                                                                                        was protected b y the R ent A cts. A failure to warn does not amount to a tacit
                                                                                                        instruction to do an act which m ay turn out to be unlawful. In the present case
                                                                                                        the judgment extended to the whole premises and therefore eviction from the
                                                                                                   E     whole premises w as lawful.
                                                                                                            As t o W r o n g f u l a n d I r r e g u l a r E x e c u t i o n , see H ALSBURY, Hailsham
                                                                                                        Edn., Vol. 14, pp. 33-37, paras. 63-66 ; and F O B C a s e s , see DIGEST, Vol. 21,
                                                                                                        pp. 456-462, N os. 384-422.]

                                                                                                     Cases referred to ;
                                                                                                   F   (1) Woollen v. Wright (1862), 1 H . & 0 . 554 ; 21 Digest 550, 1244 ; 31 L .J .
                                                                                                                Ex. 513 ; 7 L.T. 73.
                                                                                                        (2) H askins v. Lewis, [1931] 2 K .B. 1 ; Digest Supp.; 100 L.J. K.B. 180;
                                                                                                                144 L.T. 378.
                                                                                                        (3) Howard v. Gosset, Gosset v. Howard (1847), 10 Q.B, 359 ; 38 Digest 62,
                                                                                                                375 ; 16 L.J. Q.B. 345 ; 10 L.T. O.S. 51.
                                                                                                   G   (4) Brown v. Watson (1871), 23 L.T. 745 ; 41 Digest 103, 538.
                                                                                                        (5) W illiam s v. Sm ith (1863), 14 C.B. N.S. 596 ; 21 Digest 468, 493.
                                                                                                         (6) M inet v. Johnson (1890), 63 L.T. 507 ; Digest, Practice, 391, 949.
                                                                                                         (7) R . v. Cheshire County Court Judge & United Society of Boilermakers, Ex p .
                                                                                                                Malone, [1921] 2 K .B . 694 ; 43 Digest 100, 104i ; 90 L.J. K .B. 772 ;
                                                                                                                  125 L.T. 588.
                                                                                                   H       (8) M ason v. Paynter (1841), 1 Q.B. 974 ; 21 Digest 588, 1666 ; 10 L.J. Q.B. 299.
                                                                                                             (9) Morris v. Salberg (1889), 22 Q.B.D. 614 ; 21 Digest 549, 1236 ; 58 L.J. Q.B.
                                                                                                                   275 ; 61 L.T. 283.
                                                                                                           (10) Jarm ain v. Hooper (1843), 6 Man. & G. 827 ; 21 Digest 549, 1235 ; 13
                                                                                                                   L.J. C.P. 63 ; 2 L.T. O.S. 209.
                                                                                                           (11) Sm ith v . K ea l (1882), 9 Q.B.D. 340 ; 21 Digest 548, 1231 ; 47 L.T.142.
                                                                                                           (12) Lane v . Sterne (1862), 3 Gift. 62 9 ; 29 Digest 467, 161.
    10                                                              (1989) 88 C r.A pp .R.
   draw n from th e fact th a t the first lim b is satisfied, o r to displace any explanation
   advanced by th e d riv er, they can do so by any evidence which is adm issible:
   an d , (3) evidence o f alcoholic co nsum ption sufficient to im pair control is
   adm issible fo r this p u rpo se.
      T here being fo r th e foregoing reasons no basis fo r interfering w ith the
  conviction th e ap peal is dism issed.
     T here rem ains fo r consideration th e qu estio n certified by the judge. A s it
  stands, the answ er m ust be in th e negative for it om its th e whole o f the first
  lim b o f the R . v. L aw rence test. If, h ow ever, it w ere am end ed so as to read: is
  th e offence o f causing d eath by reckless driving proved w here, having taken
  alcoholic d rin k in sufficient q u an tity such th a t he knew o r m ust have known that
 his ability to drive was substantially im paired and th at th ere was therefore a risk
 o f his causing in ju ry to o th er ro a d u sers, th e d efend an t chose to drive a m otor
 vehicle and th e m an n er o f his driving was such that: (a) it created an obvious
 and serious risk o f causing physical inju ry to som e o th e r perso n who happened
 o r m ight h ap p en to be using th e ro ad , o r o f doing substantial dam age to
 prop erty , an d (b ) it did cause th e d eath o f a n o th e r ro ad u ser, we would answ er
 th e q uestion, “prim a facie, yes, in th e absence o f som e o th e r explanation.”

                                                                       A p p ea l dism issed.
    Solicitors: L eslie M addreU & C o , C h elten ham , fo r th e C row n.




 R. v. H.M . CORONER FOR EAST KENT, Ex parte
              SPOONER AND OTHERS

R. v. H.M . CORONER FOR EAST KENT, Ex parte De
              ROHAN AND ANOTHER
Q           B e n c h ( D iv is io n a l C o u r t ) (Lord Justice Bingham, Mr.
    u e e n ’s
     Justice Mann and Mr. Justice Kennedy): October 5, 6, 1987
M anslaughter— C apacity—C orporate B ody— W hether C orporation Capable o f
C om m itting M anslaughter— W hether A ggregation o f A cts b y Individuals in
C orporation Can A m o u n t to M anslaughter

   A corporate body can be guilty o f m anslaughter on the appropriate facts where
the m ens rea and actus reus o f m anslaughter can be established against those
identified as the em bodim ent o f the com pany itself. Evidence m ust be adduced to
show guilt on the p art o f the corporation as such. Evidence against one individual
cannot be added to that against an o th er so as to provide the necessary ingredients
of aggregation.
  T he vehicle ferry ship H erald o f F ree E nterprise capsized outside Zeebrugge
harbour with the resultant heavy loss o f life. A public inquiry took place shortly
after the capsize and a report was published. In the course o f an inquest into the
r
o
Q .B .D .                              R . v. H .M . C o ro n er   for   E a st K e n t    11

death o f persons on the ferry as a result o f the capsize, the coroner decided as a
m atter o f law th at (i) a corporate body could not be guilty of m anslaughter; (ii)
w here the acts o r om issions o f em ployees o r managers of a corporate body w ere
not sufficient to ren d er them guilty o f m anslaughter, those acts or om issions could
not be aggregated so as to render th e corporate body guilty; (iii) th e acts o r
om issions of th e com pany which ow ned the vessel were not the direct cause o f the
deaths; and (iv) the evidence to be adduced at the inquest would be narrow ed
dow n. T h e applicants, relatives of nam ed victims, sought judicial review of the
coroner’s decision and relied on three points m ade against the com pany in the
Sheen rep o rt, Le. th e com pany had failed to consider seriously a proposal to fit a
warning light system on the ferry; five or six previous incidents o f ferry doors being
left open had not been properly reported and collated by the com pany and it
lacked any pro per system to ensure that the highest standards o f safety w ere
observed.

H eld, refusing the applications, the C ourt was prepared tentatively to accept th at a
corporate body was capable o f being found guilty o f manslaughter; how ever, no
sustainable case had been m ade against the nam ed directors of the com pany, the
ow ners o f th e ferry. In exceptional cases the Court would intervene while
proceedings w ere in progress; but in the instant case the C ourt was very reluctant
to intervene, especially because it was an inquest. A coroner acted as an inquisitor
and as such was the m aster o f his own procedure. G reat weight had to be given to
the co ro n er’s judgm ent, w hose duty it was to guide the jury to a correct verdict by
way o f a fact finding m ission, and not to apportion blame and liability.
   A pplications fo r judicial review.
   T h e applicants, P eter A lan Spooner, Pam ela M uriel Spooner, A lan Frederick
R eynolds, Jo an Patricia R eynolds, M aurice D e R ohan and M argaret D e R ohan,
applied for judicial review o f decisions o f th e C oroner for East Kent (M r. R ichard
H arry B rooke Sturt) m ade on Septem ber 19,1987, in the course o f an inquest into
the death o f 188 people arising out of the capsize on M arch 6, 1987 o f the H erald
o f F ree E nterprise stating that as a m atter of law a corporate body could not be
guilty o f m anslaughter. A n application for an order postponing the publication of
any rep o rt o f th e proceedings until after the jury had returned their verdict in the
inquest was allowed under section 4 o f the C ontem pt of C ourt Act 1981.
   T h e grounds o f the application and the ruling of the coroner are set out in the
judgm ent o f Bingham L .J.
   T h e applications w ere argued on O ctober 5, 1987, when the C ourt stated that
they w ould be refused.
  A lastair John Forrest for the applicants Spooner and Reynolds.
  E dw ard Law son for the applicants D e R ohan.
  D avid G uy for the coroner.
                                                                         Cur. adv. vult.

   O ctober 6. BINGHAM L .J. delivered the following judgm ent: T here are before
the C ourt two renew ed applications for judicial review. The fin t application is m ade
on behalf o f M r. and M rs. S pooner and M r. and Mrs. Reynolds. T he application
was m ade on Septem ber 22, 1987, and refused by McCowan J. on S eptem ber 24.
T he second application is m ade on behalf o f M r. and Mrs. de R ohan and was fin t
m ade on Septem ber 23, being refused by McCowan J. also on Septem ber 24.
   B oth applications relate to an inquest currently being conducted in D over by H er
M ajesty’s C oroner for E ast K ent. B oth' applications are m ade by parents and
 12                                                             (1989) 88 C r.A pp.R.
   relatives of the deceased. Both seek to quash decisions of the coroner made on
   September 18 and 19.
      The grounds of the application are, put broadly, that the coroner made an
   incorrect ruling on issues of law arising during the hearing before him and, as a
  result, improperly limited the scope of the inquest. The parties ask this Court to
  make a declaration as to the law and to direct the coroner to call additional
  evidence, or to reconsider what evidence should be called in the light of the Court’s
  declaration.
      The inquest arises from the capsize of the vehicle ferry “Herald of Free
  Enterprise” off Zeebrugge on March 6, 1987 and the huge loss of life, both of
  passengers and crew, to which that tragic disaster gave rise. Nearly 200 lives were
  lost, causing widespread grief, and the facts of the disaster are etched not only on
  the recollections of all who were involved, directly or indirectly, but on the
 consciousness of the nation as a whole.
     Very shortly after the disaster the Secretary of State for Trade ordered a formal
 investigation under section 55 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1970. Sheen J. sitting
 with Assessors, was appointed to conduct it. There was a long, comprehensive and
 well publicised investigation culminating in a full report and recommendations
•published in July of this year.
     The investigation found that the immediate cause of the vessel’s loss was that she
 sailed with her bow doors open trimmed by the head, ie . with her nose down. The
 manoeuvre in which she engaged led to the entry of water into the vehicle deck,
 the heavy listing of the vessel and her speedy capsize.
     Sheen J. criticised a number of individuals who had failed to perform their duty,
 in particular those responsible for failing to close the bow doors, failing to see that
 the doors were closed and sailing without knowing that the doors were closed. He
 expressed his criticisms in strong terms. The vessel was owned and operated by
Townsend Car Ferries Ltd., and that company also was the subject of severe
criticism.
     It is right that I should refer to the terms in which Sheen J. expressed those
criticisms. In paragraph 14.1 of his report he said this:
       “At first sight the faults which led to this disaster were the aforesaid errors of
      omission on the part of the Master, the Chief Officer and the assistant bosun,
      and also the failure by Captain Kirby to issue and enforce dear orders. But a
      full investigation into the circumstances of the disaster leads inexorably to the
      conclusion that the underlying or cardinal faults lay higher up in the Company.
      The Board of Directors did not appreciate their responsibility for the safe
      management of their ships. They did not apply their minds to the question:
      What orders should be given for the safety of our ships? The Directors did not
      have any proper comprehension of what their duties were. There appears to
      have been a lack of thought about the way in which the HERALD ought to
      have been organised for the Dover/Zeebrugge run. All concerned in
      management, from the members of the Board of Directors down to the junior
      superintendents, were guilty of fault in that all must be regarded as sharing
      responsibility for the failure of management. From top to bottom the body
      corporate was infected with the disease of sloppiness. This became particularly
      apparent from the evidence of Mr. A. P. Young, who was the Operations
      Director and Mr. W. J. Ayers, who was Technical Director. As will become
      apparent from later passages in this Report, the Court was singularly
      unimpressed by both these gentlemen. The failure on the part of the shore
                                      R. v. H.M. C oroner       for   E ast K ent    13
Q.B.D.
    management to give proper and clear directions was a contributory cause of
    the disaster. This is a serious finding which must be explained in some detail.
   The report then goes into very considerable detail and in the course of the
p n ^ n , " K g three* points « S ie d on as bring
pointed out that the company and its representatives [ailed to grveJ * ™ *
consideration to a proposal that lights should be fitted on the bndge of **
which would inform the Master whether the bow doors and, for thattratter the
stem doors were closed or not. Such a warning system, if duly heeded by the
Master, would have prevented this disaster. This was a suggestion which was made
but seems unhappily to have been the subject of facetious comment.
   Secondly, attention is drawn to the failure of the company and ‘“ reprMentatms
to report and collate information relating to previous incidents when vesseb; haa
sailed with their doors open. It appears that there were five or six such undents
between October 1983 and February 1987. Had knowledge of
incidents been appreciated it should have alerted the officers of the company to^th
risk of disaster, but it appears that there was no person within the company who
ever knew of all the incidents.
   Thirdly, attention is drawn to the lack of any proper system within the company
 to ensure that the vessels were operated in accordance with the highest standar
 safety It is rightly urged upon us that where the result of an unsafe system is liab e
 to be so grave, the onus on a company to ensure safe operation is correspondingly

W|At the very end of his report. Sheen J. answered the                     «***?
investigation by the Secretary of State. Question 3 was in t h e s e t e ^ . Wm the
capsize of the ‘Herald of Free Enterprise’ caused or contributed to by the fault of
anvMPerson or persons and, if so, whom and in what respect?” The answer given
Z ’Z S Z S Z Z * . by tbe’fcute of the
listed Then: “4. Townsend Car Ferries Limited at all levels from th e Board of
Directors through the managers of the Marine Department down to thei Junior
Superintendents. As to the respects in which each of the ab o v e-n am ed was guilty
 causative fault, see Report.”                                                         _n
    One might suppose that one Inquiry of this m ag n itu d e, even into a
 this scale, would be enough but the law required Her Majesty s Corwwfor]East
 Kent to conduct an inquest with a jury pursuant to section :i of                     A
 1887. It was the coroner’s duty to ascertain in each case who the deceased as
 how, when and where the deceased came by his or her death. __
    This inquest was very different from most inquests, both becaiiseof thehuge
 n u m ^ r of deceased persons with whom it was concerned and also b ecause of the
  mass of material relating to the incident, particularly following; the «
 J. But, as with any other inquest, its conduct was in the hands ^                ‘=?™n^
  whose duty was to conduct an inquisition and not an adversarial tnal. H
  S S L ahuge mass of material in order to d e t e r m i n e , m accorda n t *..h t e <tay
  under section 4 of the 1887 Act, whom he thought it expedient to examine. He also
  had to bear in mind that at the conclusion of the hearing the jury
  give a verdict and certify who the deceased was and how, when and where the
  deceased came by his or her death.                                                    ..
    The evidence which we have seen suggests to me that this » ron^              abo
  task with great conscientiousness and assiduity. After a formal
  inquest at an earlier date the substantive opening of the mq                    carefully
  began on September 7. 1987. n>« <x»roner then delivered . ^            M
  constructed opening address to the jury, telling them of the
  14                                                             (1989) 88 C r.A p p .R .
  their functions and the whole background to the harrowing task which they had
  joindy to cany out. It could not be suggested that a speech on this scale would be
  suitable in other than exceptional cases, but on this particular occasion it was no
  doubt helpful for the juiy to be given such a compendious introduction to their
  task.
     It is not, I think, necessary to go in great detail into the opening address of the
  coroner but I should draw attention to what he said on p. 76 of the transcript of his
  address. He said this:
         “Another potential verdict you will have to consider in due course, and
         perhaps most controversially, is the verdict of unlawful killing. The notes,
        again they are not part of the law, suggest that in the case of murder]
        manslaughter or infanticide, the following form be adopted, ‘so and so was
        killed unlawfully.’ Members of the jury, again I think we can eliminate the
        infanticide and almost certainly murder from this consideration but the
        manslaughter will require more detailed consideration. I shall be directing you
        on the subject of manslaughter leading to a Coroner’s verdict of ‘killed
        unlawfully’ in due course but perhaps I need to introduce the subject now by
       saying three things and they are very important: (i) You will remember that if
        you were to decide upon such a verdict, no individual should be named as
       having been responsible, (ii) Secondly, to arrive at a verdict of unlawful killing
       you need to be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt that the act or omission
       of an individual caused substantially one or more of the deaths and that that
       individual was guilty of gross negligence. By this I mean that he did or omitted
       to do something which created an obvious and serious risk of physical injury;
       and that this was done without having given any thought to the possibility of
       the risk or that whoever did or omitted to do the thing recognised the risk and
       nevertheless decided to take it. (iii) The third thing that I wish to say at this
       stage is that although it is possible for several persons to be guilty individually
       of manslaughter, it is not permissible to aggregate several acts of neglect by
       different persons, so as to have gross negligence by a process of aggregation.
       That is a very important point of law, Members of the Jury, which I will
       emphasise again in due course.”
    No criticism is I think made of what the coroner said about manslaughter as
 against a personal defendant, but criticism has been made before us as to what he
 said about aggregation. The point has been made that a company can be guilty of
 manslaughter as well as an individual.
   After the coroner’s opening address the Inquest proceeded. A very large number
 of witnesses were called and a very large number of proofs of written evidence
 were read to the jury. So matters continued until September 17 when Sir David
Napley, on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. de Rohan, made submissions to the coroner.
   The burden of his submission was that the coroner should call five witnesses (who
were named and identified) belonging to the management of the owning and
operating company. Sir David submitted to the coroner that a corporation can be
guilty of manslaughter, and he referred to a body of authority—albeit somewhat
inconclusive—to that effect. He further urged that the coroner should investigate in
evidence the responsibility of senior management of the company in order to leave
to the jury the question whether the company itself was guilty of manslaughter, or
unlawful killing. He drew the attention of the coroner to, and relied on, evidence in
Sheen J.’s report. He further urged that different acts all contributing to a death
can each found an indictment for manslaughter against the company. Mr. Forrest
on behalf of other parties adopted and elaborated those submissions.
       Q.B.D.
                                                   R. v. H.M. C o r o n e r f o r E a s t K e n t   15
          T he coroner considered the m atter and gave a ruling on Seotem ber IS
       the*other°three of who<^ k d V° ° f Wh°v? ^ " 0t g‘VCn evidence t0 Sheen J.' and
       mnscript. T1k coroner reached fo S                                            °f
                                     of roanslaughter against the live named M v S !
                    S ^ n Z
      f_linJ        1™a,y. «e ruledT that, there
                                           S “ “ “ mP“ y-J“ m ° ' “ Uw * ta c ta e d fo r
                                                 was no evidence of conduct which would
      found a charge of manslaughter against the company even if such a crime could **•




      a ^ g a d o ? ^                tfK earb' r °CCMOn “ d             to          <«eodl with the

  a ttS 'tiO T ^ bS r*«rNt ; l rSn        Napl' y. wro" *° the         drawing his
              t, fiirther authority on the question whether manslaughter could be
                  a corporation. H e authority referred ,o was a c a i S e ? « th!




  = 5 S 5 ^ ^ ^ --£ -3
  ^            ^
                                                                                 k       SS
                         failed on its facts, and neither o f those distinguished counsel nor the
 J W S & S K E * «—                                               -

 ^ ^ m ^ M n Heal ! d e" l T d' “ $h0,, n° ti“ - <h' Coroner replied by a letter
 t h e ^ of « 5 j l '       1 “ "V?            “ y°“     dewing my attention to
 uie rase at Northern Strip Mining Construction Co. Ltd. (unreported 19561 It is




 sss? A t ^ h ? ! ? re      Uquesutl0n of cofporate m anslaughter did not in any ev ent^rise ”
                                                                                               s
   At the tune when that letter was written, on September 23, 3^0            had
gi en evidence orally and 400 statements had been read to the iurv The matiw » »
W tTTJ t ry ’ no
Iv.£.
              ! :doubt
                  s r mrooren°elaborate
                               r tr »■fbut to substantially the sam e effect a«
^ ' ° rf„ » < / * ■ ■ f-mher ruling in these tenrn: “As I ha.e L ^    p” “
brain n l , h ‘ '     CCna          the mms rta ma* *“ fou"d « the hands and
                    iTSZLSgV*-' ? ad tt"                    ^     b“ n’ “        I-'   G,°™W
ZSfiSiXS? °pen,tfK
be a whrtii !vrt
                             ^ teT^r^go ££
                 at full speed, when trimmed by the head that would



^ d e n ^ r ^ o f s r r ££ ?x5#j?rs
   16                                                            (1989) 88 C r.A p p .R .
     previous occasion, when -I gave these rulings, and I have now also considered the
     evidence given by one former-director to this inquest, and I can see nothing in any
     of that evidence to support such a suggestion. It accordingly seems to me to be
     irrelevant to the issues before the jury. Quite apart from anything else, a failure to
     act would only ground manslaughter if it was that person’s duty to act. The jury
     would need evidence of the extent of the duties of each of the directors concerned.
     It would also need evidence of the powers which each director had to take action.
     And, for example, would he have had to persuade the whole Board, or some other
    director, to agree with the proposal. It is obvious, as a matter of ordinary common
    sense, that the whole subject goes far beyond the proper scope of an Inquest,
    w hich is essentially a fact finding and not a fault finding enquiry. For these reasons
    I intend to tell the jury that they are not concerned with corporate manslaughter,
    whether it exists or not, and that in this inquest, when considering the possible
    verdict of unlawful killing, they are only concerned with the acts or omissions of
    those individuals who could be said to have caused the deaths."
       The arguments which were deployed and elaborated before the coroner have, in
   wbstance, been repeated with great cogency and skill before us. The first question
   is whether a corporation can be indicted for manslaughter. The coroner originally
   ruled that it could not. In the course of argument in this Court we indicated at an
   early stage that we were prepared to assume for the purposes of this hearing that it
   could. As a result the question has not been fully argued and I have not found it
   neoessaiy to reach a final conclusion. I am, however, tentatively of opinion that on
   appropriate facts the mens rea required for manslaughter can be established against
   * c?^F?ration- 1 see no reason in principle why such a charge should not be
   established. I am therefore tentatively of opinion that the coroner’s original ruling
  was wrong, and indeed I would need considerable persuasion to reach the
  conclusion that it was correct.
      But that is not the end of the matter because the coroner dearly adhered to his
  substantial ruling even on the assumption that a company could in principle be
  guilty of manslaughter. The coroner made it dear that he was of opinion that the
  evidence which he had considered was not capable of supporting the condusion that
  those who represented the directing mind and will of the company and controlled
 what it did had been guilty of conduct amounting to manslaughter.
      I am not persuaded that that is a condusion which is or may be wrong. Nothing
 was, in my judgment, said by Sheen J. or by way of concession before him which
 undermines that conclusion. It is important to bear in mind an important distinction.
 A company may be vicariously liable for the negligent acts and omissions of its
 servants and agents, but for a company to be criminally liable for manslaughter—on
 the assumption I am making that such a crime exists—it is required that the mens
 rea and the actus reus of manslaughter should be established not against those who
 acted for or in the name of the company but against those who were to be
identified as the embodiment of the company itself. The coroner formed the view
that there was no such case fit to be left to the jury against this company. I see no
reason to disagree. I would add that I see no sustainable case in manslaughter
against the directors who are named either.
     I do not think the aggregation argument assists the applicants. Whether the
defendant is a corporation or a personal defendant, the ingredients of manslaughter
must be established by proving the necessary mens rea and actus reus of
manslaughter against it of him by evidence properly to be relied on against it or
       \A < A Sf against a Personal defendant cannot be fortified by evidence against
another defendant. The case against a corporation can only be made by evidence
 C.A.                                 R. v. H.M. C oroner      for   E ast K ent     17

  properly addressed to showing guilt on the part of the corporation as such. On the
  main substance of his ruling I am not persuaded that the coroner erred.
     Indeed, on the materials I have seen I would reach that conclusion even if the
  inquest had been concluded. But I reach the conclusion with some relief given that
  the Inquest is in progress and that the coroner is in the course of summing-up.
     I accept that in exceptional cases -the Court will intervene by way of judicial
 review while a proceeding is in progress. If intervention were necessary to prevent
 this inquest having to be conducted all over again because of legal or procedural
 error, it might very well be such an exceptional case. But just as the Court of
 Appeal is very slow to interfere in the conduct of a trial proceeding before a judge,
 so this court should, in my judgment, be very reluctant to intervene in the conduct
 of an inquest in train before a coroner. The fact that it is an inquest perhaps makes
 the argument even stronger because the coroner is by law an inquisitor; the
 witnesses called are those whom he, under the statute, thinks it expedient to
examine, and he is very much the master of his own procedure.
    These considerations are fortified here because the coroner has immersed himself
in a huge mass of material which the court has not seen. We have scarcely glimpsed
the tip of the iceberg of evidence with which he is familiar. Very great weight
therefore should be given to his judgment, although on questions of law he is of
course exercising a judgment, not a discrection.
    It is his duty to guide the jury to a correct verdict but his responsibility is to
conduct a fact-finding exercise, not to apportion blame and not to decide civil
liability. In a case such as this the chain of causation may be of almost infinite
length. The coroner had to break it somewhere to keep his enquiry within tolerable
bounds. He broke it at what I judge to be a reasonable and sustainable point,
particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public inquiry which had already been
conducted by Sheen J.
   Those are my reasons for the conclusion announced at the end of yesterday’s
hearing that leave to move for judicial review should not be given.
  MANN J.: I agree with the reasons given by Bingham L J. Like Bingham L J., I
am of the view that a body corporate can in appropriate circumstances be guilty of
a crime of manslaughter, but would not wish to decide the matter on an application
for leave to move.
  KENNEDY J.: I agree.
                                                             Applications refused.
 Solicitors: Pannone Napier, for the applicants Spooner and Reynolds. Kingsley
Napley for the applicants de Rohan. Sharpe Pritchard & Co. agents for W. G.
Hop kin, Maidstone for the Coroner.
 Ail England Law Reports 31st March 1981                                                                           (England Law Reports 7th April 1981




                                                                                                                                                                R v Caldwell
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            961
 960                                  All England Law Reports                             [1981] 1 All ER

 have been quite content with planning permission for the second bungalow, I am bound
 to say that I am at a loss to understand why planning permission for a building of the
                                                                                                                                                   R v C aldwell
 original bungalow design was granted. Counsel for the Secretary o f State, with his usual
 candour, confessed that he was equally surprised. It does suggest that there was sortie ^ w                         " RCE, LORD D . L O C K , LORD EDMUWD-DAV.ES, LORO KEITH O F K1NKEL AN D LORO
 error in reasoning by the person responsible for m aking the decision of the Secretary of
 State in this case.
                                                                                                    J J th , n t h DECEMBER 1 9 SO, 19 t h MARCH 1981
    I also find it difficult to understand tlve reference that the decision should be granted
 on the appeals in agreement with the view taken by the inspector. It is true that the
 inspector did recommend that planning permission should be granted but it is reasonably
clear that he only did so because o f his erroneous conclusion that the original permission
 was still in existence. The reference by the inspector to largely undeveloped country and !971, s l(j)-
 intensification of residential development and other applications seems clearly to indicate                                                       .,          to m - ^ v e r t y w ith i n te n t to e n d a n g e r life or being
 that the inspector was adverse to the granting of planning permission but Yor the pre.
existing permission which he regarded as still valid.                                                ^ C r im in a l D a m a g e A c t 1 9 7 * . s
    Next it is to be noted that the Secretary of State says that the history is 'a vitally material
consideration’. The reference to history m ust be because of the expired planning                                             l»d done « ™ . 0 * f a                                           “ ' X T ” ''                       :«
permission; as I have indicated such an expired planning permission can be a relevant L d a q u a r r e l w i t h t h e o w n e r , g o t d r u n k a n d s e t f i r e , t c * e h « e | m r e v e r * ^ ^ ^
consideration but I find it very difficult to see how it could ever be regarded in the Jiscovered and put out befOTC^ny scnous amag                                                  jnd icted on two counts of arson
context of this case as being 'a vitally material consideration'. While the weight to be i„ the hotel at the time was injured. The respondent w a s.                                            ^       ^             ^            [o
given to a particular consideration is for the Secretary o f State such a conclusion indicates
                                                                                                      unders      .(.)  and    (2^   o f .
                                                                                                                                         ‘ he   C“
that either the person responsible for m aking the decision on behalf o f the Secretary of the lesser charge of m te ,to n a lly c>r r e d d » l y * a  ^ l e S  y     destroying       or   dam     aging      the    property    of
                                                                                                                                                                                             ^           ^            ^        $ i(a)
State misdirected himself, or he was acting perversely. In either event his decision was
                                                                                                      another, contrary to s 1(1), but p                       g                  being reckless whether life would
wrong in law. It is therefore not necessary for m e to decide which is the appropriate label of damaging property w ith m te n t to ^ a n g e r W e or b e in g re ^                                    ^                    ^     he
to apply. I suspect, however, that the person responsible for the decision has failed to be endangered. He claimed that he                                                                                   crossed his mind.
appreciate the distinction between a situation where there is an existing planning naight be endangering the lives o f the people ,n the                                                                    ^ ^^               under
permission which is still valid, and the position where there was a form er planning The trial judge directed the jury that run e                                                   Appeal allowed the appeal on the
permission which is no longer valid because it became tim e expired. I say this because s ,(,) and he was convicted. On appeal, the C o u n ^ A p p e 1 alio                                                                      ,.fe
the very words ‘vitally material consideration’ appear in Spackman v Secretary of Statefor ground that the mental element of 1intention 0 ” e " e ^ « * 8 ^ ^
the Environment [ 1977] 1 All ER 2.57 at 2.61 per Willis J. In Spackman it was a previous referred to in s i(i)(b) was a m atter o sp                                       dient of the offence, and drunkenness
planning permission which was still in existence, which Willis J regarded as a ‘vitally
material consideration’.
   I was referred to Spackman’s case by counsel for the applicants because I was asked on
behalf o f the applicants if the m atter was going back to the Secretary o f State to indicate
the Secretary of State’s approach to the question o f the trenches was wrong, bearing in
m ind that decision. I do not, I am afraid, agree. As far as the trenches are concerned, it
seems to m e that the Secretary of State’s decision was a perfectly proper one, and, indeed,
                                                                                                         heedless of the possible harmful                                  harm ful consequences flowing from an
probably the only possible one, bearing in m ind the facts o f this case. Spackman’s case is             encompassed both a decision to lgnor                                              failure to give any thought to
quite different because the trenches which were dug in the wrong position were intended
                                                                                                         act which the accused had ^ ° g nis^ ^ ^ ^ s ®                              °any though? were given to the
for the house for which permission had been given, and not a property of different                        whether there was any risk in circu                                 Accordingly the restricted form of
design.
                                                                                                          matter, it would be ob^ ° " S                              crimes 0f malice and subjective or objective
   It follows that I quash the Secretary o f State’s decision to grant planning permission for            recklessness which formed                   g            r „ r m i n i n e the issue o f recklessness under the
both bungalows and also quash his decision to grant permission for the retention of the                   tests of recklessness were not relevant t                               o                    or damaging property
hut.                                                                                                       I97, Act. Thus a person was gu ^ of
                                                                                                           belonging to another, contrary to s i( )                       ’ destroyed or damaged and (b) when he
Decision of the Secretary of State quashed.                                                                created an obvious risk that property *                            ^ possibility o f there being any such
                                                                                                            committed the act he either ga,ve.nothought t o c h e ^ * J nevmheless hf d g o n e on
Solicitors: Sherwood & Co (for the appellants); Treasury Solicitor; Francis ir Parkes, Reading              risk or, having recognised tha                             of recklessly endangering the life o f another
(for the second respondents).                                                                               [0 com m it the act. And a person was gu.lty of reck esslye:                             g                  ^ $^        ,f (a)

                                                                                K Mydeen Esq          Barrister.




                                                                                                                         ti   Section i is set out ai p 863 <?/, post
                                                                                                                                                           Reports 1th April 1981
                                                                                                                                       I England Law
           All E n g la n d Law Reports 31st March 1981

il                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    961
i ..*
                                                                                                                                                                                                      r   v Caldwell
! ■* ' *
b-                                                        All England L aw Reports                  [1981] 1 All El
           960
                                                                                                                                                                                                r     v Caldwell                                                                            "   -- r l-
           have been q u ite content w ith planning perm ission for th e second b ung alow I am bouru
           w say t S t T a m at a ' L to understand w h y plan n in g perm ission for a b u ild ing o f the                            fA                                                                                  _ , , T H O F K1NK EL A N D LOR D
           original bungalow design was granted. Counsel for th e Secretary o f State, w ith his usual
              n Z r       onfessed th at he w<S equally surprised. It does suggest th at there was some:                               §             b              £             2              £          »          .        “*
           e r i w i ^ r e ^ ^ ^ g by^the person responsible for m a k in g the decision o f th e Secretary of                         M
                                                                                                                                                SKILL
                                                                                                                                                ^ l t h       DEC EM BER . 9 8 o . > 9 * M AR C H 1 9 « »                                              ^                     ^


           StT a iir f i n d T t Sdifficult to understand the reference th a t th e decision should be granted                         ■    T                                      to property - Reefed“ ness              whether proper y                j    Damage Act
           on th ^ a o p e a ls in agreem ent w ith the view taken by th e inspector It is tru e that the |                                                                                                     ° f druntenne5S ava,labl -
           insDector^dW reco m m en d that planning perm ission should be granted b u t it is reasonably!
           cleaTthat he only did so because o f his erroneous conclusion th at the original permission J
           was still in existence T he reference by the inspector to largely undeveloped country and j
           ^ren sific atio n p r e s id e n tia l developm ent and oth er applications seems clearly to indicate                                                                   “ rrop? y          "
           ; S S p L o r was adverse to the g rantin g o f p la n n in g perm ission b u t for the pre-
                                                                                                                                           ^Criminal Damage Act , 9 7 *. * ^                                                                  ^ ^   result o f w hich he

                                                                                                                                           - The resp ond ed h a d ^ d < ^ ^ m^ ^ ° ^ ^ ° ^ j e^ t^ ^ o ^ h e ^ h « e U n
            consideration         T he reference to history m ust be because o f th e expired planning                         ^
            D ei-m ission- as I have indicated such an expired p lan n in g perm ission can be a relevant                        «                                                                                                                                                              '   W-
                                                                                                                                                S o v p a n d ' p u t out
                   ,4 r' n Knr I find it verv difficult to see how it could ever be regarded in the                            ^
            COI7 t er ? f '? his cas as being a Vitally m aterial consideration’. W hile the w eight to be                     ;•>
            g ^ v en to ° particular consideration is for the Secretary o f State such a cone
                  either th e p e n » n                                                    ^ e v e n t h i s d e c is io n ^       '
             State m isd.rected h . m ^ or he w - - t m g p e ^                      y     w hich is th e appropriate label
                                                                                                                                                  of d am aging ProPe“ yl    d th at h e was so d ru n k at th e t        crossed his m ind .
                                                                                                                                                . fee endangered. H e claim ed t ^ ^ ^ ^                the hotel h a d ^ ^ ^ ^       un
             3         'H u s J   h S                      S   T   J n o n responsible for the decision has failed to
             to apply,    suspect                                     a ^ituation w here there is an existing planning                           m ight be endan geri g                                    hat drunkenness was no              , h app eal o n the
             appreciate the: dist                                          position w here there was a fo rm er p lanning e                 e The trial jud g e directed he ju ry th                                 Court o f Appeal a U o w e d ^ e ^        ^

                                                                                                                                                  ground that the m                                             o f speclfic inten t 8    g                    and d ru n k e nness




                                                                                                                                                   used in a crim inal statute                         ^ ^      dictionary S£nse o f m e a n in g          ^      ^      ^       term
                                                                                                                                                   of legal art b u t m tV\ ;v? h a r m fu l consequences o f o n         e nces flowing from an
                                                                                                                                                   heedless o f the possible:       ^        ^ g risk o f ha m ful conseq^ ^       any th o u g h t to
                                                                                                                                                    encompassed b o th                             recognised as existing and also        h o u „ h t were given to the
                                                                                                                                                 g act w hich the accused                             ^ d r c u m s tances w here, if any     ^      restricted fo rm of

               ritt™                           for   which permission   tad been g i.c n . and n o, • P W       * -                                 w h e th e r     th ere was any                              there was. According y,
                                                                                                                                                     m atter, it ''w h ic h f o r i M d 'a n ^ n g r e d i e n ^ f ^ '™ ^ o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,.    ive o r objective
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r e c k l e ^ n e ^ u n d e r the

                                                                                                                                                        tests ofSrecklessness ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ g u i l t y ^ f ^ e c S e s s l y des^                  ^   c° ^ S e d a^act" w h L h

                hut.                                                                                                                               /» X g l n g t o ^ o t h e ^ o ^

                Decision of the Secretary
                                        j of State quashed.
                JL /C C lO ll'» l VJ n i l ,       ±
                                                                                                                                                         risk or, having recognised t h a u n                                   r£ckl£ssly en d angering t                         ,f (a)
                Solicitors: Sherwood dr Co (for [he appellants); Treasury Soiicilor; Francis O ' Partes, Reading
                (for the second respondents).
                                                                                                K M ydeen Esq       Barrister.              I       I



                                                                                                                                                          „     s e c t i o n , is set   out   a, P 8 6 3 e.f, post
All England Law Reports 7th April 1981
                                                                                                               All England Law Reports 7th April 1981




962                                  All England Law Reports                     [1981]1 All ER                HL
                                                                                                                                               R v Caldwell (Lord Wilberforce)                                  gg3

life o f another m ig h t be endangered. It followed, therefore, th at, w h ere a person was            t h a t cou n t b u t im nosed a sentence                        •
accused o f an offence un d er s 1 o f th e 1971 Act and th e charge was fram ed so as to charge . refused an application by the C row n for leave                                                   \ T he C° Urt
th e person only w ith intending to destroy o r dam age th e property o f a n o th er u n d er s i(i) 9 certified, u n d e r s 11(2! o f th e rvim in o l a        14      F fi.      , r House o f Lords b u t
o r in ten d in g by the destruction or dan/age o f property to e n d an g er th e life o f anothe      o f general publ L S o r t n e e Z                                                            P° 'm ° f laW
u n d e r s 1(2), evidence o f self-induced intoxication could be relevant to th e accused’s            in d u ced                                                                   ? hether eVidence o f self-
defence; but, w here th e charge was, o r included, a reference to th e accused’s being                th e life o f an o th er an d (ii) w hether th e d e f e n d \ ^     e defendant: (mended 1:0 en danger
reckless w h eth er property belonging to anoth er w ould be destroyed o r dam aged under               w o u ld be end angered w ithin the m e a n in o f " T v l w -                      er t *le    o f ano ther
s , ( , ) or being reckless w h eth er The life o f another w ou ld be en d ang ered by the m H ouse o f L o r d s g a T e t h ^                                      '^   f ^ W ‘ A- O " 3rd July the
destruction o r dam age o f property un der s 1(2), evidence o f self-induced intoxication was j Lord D iplock.                                                      '        cts afe set o u t in the o pinion o f
irrelevant. Accordingly, it was irrelevant that th e respondent had failed to give any
th o u g h t to th e risk o f endangering the lives o f residents in th e hotel because o f his self-  Neil Denison QC and Kay Blundell-Jones for th e Crow n
induced intoxication. Since, however, it m ad e no practical difference to th e respondent             Martin Thomas QC and David Thomas for the respondent
w h e th e r th e appeal were dismissed o r not, the appeal w o u ld be dismissed (Lord
W ilberforce and Lord Edmund-Davies concurring in dism issing th e appeal because they - T heir Lordships took tim e for consideration
agreed w ith the C ourt o f Appeal) (see p 963 b c, p 964 a to c, p 966 e f p 967 a b a n d j to
p 968 e, p 972 b and g and p 973 c to e, post).                                                              19th M arch. The following opinions w ere delivered
  Director of Public Prosecutions v Majewski [ 1976] 2 All ER 142 applied.
  K v Briggs[1977] 1 All ER 475, R v Parker [1977] 2 All ER 37, R v             Stephenson [1979] 2          L O R D W I L B E R F O R C E My Lords, I w ould dismiss the anneal ,nA             u
AH ER , I 9 8 and R v Orpin [ i 9 8o] 2 AH ER 32, overru.ed.                                                 certified questions as suggested J y m y noble and f e a t " friend ^ L m u n d X ie f
N                                                                                                     ^ LQ
For the offence o f destroying o r dam aging property, see 11 H alsb u ry ’s Laws (4 th Edn)                resp o n d en t had been d ^ n g w j r k f o A t a p r o ^                          / J r e s i m p k Th^
Pa - 1306. and for cases on the subject, see ,5 Digest (Reissue) ,4 3 9 -1 4 4 0 . - , 6 9 0 -              that h e had a grievance agfinst the p r o p r L T O n e ^

    For the Crim inal Dam age Act 1971, s 1, see 41 H alsbury’s Statutes (3rd Edn) 409.                     fire to th e hotel, in w h k h w m e ^ n g^esw were U vin'raTthe tim e ^ e T " T ^          *     h*"8


C a s e s r e f e r r e d t o i n o p in i o n s                                                     1 and t h e f l a m t s w e r e " e l T t f n g S S i r i d T
Director of Public Prosecutions v Majewski [1976] 2 All ER 142, [1 977 ] AC 443 , [1976] 2 said th a t he was so d r u n k at the tim e that the th o u g h t rhar                       L       1trl
   W LR 623, . 4 0 JP 3 - 5, 62 Cr App R 262, H L ; affg [ - 975 ] 3 All ER 296, [ .9 7 7 ] AC 443 , hotel whose lives m ig h t be e n d a ^ ' e d      iw      i o n t V ^ n ™ 18       ^ ^
   [ i 975 ] 3 W LR 401, 139 JP 760, 62 Cr A pp R 5, CA, 14(1) Digest (Reissue) 54, 258.                  H e was indicted at*'the C entnd ( K i l l S o ^
Lederer v Hitchins [1961] WAR 99.                                                                      (2) respectively o f the Criminal n am aoi. a,-, o           tu       •      rson under s 1(1) and
R v Briggs [1977] 1 All ER 475, [1977] 1 W LR 605, 63 C r A pp R 215, CA, 15 Digest |                                                                 8     1971 . T hat section reads as follows:
   (Reissue) 440, 12,691.                                                                                  y ' . Person w ho w ithout lawful excuse destroys o r damages any property
R v Cunningham [1957] 2 All ER 412, [1957] 2 QB 396, [1957] 3 W L R 76, 121 JP 451, 41                        e o n g i n g to another intending-to destroy o r dam age any such property o r being
   C r A pp R 155, CCA, 15 Digest (Reissue) 1198, 10,292.                                                    reckless as to w heth er any such pro p erty w ould be destroyed o r dam aged shall be
R v O ’Driscoll (1977) 65 Cr App R 50, CA, Digest (Cont Vol E) 126, 251 a.                                             0 an °      e.
R v Orpin [1980] 2 All ER 321, [1980] 1 W LR 1050, 70 Cr A pp R 306, CA.                                        J 2)        Person w ho w ith o u t lawful excuse destroys o r damages any property
R v Parker [ 1977] 2 All ER 37, [1977] 1 W LR 600, 63 C r A pp R 211, CA, 15 Digest 1                       w et er bel° n g in g to him self o r anoth er— (a) in ten ding to destroy o r dam age any
   (Reissue) 1440, 12,692.                                                                                  p ro p erty o r b eing reckless as to w h e th e r any property would be destroyed or
R VStephenson [1979] 2 All ER 1198, [1979] QB 695, [1 979 ] 3 W L R 193, 143 JP 592 , 69                      am aged; and (b) intending by the destruction o r dam age to endanger the life o f
   C r A pp R 213, CA, Digest (Cont Vol E) 161, 12,692a.                                             ;      a n ° t er ° r being reckless as to w h e th e r the life o f another would be thereby
R V Venna [1975] 3 All ER 788, [1976] QB 421, [1 975 ] 3 W LR 737, 140 JP 31, 61 C r App j                  en dan g ered ; shall be guilty o f an offence.                                             1
    R 31 o, CA, 15 Digest (Reissue) 1175, 9993 -                                                        ;        by ^     ^                                   SeCd° n ^ deStr0yinS o r d a ™ g i n g property


O n 24th May 1979 the respondent, Jam es Caldwell, was convicted at th e Central Crim inal i inten t to e n d an g er the life o T a n o t h e r ^ r e ^                                      requires
C o u rt before Miss Recorder S outhw orth QC and a jury, o n two co unts o f arson, nam ely j be en d angered. To this count the respondent pleaded no t guilty He r e l" d
w ith o u t lawful excuse dam aging the property o f another in te n d in g to dam age it or t induced drunk en n ess as a defence o n the g ro u n d that the                     Z T l,
bein g reckless w hether it w ould be dam aged and inten d in g to e n d an g er the life o f ; o f 'specific in te n t’ in the sense in which rhar evnrescin                 a ■        P w a s one
              V.             11 7 ' ,        7r r
                                         , ,life          I           u    ;                  m  ; U  F                  r    ° sense m
                                                                                                                                  " ln w hlch
                                                                                                                                         wWch     th at  expression    was used in speeches in this
              being reckless w h eth er the life o f an oth er w ould be endangered, contrary to j House in Director of Public Prosecutions v Majewskir i 9761 2 All FR             r      iA r
- -v -/       e Crim inal Dam age Act 1971 (count 1) and w ith o u t lawful excuse dam aging : C o u n t 2 contained the lesseroffence u n d e r s 1(1) to which the                  , w f a V 3'
p roperty o f another intending to dam age it o r being reckless w h e th e r it w ould be ,         The recorder directed the iurv that self-inHiirpH A            1,          en t pleaded guilty.
dam aged, contrary to s 1(1) o f the 1971 Act (count 2). He was sentenced to three years’ ! cou n t 1, an d the ju r y convicted him o n this cou n t T he^ecordeT L nK nced h i m ^ h ^
im p riso n m en t on count 1, no sentence being passed on count 2. He appealed to t h e ! years’ im p ris o n m e n t o n count 1 b u t passed no sentence on m im r 7            W        «-       C
C o u rt o f Appeal, C rim inal Division (Lord W idgery CJ, Eveleigh LJ an d O ’C o n n o r J), w hich he had pleaded guilty. O n appeal the c L n o f A n l T l h H I             u "          ^ W
w hich allowed his appeal on count 1 on 31st March 1980 and q uashed his conviction on j the j u r y as to the effect o f self-induced d ru n k en n ess on th              h              ection t0
                                                                                                                                                                                       count 1 was
All England Law Reports 7th April 1981                                                                   All England Law Reports 7th April 1981




964                                  All England Law Reports                  [1981] 1 All ER            HL                                 R v Caldwell (Lord Diplock)                                   965

w rong. T hey set aside the conviction on that count; b u t left the sentence o f three years’           m a tte r in p o in t in R v Cunningham); b u t it was n o t directed to and consequently has no
im p ris o n m e n t unchan ged as they considered it to be an appropriate sentence on count             bearing on th e m ean in g o f the adjective ‘reckless’ in s i o f the C rim inal Dam age Act
2. So it was only a Pyrrhic victory for th e respondent; b u t it left the law on criminal               1971. To use it for that purpose can, in m y view, only be misleading.
dam ag e and d ru nkenn ess in a state o f som e confusion.                                                  My Lords, the restricted m ean in g that the C o u rt o f Appeal in R v Cunningham had
   T he q uestion o f law certified for the opinion o f this House was:                                  placed on the adverb ‘m aliciously’ in the Malicious Dam age Act 1861 in cases w here the
                                                                                                         prosecution did not rely on an actual intention o f the accused to cause the dam age that
          ‘W h e th e r evidence o f self-induced intoxication can be relevant to the following
                                                                                                         was in fact do ne called for a m eticulous analysis by the ju r y o f the th oug hts th a t passed
      q u estion s— (a) W h ether the defendant intended to endanger the life o f an o th er; and
                                                                                                         th ro u g h the m in d o f the accused at or before the tim e he did the act that caused the
      (b) W h e th e r the defendant was reckless as to w h ether the life o f an oth er would be    b
                                                                                                         dam age, in o rder to see on w hich side o f a narro w dividin g line they fell. If it had crossed
      endan gered, w ithin the m eanin g o f Section 1(2)(b) o f the C rim inal Dam age Act
                                                                                                         his m in d that there was a risk that som eone’s p ro perty m ig h t be dam aged but, because
      1971.’
                                                                                                         his m in d was affected by rage or excitem ent or confused by drin k, he did n o t appreciate
    The q uestio n recognises that un d er s 1(2)(£>) there are two alternative states o f m in d as     the seriousness o f the risk or trusted that good luck w ould prevent its happening, this
respects en d a n g e rin g the life o f another, and that the existence o f either o f th e m on the    state o f m in d w ou ld a m o u n t to malice in the restricted m ean in g placed on that term by
part o f the accused is sufficient to constitute the m ens rea needed to convert the lesser c            the C o u rt o f Appeal; whereas if, for any o f these reasons, he did not even trouble to give
offence u n d e r s 1(1) into the graver offence under s 1(2). One is in tention that a                  his m in d to the question w h eth er there was any risk o f d am aging the property, this state
p articular th in g should happen in consequence o f the actus reus, viz that the life o f               o f m in d w o uld not suffice to m ak e him guilty o f an offence un d er the Malicious Dam age
a n o th er person should be endangered (this was not relied on by the Crown in the instant              Act 1861.
case). The o th e r is recklessness w hether that particular thin g should happen or not. The                 N eith er state o f m in d seems to m e to be less b lam ew o rth y than the other; b u t, if the
sam e d ic h o to m y o f m entes reae, intention and recklessness, is to be found th ro ug hout         difference betw een the tw o constituted the distinction betw een w hat does and what does
th e section: in sub-s (1) and para (a) o f sub-s (2) as well as in para (by, and ‘reckless’ as           not in legal theory am o u n t to a guilty state o f m in d for the purposes o f a statutory
descriptive o f a state o f m in d m u st be given the same m eaning in each o f th em .                 offence o f dam age to property, it w ould not be a practicable distinction for use in a trial
    M y Lords, the C rim inal Dam age Act 1971 replaced alm ost in their entirety the m any              by jury. T he only person w ho knows w hat the accused’s m ental processes were is the
and detailed provisions o f the Malicious Dam age Act 1861. Its purpose, as stated in its                accused him self, and probably no t even he can recall th e m accurately w hen the rage or
long title was to revise the law o f England and Wales as to offences o f dam age to                      excitem en t u n d e r w hich he acted has passed, or he has sobered up if he were un d er the
property. As the brevity o f the Act suggests, it m ust have been hoped that it w ould also               influence o f d rin k at the relevant time. If the accused gives evidence that because o f his
sim p lify th e law.                                                                                 g    rage, e x citem en t or d run kenness the risk o f particular h arm fu l consequences o f his acts
    In the 1861 Act, the word consistently used to describe the m ens rea that was a                      sim ply did n o t occur to h im , a ju ry would find it hard to be satisfied beyond reasonable
necessary e le m e n t in the m ultifarious offences that the Act created was ‘m aliciously’, a           d o u b t that his tru e m ental process was not that, b u t was the slightly different m ental
technical expression, not readily intelligible to juries, w hich became the subject o f                   process req u ired if one applies the restricted m e a n in g o f ‘being reckless as to w h eth er’
considerable judicial exegesis. This culm inated in a ju d g m e n t o f the C ourt o f Crim inal         so m e th in g w ould happen, adopted by the C ou rt o f Appeal in R v Cunningham.
Appeal in R v Cunningham [1957] 2 All ER 412 at 414, [1957] 2 QB 396 at 399 which                              My Lords, I can see no reason why P arliam ent w h en it decided to revise the law as to
approved, as an accurate statem ent o f the law, w hat had been said by Professor K enny in f             offences o f dam age to property should go o u t o f its way to perpetuate fine and
his O u tlin es o f C rim in al Law (1st Edn, 1902):                                                      im practicable distinctions such as these, betw een one m ental state and another, O ne j
         ‘. . . in any statutory definition o f a crim e “malice” m u st be taken ., , as requiring       w ould th in k that the sooner they were go t rid o f the better.
     eith er (i) an actual intention to do the particular kind o f h arm that in fact was done,                W h en cases un d er s 1(1) o f the new Act, in w hich the C ro w n ’s case was based on the
     or (ii) recklessness as to w h ether such h arm should occur or not (i.e. the accused has            accused h avin g been ‘reckless as to w h e th e r . . . p ro perty would be destroyed or dam aged ,
     foreseen th at the particular kind o f harm m ig h t be done, and yet has gone on to take             first cam e before the C ourt o f Appeal, the q uestion as to the m ean in g o f the expression
     th e risk o f i t ) . . . ’                                                                    9     ‘reckless’ in the context o f that subsection appears to have been treated as soluble sim ply
                                                                                                           by posing and answ ering what had by then, unfortunately, becom e an obsessive question
   My Lords, in this passage Professor Kenny was engaged in defining for the benefit o f                   a m o n g English lawyers: is the test o f recklessness subjective or objective? The first two
stud e n ts the m e a n in g o f ‘malice’ as a term o f art in criminal law. To do so he used              reported cases, in b o th o f which ju d g m en ts were given off the cuff, are R v Briggs [ 1977]
ord in ary E nglish words in their popular m eaning. A m ong the words he used was                          1 All ER 475, [1977] 1 W LR 605 and R v Parker [1977] 2 All ER 37. [ ' 977 ] 1 W LR
‘recklessness’, the n o u n derived from the adjective ‘reckless’, o f which the p opular or               600. Both classified the test o f recklessness as subjective. This led the court in R v Briggs
dictionary m e a n in g is ‘careless, regardless, or heedless o f the possible harm ful /j                 [1977] 1 All ER 475 at 477-47 8, [ 1977] 1 W L R 605 at 608 to say: ‘A m a n is reckless in
consequences o f on e’s acts’. It presupposes that, if tho u g h t were given to the m atter by            the sense requ ired w h en he carries out a deliberate act k n ow ing that there is som e risk
the d oer before the act was done, it would have been apparent to h im that there was a real               o f d am age resulting fro m that act b u t nevertheless continues in the perform ance o f that
risk o f its h aving the relevant harm ful consequences; but, granted this, recklessness                   act.’ This leaves over the question w hether the risk o f dam age m ay n o t be so slight that
covers a w hole range o f states o f m in d from failing to give any th o u g h t at all to w hether       even the m ost p ru d e n t o f m en would feel justified in taking it, b u t it excludes that kind
or n o t th ere is any risk o f those harm fu l consequences, to recognising the existence o f the         o f recklessness th at consists o f acting w ithou t givin g any th o u g h t at all to w heth er or not
risk an d nevertheless deciding to ignore it. Conscious o f this imprecision in the popular j               there is any risk o f h arm fu l consequences o f o n e ’s act, even though the risk is great and
m ean in g o f recklessness as descriptive o f a state o f m ind, Professor Kenny, in the passage           would be obvious i f any th o u g h t were given to the m atter by the doer o f the act. R v
quo ted, was, as it seems to me, at pains to indicate by the words in brackets the particular               Parker, how ever, opened the door a chink by adding as an alternative to the actual
species w ith in the genus, reckless states o f m ind , that constituted ‘malice’ in criminal               k n ow ledge o f th e accused that there is som e risk o f dam ag e resulting fro m his act and his
law. This parenthetical restriction on the natural m eaning o f recklessness was necessary                  going on to take it, a m ental state described as ‘closing his m in d to the obvious fact’ that
to an ex planation o f th e m eaning o f the adverb ‘maliciously’ w h en used as a te rm o f art            there is such a risk (see [1977] 2 All ER 37 at 40, [1977] 1 W L R 600 at 604).
in the description o f an offence und er the Malicious Dam age Act 1861 (which was the                          R v Stephenson [1979] 2 All ER 1198, [1979] QB 695, the first case in w hich there was
                                                                                                                All England Law Reports 7th April 1981
All England Law Reports 7th April 1981




                                                                                                                HL                                   R v Caldwell (Lord Diplock)                                                 967
966                                      All England Law Reports               [1981] 1 All ER
                                                                                                                 in part as objective' in current legal jargon. Questions o f crim inal liability are seldom
full a rg u m en t, thou gh only on one side, and a reserved ju d g m en t, slam m ed the door
                                                                                                                 solved by sim ply asking w heth er the test is subjective or objective
again on any less restricted interpretation of'reckless' w hether particular consequences g
                                                                                                             3       In m y op inion, a person charged w ith an offence un der s 1(1) o f the 1971 Act
will occur than that originally approved in Briggs. The appellant, a tram p, in tending to
                                                                                                                 ■reckless as to w h e th e r or not any p ro perty w ould be destroyed or dam aged i f (1) he drcs
pass the n ig h t in a hollow in th e side o f a haystack, had lit a fire to keep h im self w arm ;
                                                                                                                 an act w h ic h in fact creates m p b y k u l s s k that p roperty will be destroyed or dam aged
as a result o f this the stack itself caught fire. At his trial, he was not him self called as a                 and (2) w h e n he does the act h ? f ^ T h 7s no t given any tho u g h t to the possibility o f
witness b u t a psychiatrist gave evidence on his b ehalf that he was schizophrenic and
                                                                                                                   here b ein g any such risk or has recognised th at there was som e risk involved and has
m ig h t no t have had the sam e ability to foresee or appreciate risk as a m entally normal
                                                                                                              h none th e less g o ne on to do it. That w ou ld be a proper direction to the ju r y , cases in the
person. The ju d g e had given to the ju ry the direction on the m eaning o f reckless that fo
                                                                                                                  Court o f Appeal w hich held otherw ise should be regarded as overruled.
had been approved in R v Parker. T he a rg u m e n t for the appellant on th e appeal was that
                                                                                                                      W h ere th e charge is und er s 1(2) the question o f the state o f m in d o f the accused m u
this let in an objective test w hereas the test should be entirely subjective. It was
                                                                                                                  be approached in stages, corresponding to paras (a) and (b) The ju ry m ust be “ tls^
buttressed by copious citation from previous ju d g m en ts in civil and crim inal cases where
                                                                                                                  that w h at th e accused did am o u n ted to an offence under s ,(.), either because he actually
the expressions ‘reckless’ or ‘recklessness’ had been used by judges in various contexts.                         intended to d e s tr o y oFdarriage th e property or because he was reckless (in the sense that
Counsel for the C row n expressed his agreem en t w ith the submissions for the appellant.
                                                                                                              r I have described) w h e th e r it m ig h t be destroyed or damaged^ Only ifth e y arc; so satisfied
The ju d g m e n t o f the court contains an analysis o f a n u m b e r o f the cited cases, m ainly in c         m u st th e j u r y go on to consider w h eth er th e accused also either actually intended that the
the field o f civil law. These cases do not disclose a uniform judicial use o f the term s; and                   d estruction o r d am ag e o f the property should endanger som eone s life or was reckless (in
as respects judicial statem ents m ade before the current vogue for classifying all tests o f
                                                                                                                   a sim ilar sense) w h e th e r a h u m a n life m ig h t be endangered.                    ,   . ,
 legal liability as eith er objective or subjective they are not easily assignable to one o f those                    T u rn in g now to th e instant case, th e first stage was elim inated by the respondent s plea
categories rath er th an the other. The court, however, reached its final conclusion by a
                                                                                                                   o f g uilty to th e charge un der s i(>). F u rth e rm o re he him self gave ev,dence that his
different route. It m ade the assum ption that although Parliament in replacing the 1861
                                                                                                               H actual inten tio n was to dam age the hotel in o rder to revenge him self on the proprietor
 Act by the 1971 Act had discarded the w ord ‘maliciously’ as descriptive o f th e m ens rea (j
                                                                                                               d As respects the charge und er s .(2) th e prosecution did not rely on an actual inten t o f h
 o f th e offences o f w hich the actus reus is dam aging property, in favour o f the more                          respondent to end an g er the lives o f the residents b u t relied on his havm g been reckless
 explicit phrase ‘inten d in g to destroy or dam age any such property or being reckless as to                     w h e th e r th e lives o f any o f th em w ould be endangered. His act o f setting fire to it was
 w h e th e r any such property w ould be destroyed’, it nevertheless intended th e words to be                     one w h ich th e ju r y were entitled to th in k created an obvious risk that the lives o f the
 in terp reted in precisely the sam e sense as that in which the single adverb ‘maliciously’                        residents w ou ld be endangered; and the only defence w ith which your Lordships are
 had been construed by Professor K enny in the passage that received the subsequent                            O concerned is that the respondent had m ade him self so d ru n k as to render h im obliv.ous
 approval o f the C ourt o f Appeal in R v Cunningham.                                                   e     ® o f that risk If th e only m ental state capable o f constituting the necessary m ens rea for
      My Lords, I see no w arrant for m ak in g any such assum ption in an Act whose declared                       an offence u n d e r s 1(2) were that expressed in th e words 'intending by the destruction or
 purpose is to revise the then existing law as to offences o f dam age to property, not to                          d am age to e n d an g er the life o f another', it w o uld have been necessary to cons.de
 perpetuate it. ‘Reckless’ as used in th e new statutory definition o f the m en s rea o f these                     w h e th e r th e offence was to be classified as on e o f ‘specific inten t for the purposes o f the
 offences is an ordinary English word. It had not by 1971 become a term o f legal art with                           Tule o f law w h ich this House affirm ed and applied in Director of Public Prosecutwns v
  som e m o re lim ited esoteric m ean in g than that which it bore in ordinary speech, a
                                                                                                                f Maiewski [ 1976] 2 All ER >42, [ 1977 ] AC 44 31an d this it plainly is But this is not, in m y
  m ean in g w hich surely includes no t only deciding to ignore a risk o f harm ful f                               view a relevant in q u iry w here ‘bein g reckless as to w heth er the life o f an oth er w ould be
  consequences resulting from o n e ’s acts that one has recognised as existing, b u t also failing                  th ereby en d an g ered ’ is an alternative m en tal state that is capable o f constituting t e
  to give any th o u g h t to w h eth er or not there is any such risk in circumstances where, if                    necessary m en s rea o f the offence w ith w hich he is charged.                                         ,
  any th o u g h t were given to th e m atter, it w ould be obvious that there was.                                      The speech o f Lord Elwyn-Jones LC in Majewski, w ith w hich Lord Sim on, Lord
      If one is attaching labels, the latter state o f m in d is neither m ore n or less ‘subjective’
                                                                                                                      Kilbrandon an d I agreed, is au th o rity that jelf-indu ffid intoxication is np                        “
  th an the first. But the label solves no thing. It is a statem ent o f the obvious; m ens rea is,              „ crim e in w hich recklessness is en o u g h to constitute the necessary m ens rea (see [1976] 2
  by definition, a state o f m in d o f the accused h im self at the tim e he did th e physical act g
                                                                                                                 9 All UR 142 al i s ii- i Si, i I ‘J7 7 j AC 443 at 474 - 475 ). The charge in M ajewsk, was o f
  that constitutes the actus reus o f the offence; it cannot be the m ental state o f som e non­                      assault occasioning actual bodily h a rm and it was held by the m ajority o f the House,
  existent, hypothetical person.                                                                                      approv ing R v Venna [1975] 3 All ER 788 at 794 , [ 1976] 1 QB 421 at 428, that recklessness
      Nevertheless, to decide w h e th e r som eone has been ‘reckless’ w h eth er harm ful                           in ^ h e use o f f e r e e was sufficient to satisfy th e m ental elem ent m the offence o f a s s a u lt
  consequences o f a particular k in d will result from his act, as distinguished from his                            R educing oneself by d rin k or drugs to a condition in w hich the restraints o f reason and
   actually in ten d in g such h arm fu l consequences to follow, does call for som e consideration               h conscience are cast off was held to be a reckless course o f conduct and an integral part o f
   o f how the m in d o f the ordinary p ru d e n t individual would have reacted to a sim ilar f)                     the crim e. Lord Elwyn-Jones LC accepted as correctly stating English law the provision
   situation.I If there were n o th in g in the circumstances that ou ght to have draw n th e
                                                                                                                     in § 2.08(2) o f the Am erican Model Penal Code:
   attention o f an ordinary p ru d e n t individual to the possibility o f that k in d o f harm ful
   consequence, th e accused w ould no t be described as ‘reckless’ in the natural m eaning o f                              'W h e n recklessness establishes an elem en t o f the offence if the actor, du e to s e lt
   that w ord for failing to address his m in d to the possibility; nor, if the risk o f the harm ful                      indu ced intoxication, is unaw are o f a risk o f which he w ould have been aware had
   consequences was so slight that the ordinary p ru d en t individual on du e consideration o f                           he been sober, such unawareness is im m aterial.’
   th e risk w ould not be deterred fro m treating it as negligible* could the accused be j                      1      So in th e instant case, the fact that the respondent was unaware o f the risk of
   described as ‘reckless’ in its o rdinary sense if, having considered the risk, he decided to                      e n d a k g e r i n g l h e i r v e i ^ - r a i * n t s m - t h e ~ h o t e l o w 1n g to, his^elf-induced intoxication
   ignore it. (In this connection th e gravity o f the possible harm ful consequences would be                       w ou ld be 110 defence if that risk w ould have been obvious to h im had he been sober.
   an im p o rta n t factor. To endang er life m u st be one o f the most grave.) So to this extent,                    My Lords, th e C ourt o f Appeal in the instant case regarded the case as tu rn in g on
   even if one ascribes to ‘reckless’ only the restricted m eaning, adopted by the C ourt o f                        w h e th e r th e offence un d er s .(2) was one o f ‘specific intent or basic in t e n t F o U o w .g
   Appeal in Stephenson and Briggs, o f foreseeing that a particular k ind o f harm m ight                           a recent decision o f the C ourt o f Appeal by w hich it was bound, R v Orpm [1980]
   happen and yet going on to take the risk o f it, it involves a test that w ould be described
   All England Law Reports 7th April 1981                                                                       All England Law Reports 7th April 1981




   968                                  All England Law Reports                  [1981] 1 All ER                HL                          R v Caldwell (Lord Edmund-Davies)                                 969

  ER 321, [1980] i W LR 1050, it held that th e offence un d er s 1(2) was one o f specific                             '. . . in any statutory definition o f a crim e “m alice” m u st be taken not in the old
  intent in contrast to the offence und er s 1(1) w h ich was o f basic intent. This would be                        vague sense o f “wickedness” in general, b u t as requ irin g eith er (i) an actual intention
  right if the only m ens rea capable o f co nstitu tin g th e offence were an actual intention to 3                 to do the particular kind o f h arm that in fact was done, o r (ii) recklessness as to
  endanger the life o f another. For the reasons I have given, however, classification into                          w h ether such h a rm should occur o r not (i.e. the accused has foreseen that the
  offences o f specific an d basic inten t is irrelevant when- being reckless w hether a pan-;<-11|1r                particular k ind o f h arm m ig h t be done, an d yet has gone on to take the risk o f it).
  harm ful consequence will result from o n e’s act is a sufficient alternative m ens rea.                           It is neith er lim ited to, n o r does it indeed require, any ill-will towards the person
     My Lords, the recorder’s s u m m in g up was not a m odel o f clarity. C ontrary to the                         injured.’
  view o f th e C o u rt o f Appeal she was right in telling the ju ry that in deciding w h eth er the h
                                                                                                                Byrne J ’s c o m m e n t was laconic and unqualified: ‘W e th in k that this is an, accurate
  respondent was reckless w h e th e r the lives o f residents in th e hotel would be endangered,
                                                                                                                statem ent o f th e law . . . In o u r opinion, the w ord “m aliciously” in a statutory crim e
  the fact that, because o f his drunkenness, he failed to give any tho ught to that risk was
                                                                                                                postulates foresight o f consequence.’ My Lords, m y noble and learned friend Lord
  irrelevant; b u t there were o th e r criticisms o f th e s u m m in g up m ade by the C ourt o f
                                                                                                                Diplock som ew hat dismissively describes Professor K enny as having been ‘engaged in
  Appeal w hich y our Lordships very properly have not been invited to consider, since it
                                                                                                                defining for the benefit o f students the m eaning o f “malice” as a term o f art in crim inal
  makes no practical difference to the respondent w h e th e r the appeal is allowed o r not.
                                                                                                                law’, adding:
  Since it is n o t w o rth w hile sp ending tim e on goin g into these criticisms, I would dismiss c
  the appeal.                                                                                                             ‘To do so he used ordinary English words in th e ir popular m eaning. A m o n g the
/    I w ould give the follow ing answers to the certified questions: (a) if the charge o f an                        words he used was “recklessness”, the n o u n derived fro m the adjective “reckless”, o f
  offence u n d e r s 1(2) o f the C rim inal D am age Act 1971 is fram ed so as to charge the                        which the p opu lar or dictionary m eanin g is “careless, regardless, or heedless o f the
  defendant only w ith ‘intending by the destruction o r dam age [of the property] to endanger                        possible h arm fu l consequences o f one’s acts". It presupposes that, if th o u g h t were
  the life o f a n o th e r’, evidence o f self-induced intoxication can be relevant to his defence;                  given to the m atter by th e doer before the act was done, it would have been apparent
  (b) if the charge is, or includes, a reference to his ‘b ein g reckless as to w h ether the life o f (j             to him that there was a real risk o f its h av ing the relevant harm ful consequences
  ano ther w o uld thereby be endan gered’, evidence o f self-induced intoxication is not                             . . . This parenthetical restriction on the natural m ean in g o f recklessness was
  relevant.                                                                                                           necessary to an explanation o f the m ean ing o f the adverb “maliciously” w h en used
                                                                                                                      as a te rm o f art in the description o f an offence u n d e r the Malicious Damage Act
                                                                                                                       18 6 1 (which was the m atter in point in R v Cunningham);.but it was not directed to
  LORD EDMUND-DAVIES. My Lords, I respectfully concur in holding that this                                            and consequently has no bearing on the m ean in g o f the adjective “reckless in s i o f
  appeal m u st be dismissed. I nevertheless consider th at one o f the certified questions                           the Crim inal D am age Act 1971-’ (Emphasis added.)
  should be answ ered in a m a n n e r contrary to that favoured by a m ajority o f your e
  Lordships. A nd I believe that the reason for m y arriv in g at a different conclusion is o f                 I have to say that I a m in respectful, b u t pro fou nd, disagreem ent. The law in action
  som e im portan ce and th at it should be explored.                                                           compiles its o w n dictionary. In tim e, w hat was originally the co m m o n coinage of"speech
    W e are concerned w ith a charge o f arson in contraven tion o f s 1(2) o f the Crim inal                   acquires a different value in the pocket o f the law yer th an w hen in the laym an s purse.
  Damage Act 1971, w hich needs to be seen in its statutory setting. Section 1 is in the                        Professor K enny used lawyers’ words in a lawyers’ sense to express his distillation o f an
  following term s:                                                                                             im portant part o f the established law relating to m ens rea, and he did so in a m a n n e r
                                                                                                                accurate not only in respect o f the law as it stood in 1902 b u t also as it has been applied
          ‘(1) A person w h o w ith o u t lawful excuse destroys or damages any property                        in countless cases ever since, b oth in the United K in gdom and in other countries w here
       belonging to ano th er in ten d in g to destroy or dam ag e any such property or being                    the co m m o n law prevails: see, for exam ple, in W estern Australia, Lederer v Hitchins
       reckless as to w h e th e r any such p roperty w ou ld be destroyed or dam aged shall be                 [ 1961 ] WAR 99, and, in the U nited States o f America, Je th ro Brown’s General Principles
       guilty o f an offence.                                                                                   o f Crim inal Law (2nd Edn, 1960, p 11 5)- A nd it is well k n o w n that the 1971 Act was in
         ‘(2) A person w h o w ith o u t lawful excuse destroys or damages any property,                         the m ain the w ork o f the Law Comm ission, w ho defined recklessness by saying:
       w hether b elon ging to h im self or an oth er— (a) in te n d in g to destroy or dam age any <7
                                                                                                            9             ‘A person is reckless if, (a) k n ow in g that there is a risk that an event m ay result
       property or being reckless as to w h e th e r any p roperty would be destroyed or
       dam aged; and (b) in ten d in g by the destruction or dam age to endanger the life o f                          from his conduct o r that a circumstances m ay exist, he takes that risk, and (b) it is
       another or bein g reckless as to w h eth er the life o f anoth er would be thereby                              unreasonable for h im to take it, having regard to the degree and nature o f th e risk
       endangered; shall be gu ilty o f an offence.                                                                    w hich he know s to be present.’
         ‘(3) An offence c o m m itte d under this section by destroying or dam aging property
                                                                                                                 (See W ork ing Paper no 31, Codification o f the Crim inal Law: General Principles: The
       by fire shall be charged as arson.’                                                          h       h Mental E lem ent in C rim e ( 16th Ju n e 1970).)
   In considering the section, there are two m atters o f particular importance. (1) W hat                           It was surely w ith this contem poraneous definition an d the m u ch respected decision
 constitutes 'recklessness' in the crim inal law? (2) W h at is the m ens rea o f the offence                    o f R v Cunningham in m in d that the draftsm an proceeded to his task o f drafting the 1971
 com m o nly (and understandably) k n o w n as 'aggravated arson’ in s i(2)(b)? I tu rn to these                 Act.
 questions forthw ith.                                                                                              It has therefore to be said that, unlike negligence, w hich has to be judged objectively,
                                                                                                                 recklessness involves foresight o f consequences, co m b in ed w ith an objective ju d g m e n t
 (1) Recklessness                                                                                      !         of the reasonableness o f the risk taken. A nd recklessness in vacuo is an incom prehensible
     The words ‘in te n tio n ’ and ‘recklessness’ have increasingly displaced in statutory crimes               notion. It must relate to foresight o f risk o f the particular k ind relevant to the charge
 the word ‘m aliciously’, w hich has frequently given rise to difficulty in interpretation. In                   preferred, w hich, for the purpose o f s 1(2), is the risk o f endangering life and n o th in g
 R v Cunningham [1957] 2 All ER 412 at 414, [1957] 2 QB 396 at 399 Byrne J in the Ccrurt                         other than that.
 o f Crim inal Appeal cited w ith approval th e follow ing passage which has appeared in                            So, if a d efendant says o f a particular risk, ‘It never crossed m y m in d ’, a ju ry could not
 K enny’s O utline o f C rim inal Law fro m its first edition in 1902 onwards:                                   on those words alone properly convict h im o f recklessness sim ply because they considered
                                                                                                                          All England Law Reports 7th April 1981
All England Law Reports 7th April 1981




                                                                                                                          l_ll_                       R y Caldwell (Lord Edm und-D avies)_____________ 971^
970                                  All England L a w Reports                  [1981] 1 All ER

                                                                                                                                  house, W aller LJ, giv ing the ju d g m e n t o f the C o urt o f Appeal, C rim inal Division,
that the risk ought to have crossed his m in d , tho ugh his w ords m ig h t well lead to a                         to a
finding o f negligence. But a d efen d an t’s adm ission that he ‘closed his m i n d ’ to a a                     g said;
particular risk could prove fatal, for ‘A person cannot, in any intelligible m ean in g o f the                                            w e are o f the opinion in this case that the unlaw ful act relied on by the
words, close his m in d to a risk unless he first realises that there is a risk; and i f he realises                              learned ju d g e o f dam ag in g the b u ild in g o f ano th er by fire involved a basic intent
that there is a risk, that is the end o f the m atter' (see Glanville Williams, T extbook o f                                           It w ou ld have been different in o u r view i f th e in ten t had involved the question
C rim inal Law ( ist Edn, 1978, p 79)).                                                                                           o f d an g er to the life o f others, as in subsection (2) o f section 1 o f the Crim inal
   In the absence o f exculpatory factors, the d efen d an t’s state o f m in d is therefore all-                                 Dam age Act .971, because that w ould not be in h e re n t in the actus reus , f there was
im p o rta n t w here recklessness is an elem ent in the offence charged, and s 8 o f the b                       b               an in ten tio n to endanger the life o f a n o th e r or recklessness as to w h eth er the life o f
C rim in al Justice Act 1967 has laid do w n that:                                                                                ano th er w ou ld be endangered or not. As I have already stated, in o ur view this was
                                                                                                                                  a crim e o f basic i n t e n t . . . and therefore the defence o f dru nken ness does no t avail
         ‘A court or jury, in d e te rm in in g w h eth er a person has co m m itted an offence,—
                                                                                                                                   at all: see D.P.P. v. M aje w s k i ([1976] 2 All ER 142, [ 1977 ] AC 443 ]-
      (a) shall no t be b o u n d in law to infer that he intended or foresaw a result o f his
      actions by reason only o f its being a natural and probable consequence o f those                             And in R V Stephenson [1979] 2 All ER 1198 at 1204, [ 1979] QB                        695   at 704, w h ere the
      actions; b u t (b) shall decide w h eth er he did in tend or foresee that result by reference c             C charge was laid u n d er s 1(1), Geoffrey Lane LJ said:
      to all the evidence, d raw in g such inferences fro m the evidence as appear proper in                                           ‘T here is no dou b t that the subjective definition o f “recklessness” does produce
      the circum stances.’ (Emphasis added.)                                                                                       difficulties. O ne o f th em , w hich is particularly likely to occur m practice, is the case
    My Lords, it is unnecessary to exam ine at length the proposition that ascertainm ent of                                       o f th e person w h o by self-induced intoxication by d rin k s o r drugs deprives him selt
th e state o f m in d k n o w n as ‘recklessness’ is a subjective exercise, for the task was                                       o f th e ability to foresee the risks involved in his actions. A ssum ing that by reason
expansively p erfo rm ed by Geoffrey Lane LJ in R v Stephenson [1979] 2 All ER 1198,                                               o f his intoxication he is not proved to have foreseen th e relevant risk, can he be said
[ 1979] QB 69 5. And, indeed, that was the view expressed by the learned recorder herself "                        d               to have been “reckless” ? Plainly not, unless cases o f self-induced intoxication are an
in the instant case w hen, citing R v Brigg.s[i977] 1 All ER 475 at 477, [ 1977 ] 1 W LR 605                                       exception to the general rule. In o u r ju d g m e n t th e decision o f the H ouse o f Lords
at 608, she directed the ju ry at one stage in these term s:                                                                       in Director of Public Prosecutions v Majewski m akes it clear that they are such an
                                                                                                                                   exception Evidence o f self-induced intoxication such as to negative m ens rea is a
          ‘It m ay be the m ost useful function that I can p erform i f I read to you the most                                     defence to a charge w hich required p r o o f o f a “specific in te n t”, b u t not to a charge
       recent (I hope) definition o f ‘recklessness’ . . . by a superior court . . . A m an is                                     o f any o ther crim e. The Crim inal D am age Act 1971, s 1(1) involves no specific
       reckless . . . w h en he carries out a deliberate act, k n o w in g that there is som e risk o f   e           e             i n t e n r see R v OVriscoll. Accordingly, it is no defence un der the 1971 Act for a
       dam age resulting fro m that act, b u t “nevertheless continues in the perform ance o f                                      person to say that he was deprived by self-induced intoxication o f the ability to
       that a c t . . . ” That came, in fact, in a case o f a straight arson and dam age to property,                               foresee or appreciate an obvious risk.
       but in this case you w ould probably feel that you had to add after the words to fit
       this section o f th e Act “som e risk o f dam age to life” . . . because that is w hat we are                          That Geoffrey Lane LJ was referring in his final sentence only to s 1(1) o f the Act is m ad e
       concerned w ith. I see b o th counsel nod assent to that. So, we can stay o n co m m o n                               clear by its context, and in R v Orpin [1980] 2 All ER 321 at 323-324, [1980] . W LR 1o 50
       g ro u n d .’                                                                                      f           f       at 1054 Eveleigh LJ said:
                                                                                                                                         ‘The m en tal elem ent, in tention or recklessness, in the second part o f sub-s (2) is
(2)   The‘mens rea'of aggravated arson                                                                                               an aggravating circum stance w hich adds to th e gravity o f the actus reus w hich is
    T he first cou n t charged the respondent w ith ‘Arson contrary to Section 1(2) and (3) o f
                                                                                                                                     defined in the first part o f that subsection. A lthoug h the p ro o f o f that additional
th e Crim inal D am age Act 1971’, and the particulars o f the offence were in the following
                                                                                                                                     elem en t will often involve evidence as to possible o r actual d anger to life, the
term s:                                                                                                                              additional aggravating factor lies in the mind. It is the m ental attitu de to the
          ‘J am es Caldwell on the 23rd day o f D ecem ber 1978 w itho ut lawful excuse you 9                         9             consequences o f an actus reus. It goes beyo nd the actus reus itself, and is therefore
       dam aged by fire a w ind ow fram e an d curtains at the Hydro H o te l . . . belo nging to                                     to be treated as a specific in ten t w hich has to be established as an ingredient o t the
       anoth er in te n d in g to dam age th e said property o r being reckless as to w h e th e r any                                offence. That bein g so, evidence o f intoxication is relevant as one o f those m atters
       such p roperty w ould be d am aged and in ten d in g by the said dam age to endan g er the                                    to be taken into consideration in d e te r m in in g w h e th e r o r not the necessary m enta
       life o f a n o th er or being reckless as to w h e th e r the life o f another w ould be thereby                              elem ent existed. T here is n o th in g inconsistent in treatin g an offence u n d e r sub-s
       en d ang ered.” (Emphasis added.)                                                                ^                 u         ( ,) as a crim e o f basic intent an d an offence u n d e r sub-s (2) as one o f specific intent.
                                                                                                                                       t is only the second part o f sub-s (2) w h ich introduces a specific intent. T he sam e
     My Lords, the very layout o f s 1 m akes clear that a state o f m in d over an d beyond that                                     words are used to denote the attitu d e o f m in d , b u t in the o n e case th ere is an .act
 essential for a conviction un d er s 1(1) has to be established before the graver crim e                                             stipulated corresponding to the m ental state an d m anifesting its existence, whilst in
 created by s 1(2) can be b ro u g h t hom e. T he latter has features both o f an offence against
                                                                                                                                      the o th e r there is no such act.’ (Em phasis added.)
 property and an offence against the person, an d a special ‘in ten t’ o r a special ‘recklessness’
 is involved, a state o f m in d ‘ulterior’ to the ‘basic’ in tent or recklessness w hich is sufficient                           But the trial ju d g e h ere unfortunately failed to differentiate betw een the different
 for s 1(1). A nd ‘in te n tio n ’ and ‘recklessness’ are m ore th an birds o f a feather; they are           j           i types o f arson em braced by s 1 o f the 19 7 1 Act by directing the ju ry w ith o u t qualification
 blood-brothers; so m u ch so that Austin included ‘recklessness’ w ith in the term ‘in ten tio n ’                            that arson is an offence o f basic in te n t’. This led her, ,n p u rp o rted pursuance o f
 (see Jurisprudence (4th Edn, vol 1, pp 436, 441, 442)). As James LJ said in R v Venna                                         Majewski, to conclude th at—
 [1975] 3 AH ER 788 at 794, [1976] QB 421 at 429: ‘In m any cases the d ivid ing line
                                                                                                                                        ‘it is no defence for the accused, by reason o f self-induced intoxication, to say that
 betw een in ten tio n and recklessness is barely distinguishable.’ So in R v O’Driscoll (1977)
                                                                                                                                      he was senseless an d so had neith er “in te n t” n o r “recklessness w ith regard to w hat
 65 Cr App R 50 at 55, w here the charge was one o f m anslaughter caused by setting fire
    ™ cnyianu i_aw Heports ;th April 1981
                                                                                                                      All England Law Reports 7th April 1981




                  ____________ All England Law Reports______ [1981] 1 All ER                                          Hi_                          R v Caldwell (Lord Edmund-Davies)                               973

                                                                                                                      unable to concur that your Lordships’ decision should n ow becom e the law o f the land.
                                                                                                                      For, as Evefeigh LJ said in R v Orpin [1980] 2 All ER 321 at 324, [1980] 1 W L R 1050 at
                                                                                                                  3   .0 5 4 :     7
           Well, yes, 1 m ean t to set fire to   that, b u t that’s all.’”                                  My’                  . . there is no th in g inconsistent in treating intoxication as irrelevant w hen
                                                                                                                             considering the liability o f a person w ho has willed him self to do that w hich the law
                                                                                                                             forbids (for example, to do so m e th in g which w ounds another), an d yet to m ake it
              JU dgm ent' the C ourt o f Appeal, Crim inal Division, was rig h t in holding th r
   this direction contained two errors. In the f ir a place H «nirp h J                ,      g that                         relevant w hen a fu rth er m ental state is postulated as an aggravating circum stance
  directions as to the subjective n atu re o f the ‘recklessness’ tect     re              ■ correct              b          m ak in g the offence even m o re serious.’
  ju r y to hold recklessness established if they considered that it was . . a fa°[ l L u h ^ d that                     By way o f a postscript I w ould add th at the m ajority view dem onstrates yet again the
                                                                                                                      folly o f totally ignoring the recom m endation s o f the Butler C o m m itte e (Report on
                                                                                                                      M entally Abnorm al Offenders (C m n d 6244 (1975)), paras 18, 53-58).
                                                                                                                         M y Lords, I would dismiss the appeal.
  o S e c t t e l y yAan d " h e se" ‘T                      °f ^     aCCUSCd'S 3Cti° n w a s t ° be judged
                                                                                                                  Q
                                                                                                                      LORD KEITH OF KINKEL. My Lords, I am in entire ag reem en t w ith the reasoning
                                                                                                                      contained in the speech o f m y noble and learned friend Lord Diplock, w hich I have had
  P-iJJ E L                                                                        “ h,ve f” “ ” *                    the benefit o f reading in draft. I w ould answer the certified questions in the m an n er
                                                                                                                      w hich he proposes, and dismiss the appeal.
           ' l '1. 1“ , " 'd                                      'p” ,'h o f L o r T E l w y n - J ^ l ' . 7
                                                                                                                      LORD ROSKILL. My Lords, I had prepared an opinion o f m y o w n in this appeal b u t
                                                                                                                      having had the advantage o f reading in draft the speech o f m y noble and learned friend
 respect,      do not share. In co m m o n w ith all t h e U w Lords h e a d n g thaT appeal             £ A          Lord Diplock I am satisfied that no useful purpose would be served by delivering that
                                                                                                                      speech. I agree in every respect w ith w hat m y noble and learned friend has said in his
                                                                                                                      speech an d with his proposed answers to the questions certified. For the reasons he gives
                                                                                                                      I agree that this appeal should be dismissed.
                                                                                                                  g
                                                                                                                      Appeal dismissed.

                                                                                                                      Solicitors: R E T    Birch (for the C row n); Gordon (irJames Morton (for the respondent).
S ” r d f,h'o f
rf C
                                            ”«' »«  ’SbiZiSBSjssss*
              „ 1 °,” " h" "T"l' ” n';: L«"J El—yn-Jones LC                  d e.lm g sim p ., w S c t e                                                                           Mary Rose P lu m m e r   Barrister.




s ^ 0 ° a r ^ C(3)>o f1t h ^ i ,g71' Act^                                              a rso n T o n trary 'to
All England Law Reports 7th April 1981                                                                                  All England Law Reports 7th April 1981




974                                        All England L a w Reports                    [1 9 8 1 ] 1 All ER             HL                                       R v Lawrence                                       975

                                                                                                                        follow ing points o f law o f general public im p ortance were involved in its decision: (i)
                                              R v Lawrence                                                              was m ens rea involved in the offence o f driv in g recklessly; (2) if yes, w hat was the m ental
                                                                                                                        elem en t required; and (3) was the follow ing a p roper direction on a charge o f driv in g
H O U S E O F LORDS
                                                                                                                        recklessly: ‘A driver is guilty o f driving recklessly i f he deliberately disregards the
L O R D H A IL S H A M O F ST M AR YLE B ONE LC, L O R D D I P L O C K , L O R D FRASER O F TU LL YBE LTON, LORD
                                                                                                                        obligation to drive w ith due care and attention or is indifferent w h eth er or no t he does
R O S K tLL A N D L O R D B R ID G E O F H A R W I C H
                                                                                                                        so and thereby creates a risk o f an accident w hich a driver d riv in g w ith d u e care and
5 t h , 9 t h FE B R U A R Y , 1 9 t h M AR CH 1 9 8 I
                                                                                                                        attention w ou ld no t create’? On 24th July the House o f Lords gave the C ro w n leave to
                                                                                                                   jj   appeal. T he facts are set out in the opinion o f L ord Hailsham LC.
Road traffic - Reckless driving - Causing death by reckless driving - Reckless - Mens rea -
Mental element required - Proper direction to be given tojury - Road Traffic Act 1972,55 1, 2                           D H Penry-Davey for the Crown,
(as substituted by the Criminal Law Act 19JJ, s jo (i)).
                                                                                                                        A Arlidge for the respondent.
T he actus reus o f th e offence o f d riv in g recklessly, contrary to ss 1 and 2° o f the 1972 Act,
                                                                                                                        T heir Lordships took tim e for consideration.
is n o t m erely d riv in g w ith o u t due care an d atten tio n b u t driv in g in a m a n n e r that creates
an obvious an d serious risk o f causing physical in ju ry to any o th er road user or substantial                 £
                                                                                                                        19th March. T he following opinions were delivered.
d am age to pro perty. T he m ens rea o f the offence is d riving in such a m a n n e r w ithout
giving any t h o u g h t to tKe risk or, h av in g recognised that it exists, nevertheless ta k in g jh e
                                                                                                                        LORD HAILSHAM OF ST MARYLEBONE L C My Lords, the question in this
risk._It is for the j u r y to decide w h e th e r the risk c re a te d b y the accused’s driv in g was
                                                                                                                        appeal is w h eth er the conviction on 18th March 1980 o f the respondent for causing death
b o th obvious and serious, the standard b e in g th a t o f the ordinary p ru d en t motorIsFas
                                                                                                                        by reckless d riv in g should be restored. In m y o pinion it should not, b oth on th e grou nds
represented b y th e m se lv e s (see p 977 j to p 978 a an d p 982 a to c a n d / t o p 983 g, post).
                                                                                                                   (j   on w hich it was quashed by the Court o f Appeal, a n d on the m o re general g ro u n d ab o u t
   R v Caldwell p' 9“677 ante, applied.
                                                                                                                        to be form u lated by m y noble and learned friend Lord Diplock, w ith whose conclusions
   R v Murphy (William) [1980] 2 All ER 325 overruled.                                                                  and reasoning I wish to be wholly and unequivocally associated. If I proceed w ith a few
    Allan v Patterson 1980 SLT 77 approved.
                                                                                                                        observations o f m y ow n about the course o f the proceedings, it is because I wish to draw
    Observations on the need for brevity in s u m m i n g u p to a ju ry and in the conduct o f
                                                                                                                        som e lessons fro m th em regarding the general conduct o f trials on in d ictm en t, an d no t ,
C row n C o u rt trials generally (see p 9 7 5 / to j, p 977 c toll, p 979 be and p 983 d to g , post).
                                                                                                                        because I wish to repeat in other words w hat m y noble an d learned friend is abo u t to say.
                                                                                                                   g        My Lords, it is notorious that there has g ro w n u p a serious backlog o f cases for trial in
Notes
                                                                                                                        the C row n C ourt, and this is particularly the case in the South East an d London. This
For causing death by reckless d riv in g an d for reckless driving, see 33 H alsbury’s Laws
                                                                                                                        backlog has been a source o f particular anxiety to m e in b oth m y term s o f office, as I
(3rd Edn) 6 2 2 -6 2 3 , paras 1047-1048.
                                                                                                                        kn o w it is cu rre ntly to the present Lord C h ie f Justice. The causes o f it are com plex, and
   For the Road Traffic Act 1972, ss 1, 2 (as su b stituted by the Crim inal Law Act 1977,
                                                                                                                        the rem edies are therefore not particularly sim ple. But, so long as it persists, the whole
s 50(1)), see 47 H alsbury’s Statutes (3rd Edn) 1221.
                                                                                                                        system o f trial by jury, and the regard in w hich it is rightly held, are adversely affected.
                                                                                                                   f        My Lords, it is a truism to say that justice delayed is justice denied. But it is no t m erely
Cases referred to in opinions
                                                                                                                        the anxiety and uncertainty in the life o f the accused, w h e th e r on bail o r rem and, w hich
Allan v Patterson 1980 SLT 77, [1980] RTR 97.
                                                                                                                        are affected. W here there is delay the whole quality o f justice deteriorates. O u r system
R v Caldwell p 961, ante, HL.
                                                                                                                        depends on the recollection o f witnesses, conveyed to a ju ry by oral testim ony. As the
R v Evans [1962] 3 All ER 1086, [1963] 1 QB 412, [1962] 3 W LR 1457, 12 7JP 4 9, 61 LGR
                                                                                                                         m o n th s pass, this recollection necessarily dim s, an d juries w ho are correctly directed not
  32, 47 C r App R 62, CCA, 45 Digest (Repl) 87, 298.
                                                                                                                         to convict unless they are assured o f the reliability o f the evidence for th e prosecution
R v Murphy (William) [1980] 2 All ER 325, [1980] QB 434, [1980] 2 W LR 743, [1980]
                                                                                                                   g    necessarily tend to acquit as this becomes less precise, and som etim es less reliable. This
  RTR 145, CA.
                                                                                                                         m ay also affect defence witnesses on the opposite side. In th e instant case, an accident
R v Sheppard [1980] 3 All ER 899, [1980] 3 W L R 960, HL.
                                                                                                                         took place unexpectedly in a m atter o f seconds. T he evidence at the trial in cluded the
R v Stephenson [1979] 2 All ER 1198, [1979] QB 695, [1979] 3 W LR 193, 143 JP 592, 69
                                                                                                                         testim ony o f witnesses, present on the occasion, none o f w h o m could have been expecting
  C r App R 213, CA, Digest (Cont Vol E) 161, 12,692a.
                                                                                                                         a m o m e n t before it occurred that they were to be confronted w ith a desperate tragedy,
                                                                                                                         to the sequence o f events in w hich in 11 m o n th s ’ tim e they w ould be expected to testify
Appeal
O n 18th M arch 1980 the respondent, S tephen Richard Lawrence, was convicted at the
                                                                                                                    h    on oath.
                                                                                                                            Part o f the delay in b rin ging cases to trial is du e to the increase in th e v o lu m e o f
C row n C o u rt at Ipswich before M r Michael W eism an, sitting as a deputy circuit judge,
                                                                                                                         indictable crim e bro u g h t to the Crown Court. But part also is du e to th e increasing
an d a ju r y o f causing death by reckless d riving, contrary to s 1 o f the Road Traffic Act
                                                                                                                         prolixity in the conduct o f cases when they actually com e to be heard. It cannot be too
1972, as su b stituted by s 50(1) o f the C rim inal Law Act 1977. He was sentenced to six
                                                                                                                         often stressed that verbose justice is not necessarily good justice. T here is virtue, both
m o n th s ’ im p ris o n m e n t an d disqualified for hold in g a driving licence for three years. He
                                                                                                                         from the p o in t o f view o f the prosecution an d from the p o int o f view o f th e defence, in
appealed to the C ourt o f Appeal, C rim inal Division (W atkins LJ, Boreham and
                                                                                                                    j    incisiveness, decisiveness and conciseness, no t only in addressing juries b u t in the general
H odgson JJ) w hich allowed his appeal on 2 0 th May 1980 an d quashed his conviction.
                                                                                                                         conduct o f a case, the exam ination and cross-examination o f witnesses, th e subm ission o f
O n 23rd May th e court refused an application by the Crow n for leave to appeal to the
                                                                                                                         legal a rg u m e n t, and in su m m in g up. A long trial is not necessarily a b etter one if a
House o f Lords b u t certified, u n d e r s 33(2) o f the Crim inal Appeal Act 1968, that the
                                                                                                                         shorter one w ou ld have sufficed. It is these considerations w hich lead m e to analyse the
                                                                                                                          course o f events in the present appeal, and not any desire to expand on or to q ualify the
a Sections i and 2 are set out at p 981 be, post                                                                          reasoning o f m y noble and learned friend.
I




!
                                                                                                                            AH E n g la n d Law Reports 7th April 1981
All England Law Reports 7th April 1981




                                                                                                                                                             R v Lawrence (Lord Hailsham LC)                                977
                                         All England Law Reports                          [1981] 1 All ER
976
                                                                                                                         narked on the opposite side o f the road to the off-licence. M r C row ther stayed in the
  T h e course o f events was as follows. On 13th March 1980 in th e C row n C ourt at                                   ^ !n Mrs C ro w th er crossed the road an d entered the off-licence. W hen she came out, she
Ipswich the respondent (defendant) in these proceedings was arraigned on an indictm ent a                              > c r o p p e d at the kerb. H er husband saw h er blow h im a kiss, and that was the last tim e he
of great simplicity. It read as follows:                                                                                   ' h i s wife alive. In crossing the road to re tu rn to the van there was a collision between
                                                                                                                         herself an d the second o f tw o m o to r cyclists. T he cycle involved m the collision was
          ‘Stephen Richard Lawrence is charged as follows:—
                                                                                                                         driven by the respondent. Mrs C ro w th er was killed instantaneously. Her body was
       StS ' ^ n g ° d l a t h ebyereckless driving, contrary to section 1 o f the Road Traffic Act                      carried 45 yards on the fro nt o f the cycle before the cycle stopped.
                                                                                                                              At the trial one solitary dispute o f p rim a ry fact emerged. This was the speed at which
        1972-                                                                                                  b       * the cvcle was travelling. T he prosecution led evidence intended to show that the cycle
       ‘Particulars o f O f f e n c e : -                                                   Lowestoft in the             L s travelling at a grossly excessive speed. Apart from the m easurem ents on the road
          ‘S te p h e n r i c h a r d L a w re n c e , on the 13th aay o r A p n   y /y
       C ou n ty o f Suffolk, caused the death o f Yvonne Letitua C row ther, by driving a                                there were witnesses o f the accident, forensic evidence that the speedom eter was jam m ed
       m o to r vehicle on a road, nam ely, Victoria Road, recklessly.                                                    at 77 m p h a n d as to the im plications o f this, and police evidence regarding the account
                                                                                                                             o f the accident by the accused.                                             . . . . .    _
 I pause at this stage only to p o int out that, ow ing to the delays w hich have m o u n ted up                                By contrast, the accused gave evidence and called witnesses w ho testified that the true
 in the South East an d London, this sim ple case has taken a whole year less one m o n th to c                         c    ^ e d only was 30 to 40 m p h , technically illegal, since the area was built up, possibly
 com e on for trial. T hat it took this length o f delay to b rin g it on for trial is, o f course, no
                                                                                                                            rareless, b u t m ost im pro bably reckless.                                                    ,     ,
 criticism o f the judge, counsel or solicitors in the present case. It is the cum ulative result                               Given the n atu re o f the case, one w ould hardly thin k that the case presented m uch
 o f the len gth and n u m b e r o f other cases with which your L ordships have no t been                                  difficulty for a ju r y to try or for the ju d g e to su m up in a m an n er calculated to lead them
                                                                                                                            m a just an d safe conclusion. If th ey were satisfied w ith the prosecution evidence to the
 “ T h e c a l pursued its course d u r in g 13th (Thursday), 14th (Friday) and 17th (Monday)                             ■ extent requ ired by the b u rd e n o f p ro o f in crim inal cases they could hardly fail to
  M arch 1980. T he learned jud g e com m enced his su m m in g up on Tuesday’ «t                                           convict. If they th o u g h t the defence evidence raised a reasonable dou bt they could
  March. After this su m m in g up and an interchange between th e tw o counsel and the                                      hardly fail 10 acquit. In th e event they convicted by a majority, and their verdict was set
  judge the ju ry retired ai 11.28 am . They returned ai 2.15 p m after deliberating                                        aside as unsafe an d unsatisfactory on th e g ro u n d that the tw o directions on recklessness
  h o u rs an d 47 m inutes, w h en they were given a m ajority verdict direction. At 2.32 pm                                were so unclear. N either th e result, n o r the delay in bringing the m atter to trial, no r the
  th e ju ry delivered a note 10 the learned judge r e q u e s t i n g fu rth e r directions on he                           course o f th e proceedings o u g h t 10 afford any o f us w ho are concerned in the
‘ m e a n in g o f ‘driv ing recklessly’. T here was a further interchange betw een judge and                                adm in istration o f justice in any capacity m u c h cause for satisfaction.
  counsel in the absence o f the jury. Ai 3- ■ 5 p m the ju ry were su m m o n e d back and given e                      e       Ii has been said before, b u t obviously requires 10 be said again. T he purpose ot a
  a f u rth e r direction. Ai 3.43 p m the ju ry convicted th e respondent by a verdict o f eleven                           direction 10 a jury is not best achieved by a disquisition on jurisp rud ence or philosophy
   to one, an d after the usual procedure ihe learned jud g e sentenced th e respondent 10 six                               or a universally applicable circular to u r ro u n d the area o f law affected by the case. The
   m o n th s in prison and th ree years disqualification.                                                                   search for universally applicable definitions is often productive o f m ore obscurity than
      O n 20th May .9 80 the whole trial aborted, because the C ourt o f Appeal quashed he                                   light A direction is seldom im p ro v e d and m ay be considerably dam aged by copious
   conviction on the grounds that both directions left ‘so m u ch unclear as to render the                                , recitations from the total content o f a ju d g e ’s notebook. A direction to a jury should be
    u ry ’s verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory’. So other cases in the C row n C ourt at pswich f                              custom -built to m ake th e ju ry u nd erstand their task in relation to a particular case. Ot
   w ere delaved bv the judge, tim e consum ed to no purpose d u rin g th e better part o f a                                 course it m u st include references to th e b urden o f proof and the respective roles o f jury
    w eek. But that has not been th e en d o f the matter. At the request o f the prosecution the                             and judge But it should also in clud e a succinct but accurate su m m a ry o f the issues ot
    Court o f Appeal certified the th ree questions as o f general public im portance .                                       fact as to w hich a decision is required, a correct but concise su m m ary o f the evidence and
            ‘1 Is m ens rea involved in the offence o f driving recklessly? 2. If yes, what is the                            arg u m en ts o n both sides, an d a correct statem ent o f the inferences w hich the ju ry are
          m ental elem ent required? 3. Is th e fo llo w in g on a charge o f driv ing recklessly a                        „ entitled to d raw fro m th eir particular conclusions about the prim a ry facts^ In the present
          proper direction: “ A driver is guilty o f driving recklessly if he deliberately disregard                   , 9 instance th ere was only on e issue o f p rim a ry fact, the speed at w hich the cycle was
          the obligation to drive w ith due care and attention or is indifferent as to w hether or                             travelling, and I d o u b t w h e th e r a direction could have been faulted if th e ju ry had sim ply
          no t he does so and th ereb y creates a risk o f an accident w hich a driver drivin g with                           been told that i f they were satisfied that the prosecution had proved that the R e u s e d h a d
                                                                                                                               been travelling at a grossly excessive speed they were entitled to infer that he had been
          d u e care and attention w ould not create ?
                                                                                                                               driving recklessly and as a result had caused M rs Crowther’s death, th at if so they shou d
    These th ree questions fo rm the substance o f the appeal. In c e r t i f y i n g th e m the Court o f                  h convict, a n d that if they were not so satisfied they should acquit. As it is I feel sure that
    Appeal refused leave to appeal. This was given subsequently by the Appeal C om m ittee                         h        h the C ourt o f Appeal were correct in th eir belief that the ju ry m ay well have been so
    o f y o u r L o r d s h i p House^possibly because the question                                                             bem used w ith the effect o f th e s u m m in g up that their verdi,:t xras                       ^
    was already before your Lordships in another context m R v C a l d n e l l p 961, ante,                                     unsatisfactory, an d that, if only for this reason, the appeal m ust fail. The verdict cannot
                                                                                                                               be restored.                                                                         ,         , ,   ,
     W^ i m e n d o ^ t h ^ af a c t r b e c a u ^ 1alK)gether apart from the m erits o f the appeal with                         T here is, how ever, a second reason why, in m y ju d g m e n t, the appeal by the
     w hich m y noble and learned friend Lord Diplock intends to deal I th in k there are lessons                            j prosecution m ust fail. O f t h e t h r e e q u e s tio n s o f law certified by the Court o f Appeal, I
     to be learned fro m these proceedings which ought urgently to be studied since they                  y                    have no d o u b t that all three m ust be answ ered in the sense proposed by m y noble and
     directly relevant to the serious delays to which I have now drawn                                                      ■ learned friend L ord Diplock. Since it follows from this that the th ird o f these questions
   „ The facts o f the case can be stated m stark simplicity. O n >3th April .979 at                                         \ is answered in the negative, the learned ju d g e’s direction w hich broad y followed the
 ^ a p p r o x i m a t e l y 8.30 p m , a h usband and wife, Mr and Mrs C row ther, decided to drive                           form ula contained in it was w ro n g in law. For this he can hardly be blam ed since the
 ^ th e ir van to an off-licence in L ow estoft,in order to b uy som e soft d rin k for the                                     form ula broadly corresponds w ith th at proposed by Eveleigh LJ in R v Murphy (William)
     children. They arrived at their- 3 S t i im to n at approxim ately 9 p m . T heir van was
                                                                                                                  ^11 England Law f ^ ^ t s 7th April 1981
    All England Law Reports 7th April 1981




    978                                      All England Law Reports             [1981] 1 All ER                  ^IL                                 R v Lawrence (Lord Diplock)______________ 979

                                                                                                                 to the latter. The case for the defence was that th e speed o f the m otor cycle was no m ore
    [1980]                       2 All E R 325, [1980] 1 QB 434 (then just reported), w hich, to the extent described
                                                                                                                  than 30 or, at m ost, 40 m p h and probably nearer to the form er.
    in detail by m y noble and learned friend, m ust be considered overruled. I also associate g
                                                                                                              1        All that the j ury had to do was to m ake up th eir m in d s w hether, on that evidence, they
    m yself w ith m y noble and learned friend's affirm ative answ er to the first question, and
                                                                                                                  were satisfied bey ond reasonable doub t that the driver was in fact driving along this
    the fo rm u latio n o f his answer to the second, w ith the reasoning leading up to which I
                                                                                                                  urban street, on w hich it was not disputed there was a good deal o f o ther traffic, at a speed
    also agree. T h o u g h it does not directly affect the three questions posed I share th e distate
                                                                                                                  som ewhere betw een 60 and 80 m ph. If they were so satisfied, even the defence did not
    for the obsessive use o f the expressions ‘objective’ and ‘subjective’ in crim e. In all
                                                                                                                  suggest that any sensible ju ry could com e to any o th er conclusion than that he was
    indictable crim e it is a general rule that there are objective factors o f conduct which
                                                                                                                  driving recklessly ; whereas, if they tho u g h t that his ow n estim ate o f his speed at 30 to
    constitute th e so-called ‘actus reus’, and a fu rth e r gu ilty state o f m in d which constitutes b
                                                                                                              ^ 40 m p h m ig h t be right, they ough t to have fo u n d h im not guilty, for the prosecution
    the so-called ‘m e n s rea’. The necessity for this guilty state o f m in d has been increasingly
                                                                                                                   had not relied o n any o th e r aspect o f his driving as constituting recklessness, apart from
     em phasised o f recent years (cf R v Sheppard [ 1980] 3 All ER 899, [ 1980] 3 W LR 960), and
     this I regard as a tho rou ghly praiseworthy d ev elopm ent. It only surprises m e that there                 excessive speed.                                                                               .
                                                                                                                       I find it difficult to conceive that so simple a case could have taken m ore than a single
     should have been any question regarding the existence o f m ens rea in relation to the
                                                                                                                   day to try 20 years ago w hen, as a High C ourt ju dge, I was trying cases o f the then newly-
     words ‘reckless’, ‘recklessly’ o r ‘recklessness’. U nlike m o st English words it has been in
                                                                                                                   created offence o f causing death by dangerous driving. I warm ly endorse what Lord
     the English language as a word in general use at least since the eight century ad almost q
                                                                                                              C Hailsham LC has said about the tortoise pace at w hich cases in the Crown Court are
     always w ith th e sam e m eaning, applied to a person o r conduct evincing a state o f m ind
                                                                                                                   nowadays so frequently allowed to am ble on. It m akes the trial itself a less effective and
     stopping short o f deliberate intention, and go ing beyond m ere inadvertence, or, in its
                                                                                                                   reliable m eans o f achieving a just result and is one o f the m ain causes o f the long delays
      m o d ern th o u g h n o t its etymological and original sense, m ere carelessness. The Oxford
                                                                                                                   between c o m m ittal and trial which are no th in g short o f a disgrace to o u r legal system.
      English D ictionary quotes several examples fro m O ld English, m any from th e Middle
                                                                                                                        In the course o f his s u m m in g up the deputy circuit ju d g e gave to the jury a direction
      English period, an d m any m ore from m o d e rn English. T he word was fam iliar to the
                                                                                                                . as to what a m o u n te d in law to ‘driving recklessly’. This direction the Court o f Appeal
      Venerable Bede, to Langland, to Chaucer, to Sir T ho m as M ore an d to Shakespeare. In its ^
                                                                                                                   described w ith justification, but also w ith the u tm o st sym pathy, as confused. And so it
      alternative an d possibly older pronunciation, an d etym ologically incorrect spelling
                                                                                                                   was, because it sought to com b ine the very recent definition o f driving recklessly in s 2
      (wretchless, wretchlessly, wretchlessness) it was k n o w n to the authors o f the Articles of
                                                                                                                   of the Road Traffic Act 1972 that had been given by Eveleigh LJ in R v Murphy (William)
      religion p rin te d in the book o f C o m m o n Prayer. T h o u g h its pronunciation has varied,
                                                                                                                   [1980]          2 All ER 325, [1980] QB 434 (‘the Murphy definition1) w ith the definition o f
      so far as I k n o w its m eanin g has not. T here is n o separate legal m ean ing to the word.
                                                                                                                    ‘reckless’ in s 1(1) o f th e C rim in al Damage Act 1971 that had been given by Geoffrey
      This retains its dictionary sense, adequately, I believe, expou nded by m y noble and
                                                                                                                    Lane LJ in R v Stephenson [ 1979 ] 2 All ER 1178, [ 1979 ] QB 695. This latter definition has
      learned friend L o rd Diplock. It is, o f course, tru e that, in a legal context, the state o f e
                                                                                                               e been the subject o f disapproval by this House in the im m ediately preceding appeal, R v
      m in d described as ‘reckless’ is discussed in connection w ith conduct objectively
       blam ew o rth y as well as dangerous, while in c o m m o n speech it is possible to conceive (for            Caldwell p 961, ante.                                          ^                            f
                                                                                                                        The jury too m u st have found the direction confusing for, after three and a halt hours
       instance in th e context o f the w in ner o f a m ilitary decoration in circum stances in which
                                                                                                                     retirem ent, they sought fu rth e r elucidation fro m the judge. In substance he repeated to
       he is reckless o f his ow n safety) o f th e use o f the w ord w ith out a blam ew orthy
                                                                                                                     them the Murphy direction and, after a fu rth er short retirem ent, the jury, by a m ajority
       connotation. N o w that m y noble and learned friend has given it a lucid legal
j      interp retatio n I trust that it will cause no m ore trouble to the profession, academ ics or f
                                                                                                               t     of eleven to one, bro u g h t in a verdict o f guilty.
                                                                                                                         The Murphy direction is in the following term s:
       juries. I also associate m yself w ith what h e has said about the Scottish case of Allan v
       Patterson 1980 SLT 77. R v Stephenson [197 9 ] 2 All ER 1 i9 8 ,[ i9 7 9 ] Q B 6 9 5 was discussed                      ‘A driver is guilty o f driv ing recklessly i f he deliberately disregards the obligation
       before us, b u t in view o f what has just been said before y our Lordships in R v Caldwell p                        to drive w ith d u e care an d attention o r is indifferent w hether or not he does so and
       961, a n te th ere is n oth in g I can usefully add, except that I respectfully accept the view of                   thereby creates a risk o f an accident w hich a driver driving with due care and
        the m ajo rity in that case. Since the days o f Noah, the effects o f alcohol have been know n                      attention w ould not create.’
        to induce th e state o f m in d described in English as recklessness, and not to in h ibit it, and fi   9        W hether the Murphy direction is correct o r not is the subject o f the third question o f
        for that m a tte r to rem ove inhibitions in the field o f intention, and not to destory                     law involved in the instant case that the Court o f Appeal, in giving leave to appeal, has
        in tention. But that is a different question.                                                                certified as being o f general public im portance. The o th e r two are: ‘1. Is m ens rea
            In the result the appeal fails.                                                                           involved in the offence o f drivin g recklessly? 2. If yes, what is the m ental elem ent
                                                                                                              ’     required?’
      LORD DIPLOCK. My Lords, on Good Friday, 13th April 1979 . after night had fallen,                               To answer these question necessitates in the first instance a brief reference to the
      the respondent (‘the driver1) was riding his m o to r cycle along an urban street in                \       * legislative history o f those road traffic offences that had for so m any years prior to 1977
      Lowestoft. T he street was subject to a 30 m p h speed lim it and there was a good deal of                    been popularly k n o w n as ‘careless d riv in g ’ and ‘dangerous driving’ respectively.
      o th er traffic using it at the tim e. The driver ran in to and killed a pedestrian w h o was                   The history starts w ith s 1 o f the M otor Car Act 1903, which drew no distinction
      crossing th e road to return from an off-licence shop to h er car w hich was p arked on the                   between d riv in g ‘recklessly’ or ‘negligently’ or ‘in a dangerous m anner’, so far as the
      opposite side o f th e street. T he driver was in d u e course tried on in d ictm ent for the                 gravity o f th e offence was concerned. It was in the following terms:
      offence o f causing her death by driv ing a m o to r vehicle on a road recklessly, contrary to
                                                                                                                               ■( 1) If any person drives a m o to r car on a public highw ay recklessly or negligently,
      s 1 o f the Road Traffic Act 1972.                                                                                   o r at a speed or in a m a n n e r which is dangerous to the public, having regard to all
          Apart fro m th e very tragic consequences o f this accident the case that the ju ry had to
                                                                                                                           the circum stances o f the case, including th e nature, condition and use o f the
      try was ab o u t as sim ple and straightforw ard as any case can be in w hich the charge is one
                                                                                                                           highway, an d to the a m o u n t of traffic w hich actually is at the time, or which m ig h t
      o f d riv in g recklessly. The only question o f fact th at was in issue was the speed at which
                                                                                                                           reasonably be expected to be, on the highw ay, that person shall be guilty o f an
       the driver was travelling im m ediately before th e im pact. The prosecution s case was that
                                                                                                                           offence u n d e r this A c t . . . ’
       the m o to r cycle was being driven at between 60 and 80 m p h and probably m u c h nearer
                                                                                                                    .,i England Law Reports 7th April 1981
All England Law Reports 7th April 1981




                                                                                                 f
                                                                                                                                                                                            i >.


                                     All England L aw Reports                 [1 9 8 1 ] 1 All ER                                                     R v Law rence (Lord Diplock)                               981
980

   This rem ain ed the law u n til it was repealed by the Road Traffic Act 1930, w hich made                          My Lords, your Lordships m ay take judicial notice o f the fact that the a m e n d m e n t o f
separate offences o f dangerous d riv in g and careless driving. The fo rm er was the more                         B 1 and 2 o f the Road Traffic Act 1972 by s 50 (1) o f the C rim inal Law Act 1977, which
serious offence; it was triable on in d ic tm e n t as well as su m m arily and the penalties that              * followed on the Report o f the In terd ep a rtm en tal C o m m itte e on th e D istribution o f
could be im posed included im p ris o n m e n t and were heavier than those for careless                           C r i m i n a l Business betw een th e C row n C o u rt and Magistrates’ Courts in 1975 (Cmnd
driving, w hich was triable su m m a rily only.                                                                    6323), was to restore the difference in culpability betw een d rivin g offences which
   T he description o f the offence o f dangerous driving was:                                                     attracted the severer penalties w hich could be im posed for offences u n d er s 2 o f the Road
                                                                                                                   Traffic Act 1972, and so justified the rig ht o f th e accused to elect trial by jury, and the
                 ([ 'j i f any person drives a m o to r vehicle on a road recklessly, or at a speed
                                                                                                                 , 0jfences under s 3 w hich did no t attract penalties severe enou gh to justify any such right
       or in' a m a n n e r w hich is dangerous to the public, having regard to all the                b           o f election, and by this m eans to reduce the load o f business in the C row n Court.
       circum stances o f th e case, in clu d in g the nature, condition, and use o f the road, and                    The am e n d m e n t took the fo rm o f su b stitu tin g for ss 1 and 2 o f the Road Traffic Act
       the a m o u n t o f traffic w hich is actually at the tim e, or w hich m ig h t reasonably be
                                                                                                                    [972 the following new sections:
       expected to be, on the road . . .
           ‘X2.__(1) If any person drives a m oto r vehicle on a road w ith o u t due care and                              ‘1. A person w h o causes the death o f an oth er person by drivin g a m o to r vehicle
       a ttention or w ith o u t reasonable consideration for other persons using th e road ..                            on a road recklessly shall be guilty o f an offence.
                                                                                                                C           ‘2 . A person w ho drives a m o to r vehicle on a road recklessly shall be guilty of an
 To these w ere added by s 8 o f th e Road Traffic Act 1956 th e new offence o f causing death C
                                                                                                                          offence.’
 by reckless or dangerous d riving, th e m an n er o f driving involved in this offence being
 th e sam e as u n d e r s 12(1) o f th e Road Traffic Act 1930.                                                       T he elim ination o f the reference to d riv in g at a speed or in a m a n n e r dangerous to the
     These descriptions o f the offences w ere reproduced in ss 1 and 2 an d in s 3 respectively                   public was obviously intended to rem ove the overlap betw een the offence in s 2 which
 o f the Road Traffic Act 1972. D angero us driving continued to be triable on indictm ent                         gave a right to trial by ju ry and th e lesser offence in s 3 that did not, w hich had resulted
 as well as su m m a rily , careless d riv in g rem ained triable su m m arily only.                    ^       v from the decision in R v Evans. Section 3 creates an absolute offence in th e sense in which
     A lth o u g h the adverb ‘recklessly’ as descriptive o f a m a n n e r o f d riving has been there            that term is co m m o n ly used to d enote an offence for w hich the only m ens rea needed is
 ever since th e single offence was split up into two o f w hich one was treated as much                           simply that the prohibited physical act (actus reus) done by the accused was directed by
 graver th an th e other, th e practice so far as living m em o ry goes had been to charge                         a m in d that was conscious o f w hat his body was doing, it being unnecessary to show that
 defendants w ith driving ‘at a speed or in a m an n er w hich is dangerous to the public’ and                     his m in d was also conscious o f the possible consequences o f his doin g it. So s 3 takes care
 not w ith driv in g ‘recklessly’. T his is w hy the offence became popularly k now n as                           of this kind o f inattention or m isju d g m e n t to w hich th e ordinarily careful m otorist is
  dangerous, n o t as reckless, d riv in g ; and juries, w hen the trial was on indictm en t, were e            o occasionally subject w ith o u t its necessarily involving any m oral turp itu d e , although it
  instructed to consider w h e th e r in th eir ju d g m e n t the defendant was driv in g in a m anner            causes inconvenience and annoyance to o th e r users o f th e road. So th ere is no reason why
  th a t was dangerous to the public. It was not thoug ht necessary to confuse th em by                             your Lordships should go out o f your way to give to the new s 2 a w ide a m b it th at would
  talking about ‘subjective’ and ‘objective’ tests, although before 1963 they m ig h t have                         recreate the fo rm er overlap w ith s 3.
  been told that to convict o f dangerous driving they m u st be satisfied that the way in                              My Lords, this House has very recently had occasion in R v Caldwell p 961. ante, to give
  w hich th e defendant was d riv in g was som ething worse than a m ere failure to show                            close consideration to th e concept o f recklessness as constituting m en s rea in criminal
  proper consideration for o th er people using the road o r som e m in o r m isju d g m e n t o f the f        f law. T h e conclusion reached by th e m ajo rity was th at th e adjective reckless w hen used
  situation o r m o m en tary lack o f attention. As a Queen s Bench ju d g e I used so to direct                   in a crim inal statute, ie the C rim inal D am age Act 1971, had not acquired a special
   juries myself, in trying cases o f causing death by dangerous driving.                                           m eaning as a te rm o f legal art, b u t bore its popular or dictionary m e a n in g o f careless,
       By its decision in R v Evans [ 1962] 3 All ER 1086, [ 1963] 1 QB 41 however, the Court                       regardless, or heedless o f the possible h a rm fu l consequences o f on e’s acts. T h e sam e m ust
  o f C rim in al Appeal for practical purposes abolished the difference betw een the standard                      be tru e o f the adverbial derivative ‘recklessly’.
   o f d riving in careless d rivin g an d that involved in dangerous driv ing w here danger to the                     T h e context in which th e w ord ‘reckless’ appears in s 1 o f the Crim inal Damage Act
   public did in fact result. At th e trial o f Evans the judge had directed the ju ry ([1962] 3 g                   1971 differs in two respects from th e context in w hich th e w ord recklessly appears in
                                                                                                                 9 ss 1 and 2 o f the Road Traffic Act 1971, as n ow am ended. In th e C rim inal Dam age Act
  All ER 1086 at 1087, [1963] 1 QB 411 at 413-414):
                                                                                                                     1971 th e actus reus, th e physical act o f destroying o r dam agin g p roperty belonging to
           ‘. . in law it is n o w well settled that if the driving is in fact dangerous, and that                   another, is in itself a tort. It is not so m e th in g th a t one does regularly as part o f the
         dangerous driv ing is caused by som e carelessness on the part o f the accused, then                        ordinary routine o f daily life, such as d riv in g a car o r a m o to r cycle. So there is
         how ever slight the carelessness, that is dangerous driving.’                                               som ething out o f the ordinary to call th e doer’s atten tio n to w hat he is doing and its
  T his s u m m in g up was approved on appeal. The court said ([ 1962] 3 All ER 1086 at 1088,             fo    fj possible consequences, w hich is absent in road traffic offences. T h e o th e r difference in
  [1963] 1 QB 412 at 418):                                                                                           context is that in s 1 o f the C rim inal D am age Act 1971 th e m e n s rea o f the offences is
                                                                                                                     defined as being reckless w h e th e r particular h a rm fu l consequences w ould occur, whereas
            'If a m an in fact adopts a m a n n e r o f driving which th e ju ry th in k was dangerous               in ss 1 and 2 o f the Road Traffic Act 1972, as n ow am ended, th e possible harm ful
         to th e o th er road users in all th e circumstances, then on the issue o f guilt it matters                consequences o f which the driver m u st be sho w n to have been heedless are left to be
         not w h e th e r he was deliberately reckless, m om entarily inattentive or even doing his                  im plied from the use o f the w ord ‘recklessly’ itself. In ordinary usage recklessly as
         in co m p eten t best.’                                                                                 j descriptive o f a physical act such as d riv ing a m o to r vehicle w hich can be perform ed in
       This m erg in g o f the standards o f defective driving that was to a m o u n t to the offences               a variety o f different ways, som e o f th e m entailing danger and som e o f th e m not, refers
   o f careless an d dangerous d riv in g respectively, leaving the only difference betw een the                      not only to the state o f m in d o f th e doer o f th e act w h en he decides to do it but also
   tw o offences that in the latter d an g er to the public had in fact been caused, led to an                       qualifies the m a n n e r in w hich the act itself is perfo rm ed. O ne does not speak o f a person
   increase in the n u m b e r o f cases in w hich the prosecution charged the defendant with                        acting ‘recklessly’, even th o u g h he has given no th o u g h t at all to the consequences o f his
   dangerous d riv in g an d the d efend ant, w ith his driving licence at stake, alm ost invariably                  act, unless the act is one that presents a real risk o f h a rm fu l consequences w hich anyone
                                                                                                                      acting w ith reasonable prudence w ould recognise an d give heed to. So the actus reus of
   elected to be tried by jury.
All England Law Reports 7th April 1981                                                                       AH E n g la n d Law Reports 7th April 1981




982                                  All England Law Reports                   [1981] 1 All ER               HL                                    R v Lawrence (Lord Diplock)                         983

the offence u n d e r ss i and 2 is not sim ply d riv in g a m o to r vehicle on a road, bu t driving        draw the inference to w hich I have referred, the practical result o f approaching the
it in a m a n n e r which in fact creates a real risk o f h a rm fu l consequences resulting from            Question o f what constitutes driv in g recklessly in the way that was adopted by the Lord
it. Since d riving in such a m an n er as to do no worse than create a risk o f causing *                  * Justice-General in Allan v Patterson is likely to be any different from the result of
 inconvenience o r annoyance to o ther road users constitutes the lesser offence un d er s 3                 instructing a ju ry in some such term s as I have suggested above. T he sam e Act applies
the m a n n e r o f d rivin g th at constitutes the actus reus o f an offence under ss 1 and 2 must          to both countries; it w ould be u n fortun ate if the interpretation p u t on it by the Scottish
be worse than th at; it m u st be such as to create a real risk o f causing physical injury to               c o u r t s differed fro m th at p u t on it by the courts in E ngland and Wales.
som eone else w ho happens to be using the road o r dam ag e to property m ore substantial                       I would give the follow ing answers to the questions certified by the Court o f Appeal:
than the kind of m in o r dam age that m ay be caused by an erro r o f ju d g m en t in the course 1.         i. m ens rea is involved in the offence of driving recklessly; 2. th e m ental elem ent
o f parking one's car.                                                                                       required is that, before ad o pting a m an n er o f driv ing that in fact involves an obvious and
    T he Murphy direction, as it seems to m e, is defective in this respect before one comes                 serious risk o f causing physical injury to some oth er person w ho m ay happen to be using
to any question o f m ens rea. By referring to the d u ty to drive with ‘due care and                        the road Or o f doin g substantial dam age to property, the driver has failed to give any
atten tio n ’, w hich is a direct quotation from s 3, it m akes th e standard o f driv ing that              thought to the possibility o f there being any such risk, or, h aving recognised that there
m ust be m aintained, in o rder to avoid the m o re serious offence o f driving recklessly, the              was some risk involved, has none the less gone on to take it; 3. the Murphy direction is
sam e as in the less serious offence un d er s 3 a n d thus perpetuates the very m ischief which             wrong in the respects referred to earlier.
the 1977 am e n d m e n ts were intended to rem edy. For w h en a decision has to be made ^                C Since the d eputy circuit judge gave to the ju ry w hat was substantially the Murphy
w hether to prosecute a d riv er for an offence u n d e r s 2 instead o f under s 3 the only                 direction itself and also a som ew hat confused version o f it and both o f these stated the
material available to the prosecution is evidence o f w hat th e driver actually did, the actus              law too unfavourably to the driver, this appeal m u st in m y view be dismissed.
reus o f the offence. The prosecution has no way o f k n o w in g at that stage, w h en the
choice o f charge has to be m ade, w hat was th e state o f m in d o f the driver w hen or                    LORD FRASER OF TULLYBELTON. My Lords, i have had the advantage o f
im m ediately before he did it. It can only in fer this fro m w hat the driver was seen to do ^             1 reading in draft the speeches o f m y noble and learned friends Lord Hailsham LC and
and any statem en t that he m ay have made.                                                                   Lord Diplock, and i agree w ith them . 1 would dismiss this appeal.
    1tu rn now to the m ens rea. My task is greatly sim plified by w hat has already been said
about the concept o f recklessness in crim inal law in R v Caldwell. W arning was there                      LORD ROSKILL. My Lords, I have had the advantage o f reading in draft the speeches
given against ad o pting th e simplistic approach o f treating all problem s o f criminal                    of m y noble and learned friends Lord Hailsham LC an d Lord Diplock. I agree that this
liability as soluble by classifying the test o f liability as being either ‘subjective’ or                   appeal fails for the reasons given by m y noble and learned friend Lord Diplock in his
‘objective’. Recklessness on the part o f the d oer o f an act does presuppose that there is g             g speech. O n the w ider issues w ith w hich m y noble and learned friends Lord Hailsham
som ething in the circum stances that w ould have d raw n the attention o f an ordinary                      LC and Lord Diplock deal, i wish to express m y respectful concurrence with what they
p rud ent individual to the possibility that his act was capable o f causing the k ind of                    have said. 1 would only add that bu t for the tragedy involved in this case, the charge
serious h arm fu l consequences that the section w hich creates the offence was intended to                  would have been one o f reckless d rivin g which could an d very probably wouid have been
prevent, and that the risk o f those h arm ful consequences occu rring was not so slight that                heard in a magistrates’ court, it is difficult to believe that any magistrates' court would
an ordinary p ru d e n t individual would feel justified in treatin g th em as negligible. It is             not have dealt w ith this case if not in a m o rn in g at least w ithin one full day and reached
only w hen this is so that the doer o f the act is acting ‘recklessly’ if, before-doing the act, f         f the correct answer, w hatever it m ig h t be.
he either fails to give any th o u g h t to th e possibility o f th ere being any such risk or,
having recognised that th ere was such risk, he nevetherless goes on to do it.                                LORD BRIDGE OF HARWICH.                  My L o rd s ,! have had the advantage o f reading in
    In m y view, an appropriate instruction to th e ju r y on w hat is m eant by driving                      draft the speeches o f m y noble and learned friends Lord Hailsham LC and Lord Diplock.
recklessly w ould be that th ey m u st be satisfied o f tw o th in g s: first, that the defendant was         1 fully agree w ith th e m both. Accordingly i too w ould dismiss this appeal.
in fact driving th e vehicle in such a m a n n e r as to create, ajp obvious and serious risk o f
causing physical in ju ry to som e o ther person w h o m ig h t happen to be using theToacTOr g            g Appeal dismissed. Certified questions answered in form indicated in Lord Diplock’s opinion.
o f doing substantial dam age to property; and, second, th at in driv in g in that m an n er th e
defendant did so w ith o u t having given an y th o u g h t to th e possibility o f there being any                     Sharpe, Pritchard & Co, agents for M F C Harvey, Ipswich (for the Crown);
                                                                                                              Solicitors:
such risk or, having recognised that there was som e risk involved, had none the less gone^                   Goldkorm, Davies & Co, agents for Norton, Peskett ir Forward, Lowestoft (for the
on to take it.                                                                                                respondent).
    it is for th e ju ry to decide w hether the risk created by th e m a n n e r in which the vehicle
was being driv en was b oth obvious and serious and, in d eciding this, they m ay apply the fo                                                                             Mary Rose P lu m m er Barrister.
standard o f th e ordinary p ru d en t m otorist as represented by themselves.
    If satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was created by the m an n er o f the
defendant’s driving, th e ju ry are entitled to in fer that he was in one o r other o f the states
o f m in d required to constitute the offence and will probably d o so; b u t regard m u st be
given to any explanation he gives as to his state o f m in d which may displace the
inference.                                                                                             j
    My Lords, in Allan v Patterson 1980 SLT 77, L ord Emslie in the High C ou rt o f
Justiciary did apply the label ‘objective’ to th e test o f w h eth er a driver was driving
 recklessly w ith in the m ean in g o f s 3 o f the Act. W hile for reasons set out in greater detail
 in m y speech in R v Caldwell I th in k it is desirable in all cases o f crim inal liability to avoid
 the use o f this label, 1d o not th in k that, having regard to the likelihood that the ju ry will
 1058                                  All England Law Rep^p _______[1983] 2 All ER                                              HL                           R v Seymour (Lord Diplock)                                 1059

                                                                                                                                 po int o f law o f general public im portance was involved in the decision to dismiss the
                                           R v Seymour                                                                           appeal and refused leave to appeal to the House o f Lords. O n 17 M arch 1983 the Appeal
                                                                                                                                 C o m m itte e o f the House o f Lords gave the appellant leave to appeal against the decision.
H O U SE O F LORDS
                                                                                                                                 T he facts are set o u t in the opinion o f Lord Roskill.
L O R D D I P L O C K , L O R D FRASER O F TU LL YB ELT ON . L O R D R OS KILL , LOR D B RIDGE O F H A R W I C H A N D
L O R D T EM P LEM AN
                                                                                                                                 Michael Connell QC and John Cartwright for the appellant.
7 J U N E , 21 JU L Y 1983
                                                                                                                                 Graeme Hamilton QC and Conrad Seagroatt QC for the Crown.
Road traffic - Reckless driving - Causing death by reckless driving - Charge of manslaughter -                               ^
                                                                                                                                 T heir Lordships took tim e for consideration.
Proper direction tojury
                                                                                                                                 21 July. The following opinions were delivered.
W h ere m anslaug hter is charged w h en the victim was killed as a result o f reckless drivin g
by the defendant on a public highway, th e trial jud g e should give the ju ry th e direction
                                                                                                                                 L O R D DIPLOCK. My Lords, 1 have had the advantage o f reading in draft the speech
laid d o w n as appropriate in a case o f causing death by reckless driving, while also p o in tin g
                                                                                                                                 o f m y noble and learned friend Lord Roskill. 1agree w ith it, and for the reasons he gives
out that to constitute the offence o f m anslaughter/fhe risk o f death being caused by the c
                                                                                                                                 I w ou ld dismiss this appeal.
m a n n e r o f the d efendan t’s driving m u st be very hign, and o m ittin g if necessary any
reference to there being a risk o f dam age to property i f that is irrelevant (see p 1059 b to
                                                                                                                                 L O R D FRASER OF T U LLY B ELTO N . My Lords, 1 have had the advantage of
d, p 1063a!) and p 1066 b to d, post); R v Lawrence [1981] 1 All ER 974 adopted.                                                 reading in draft the speech o f m y noble and learned friend Lord Roskill. I agree that, for
     A ltho ugh the legal ingredients o f the co m m o n law offence o f m ansla ugh ter an d the
                                                                                                                                 th e reasons stated by him , the appeal should be refused.
statutory offence o f causing death by reckless d riving contrary to s i “ o f the Road Traffic
                                                                                                                                     But I wish to refer to the difference which the appeal has brought to light between the
Act 1972 are identical they should not be joined in the sam e in d ictm ent, one count ^
                                                                                                                                 practice in the courts o f England and Wales an d that in the courts o f Scotland w ith regard
alleging m an sla ug hter and another alleging the statutory offence, because the degree o f
                                                                                                                                 to prosecutions for causing death by reckless driving of m o to r vehicles, in cases which
recklessness required for conviction o f the statutory offence is less than that req u ired for
                                                                                                                                 are regarded as particularly bad. In E ngland an d Wales the practice is to prosecute the
conviction o f m an slaugh ter and a ju ry o u g h t n o t to be required to assess differing degrees
                                                                                                                                 driver on a charge o f m anslaughter, but not to charge the statutory offence o f causing
o f tu rp itu d e w h en d eterm in in g a d efen d an t’s guilt or innocence, since the degree o f
                                                                                                                                 death by reckless driving, contrary to the Road Traffic Act 1972, s 1, as am ended by the
t u rp itu d e is a m atter relevant to sentence rath er than conviction (see p 1059 b to d and
                                                                                                                                 C rim inal Law Act 1977, s 50. In Scotland the practice is to prosecute on one charge o f
p 1065 c to p 1066 d, post).                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                 culpable hom icide, o r alternatively o f the statutory offence, leaving the ju ry (if it decides
                                                                                                                                 to convict) to decide w h ether to do so o n the first or second alternative. The fact that
N otes                                                                                                                           th ere is such a difference betw een the procedure in the two jurisdictions is perhaps
For trial for m an slaugh ter by causing death by reckless driving, see 33 H alsbury’s Laws                                      surprising, as there is no relevant difference between the crimes o f m anslaughter and
(3rd edn) 624, para 1050.                                                                                                        culpable hom icide, and the statutory offence is laid dow n by the same Act in both
                                                                                                                                 countries.
Cases referred to in opinions                                                                                                         Lord Roskill has explained the logical reasons why the English practice, at least since
Andrews v DPP [ 1937] 2 All ER 552, [1937] AC 576, HL.                                  1                                         the passing o f the C rim inal Law Act 1977, has been to prosecute only for one or other of
 Dunn v HM Advocate i960 JC 55.                                                                                                   the c o m m o n law or the statutory offences. I have no intention o f criticising the English
 HM Advocate v Earnshaw 1982 SLT 179.                                                                                             practice, as it is applied in England, b u t there are in m y opinion good reasons why the
Jennings v United States Government [1982] 3 All ER 104, [1983] AC 624, [1982] 3 W L R                                            Scottish practice should continue as it is in Scotland.
   450, H L ; rvsg [1982] 3 All ER 104, [1982] 1 W L R 949, DC.                          „                                            T he Scottish practice was settled in Dunn v HM Advocate 1960JC 55 where the accused
R v Caldwell [1981] 1 All ER 961, [1982] AC 341, [1981] 2 W LR 509, HL.                                                           had been tried on an indictm en t w hich charged culpable hom icide and the statutory
R v Church [1965] 2 All ER 72, [1966] 1 QB 59, [1965] 2 W LR 1220, CCA.                                                           offence as alternatives, and had been convicted o f culpable homicide. At that time, the
R v Lawrence [1981] 1 All ER 974, [1982] AC 510, [1981] 2 W LR 524, HL.                                                           statutory offence was that created by the Road Traffic Act 1956, s 8(1) (driving ‘recklessly
R v Lowe [1973] 1 All ER 805, [1973] QB 702, [1973] 2 W L R 4 8 i,C A .                                                           or at a speed or in a m a n n e r w hich is dangerous to the public1). As the degree o f
R v Pigg [1982] 2 All ER 591, [1982] 1 W L R 762, CA; rvsd [1983] 1 All ER 56, [1983] 1                                           negligence w hich constitutes dangerous drivin g is less that that which constitutes reckless
   W L R 6, HL,                                                                          fy                                       driving, the statutory offence in that form was clearly less serious than the co m m on law
                                                                                                                                  crim e o f culpable homicide, w hich requires recklessness. But it is plain that neither the
A ppeal                                                                                                                            trial ju d g e (Lord Guest) no r the Lord Justice-Clerk (Thomson), w ho delivered the only
O n l s j a n u a r y 1982 the appellant, E dw ard Jo h n Seym our, was convicted at the C row n                                  reasoned opinion in the High C o urt o f Justiciary, based the distinction on the use o f the
C o u rt at N o rth a m p to n before Bush J an d a ju r y o f m anslaughter by unlaw fully killing                                w ord ‘dangerous'. Accordingly, the a m e n d m e n t m ade by the Act o f 1977. which deleted
Iris Ada Burrows on 30 April 1981 by his reckless driv ing on a public highw ay. T he                                              dangerous driving from the statutory offence leaving it consisting only o f driving
appellant was sentenced to five years im p ris o n m e n t and disqualified from h old ing or                            j         recklessly, has not affected the practice, which continues to be that in cases which appear
ob taining a d riving licence for a period o f six years. He appealed against his conviction                                       to the prosecutor to be particularly bad cases, culpable hom icide and the statutory offence
to the C o u rt o f Appeal, Crim inal Division (W atkins LJ, Lawson and Stephen B row n JJ)                                        are charged alternatively. At least one case has been prosecuted in that way since 1977:
w hich dism issed his appeal on 12 January 1983. O n 26 January 1983 the court certified                                           see HM Advocate v Earnshaw, tried at Ayr on 22 May 1981 (reported only on another
u n d e r s 33(2) o f the C rim in al Appeal Act 1968, on the application o f the appellant, that a                                po int on appeal in 1982 SLT 179).
                                                                                                                                       The Scottish practice can, in m y view, be justified on the ground that, w hen Parliament
a Section i , so far as material, is set out at p 106 1hj. post                                                                    created the statutory offence o f reckless driving, it left the co m m o n law crimes o f
1060                            All England Law R epot^^                      [1983] 2 All ER               HL      _________               R v Seymour (Lord Fraser)                                   1061

 culpable hom icide, and m an slaug hter, in existence. This House decided in Jennings                      caused by the m a n n e r o f the accused’s driv in g was very high. Such a direction will, o f
 v United States Government [1982] 3 All ER 104, [1983] AC 624 that the crim e of                           course always be necessary where the co m m o n law crim e an d the statutory offence are
 m anslaughter had not been im pliedly repealed and the decision is in principle applicable                 charged alternatively, b u t where, as in this case, the c o m m o n law crim e is charged alone,
 to culpable hom icide in Scotland. But in Jennings [1982] 3 All ER 104 at 117, [1983] AC                   it m ay be unnecessary and inappropriate. In the present case I th in k it was unnecessary.
624 at 6 44-6 4 5 Lord Roskill said that ‘the ingredients o f the statutory offence are co­                    I would dismiss the appeal.
extensive w ith the ingredients o f the . . . c o m m o n law offence o f m ansla ugh ter’, and it is
                                                                                                            L O R D R O S K I L L . M y Lords, this appeal arises fro m the dismissal on i2 ja n u a r y 1983
suggested that the effect o f th at statem en t is that any a ttem p t to distinguish between the
 two offences according to th eir respective degrees o f gravity, or indeed on any other jj               . by the C ourt o f Appeal, C rim inal Division (W atkins LJ, Lawson and Stephen Brown JJ)
ground, is illogical and w rong. It is said that they are not two offences b u t only one                   o f the appellant’s appeal against his conviction on 15 Jan uary 1982 for m anslaughter after
offence w ith two names. I do no t accept that arg um en t. A lth ough the ingredients of the               a trial at the Crow n C o urt at N o rth am p to n before Bush J and a ju ry . The Court o f Appeal,
 two offences are the sam e, the degree o f recklessness requ ired for conviction o f the                   Crim inal Division granted the appellant a certificate to the term s o f which I will later
statutory offence is less th an that required for conviction o f the c o m m o n law crime. That            refer. Leave to appeal was refused by the court b u t was later given by y our Lordships
 is w hy the m a x im u m sentence for the statutory offence (five years’ im prisonm ent) is less
than the m a x im u m sentence for culpable hom icide or m an sla u g h ter (im prisonm ent for c                The C row n’s case w hich was accepted by the ju ry was that the appellant had killed Mrs
life). That is also why, in cases such as that which is the subject o f the instant appeal,                  Ada Burrows by his reckless driv ing on a public highw ay o f an 11 ton lorry The
which the prosecutor considers to be very grave, it is th o u g h t appropriate to prosecute                 allegation was that on 30 April 1981 follow ing a quarrel b etw een the appellant and Mrs
for the c o m m o n law crim e.                                                                              Burrows, w ith w h o m the appellant had been living, the appellant m et Mrs Burrows
    But then it is said to be w ro n g for the ju ry to be concerned w ith assessing the different           d riving a Vauxhall car in the opposite direction fro m that in w hich he was driving the
degrees o f tu rp itu d e b etw een one case and another. It is o f course the law in Scotland, as           lorry. There was a slight collision. Mrs Burrows got out o f the Vauxhall car and
in England, that the decision on sentence is for the jud g e alone, b u t the ju r y ’s decision to ^      . approached the lorry. He, allegedly in ten ding only to push her car out o f the way, drove
convict o f culpable h o m icide rath er than o f the statutory offence does not oblige the                  his lorry up against the car. He did so so violently that the car was m oved some ten to
ju d g e to impose a sentence o f m o re than five years’ im p riso n m en t. It m erely makes it            twenty feet and one o f its tyres was forced off. In the course o f so doing Mrs Burrows was
possible for h im to do so, by increasing the range o f p u n ish m e n ts w ithin which he can              crushed betw een the tw o vehicles. H er injuries were such that, in the words o f an
select that w hich he considers appropriate. Since the co m m o n law crim e and the statutory               am bulance driver w ho gave e v i d e n c e s q u oted by the ju d g e in his su m m in g up, had
offence co n tin ue to exist together, and since (as is agreed) th e distinction betw een the two             the am bulance driver picked her up in the n o rm al way as am bu lance drivers do, she
                                                                                                          „ w o u ld have broken in tw o.’ She died about a week later on 6 May 1981.
depends on the degree o f wickedness exhibited by the accused, it seems to m e to be e
perfectly pro per (to p u t it no higher) that the d uty o f assessing th e degree o f wickedness                 T he jury accepted those facts as established w ith o u t hesitation for they unanim ously
should be p erform ed by the ju ry in order to decide w hich offence (if any) he has                          convicted the appellant in just over three-quarters o f an hour. It was an extrem ely grave
com m itted. That view has th e ov erw h elm in g advantage in practice that it avoids the                    case o f m o tor-m anslaug hter’ to use the popular phrase, a view which the trial jud ge
risk, which existed in th e instant appeal, that a person w ho is accused only o f                            clearly took since he passed a sentence o f five years’ im p ris o n m e n t on the appellant and
m anslaughter or culpable ho m icid e m ay be acquitted o f that charge and m ay then go                      your Lordships were told that there was no appeal to the Court o f Appeal, Crim inal
un punished, altho ugh he w o u ld have been convicted o f the statutory offence if it had f              f Division against that sentence.                                                            j-r
been charged as an alternative. Such a result would not, in m y view, be in the interests o f                      My Lords, in recent years, and indeed since the e n actm en t o f s 8 o f the Road Traffic
justice and I w ould be sorry to see the risk o f its occurring being introduced into Scottish                 Act 1956 w hen the statutory offence o f causing death by reckless or dangerous driving
procedure w here at present it does not arise. If it becam e necessary for the judge, in                       was first created, charges o f ‘m o to r m an sla u g h ter’ have been com paratively rare. It is
answ er to questions from th e ju ry , to refer to the question o f sentence, I th in k that a jury            co m m o n know ledge that the statutory offence was created carrying a m a x im u m penalty
is well able to understand the difference betw een selecting th e actual sentence (which is                    o f five years’ im p riso n m en t because o f the e x trem e reluctance o f juries to convict
the d u ty o f the judge) an d selecting the offence which carries a maximum sentence at least g          „ m otorists o f m anslaughter. After 1956 w h en the statutory offence was created, the
adequate to cover what is requ ired in the circum stances o f th e case (which is the effect of           9 practice in England and Wales was to charge the offence o f causing death by dangerous
the j u r y ’s decision betw een culpable hom icide and the statutory offence). If the choice is               drivin g only and not by reckless driving.
betw een leaving the ju ry w ith a poor im pression o f the trial process, on the one hand,                        The subsequent legislative history o f this offence has recently been twice discussed in
and risking allowing a guilty m otorist to escape wholly u n p u n ish e d because o f some                    your Lordships’ House, first, in the speech o f m y noble and learned friend Lord Diploc
supposed technical difficulty in brin g in g alternative charges against h im , on the other                    in R V Lawrence [1981] 1 All ER 9 7 4 , [1982] A C 510 and, second, in m y speech mjenmngs
hand, I would have no hesitation in preferring the former.                                            ^    h v United States Government [ .9 8 2 ] 3 All ER 104, [1983] AC 624 an d requires no fu rth er
    I would only add that the n u m b e r o f cases in which, eith er in Scotland or in England,           h repetition. Suffice it to say that by reason o f th e en actm en t o f s 50 o f the C rim inal Law
it will be appropriate to prosecute a m otorist on a charge o f culpable homicide or                            Act 1977, the fo rm er provisions o f s 8 o f the 1956 Act, w hich by 1 9 7 7 had becom e 1(1)
m an slaugh ter m u st be very sm all, as it is extrem ely rare for conviction on such a charge                 o f the Road Traffic Act 1972, were replaced by a new s 1 w hich provided: A person w ho
to result in a sentence in excess o f five years’ im prisonm ent. In the instant appeal, and                     causes the death o f another person by d rivin g a m o to r vehicle on a road recklessly shall
also in the Earnshaw case, w h ere the accused was convicted o f culpable homicide,                           be guilty o f an offence.’                                                 .          ,           . _
sentences o f five years’ im p ris o n m e n t were im posed.                                         j           This enactm en t in due course gave rise to two questions. First, what was the m ean in g
    W ith regard to the certified q uestion in this appeal, the subm ission o f counsel for the             1 o f the word ‘reckless’ in this new section? Or, to p u t the sam e point in other words w hat
appellant that the direction suggested in R v Lawrence [1981] 1 All ER 974, [1982] AC                         was the proper direction for the trial ju d g e to give to a ju ry as to the test to be a p p 'jfd in
                                                                                                              d eterm in in g w h eth er or not a person charged un d er this section was guilty o f the offence
51 o should not be given in its entirety w here the charge is one o f m anslaughter, is not,
                                                                                                              charged? Second, and in particular having regard to th e speech o f Lord Atkin in Andrews
in m y opinion, well founded. If any modification o f the ‘Lawrence direction’ is appropriate
in a case w here m an sla u g h ter alone is charged, it w ould be to add a w arn in g to the jury            v D P P [ . 937 ] 2 All ER 552 at 557, [>937] AC 576 at 584, did the co m m o n law offence of
                                                                                                               m anslaughter by reckless driving o f a m o to r vehicle survive the enactm ent o f s 50 o f the
that before convicting o f m an sla u g h ter they m u st be satisfied that the risk o f death being
                                                                                                                             /
1062                              All England Law R e p o rt^                   [1983] 2 AUER                         HL                            R v Seymour (Lord Roskill)                                 1063

 1977 Act, for if it did so survive there w ould be two offences, one at co m m on law and                      th at w here the co m m o n law offence o f m anslaug hter was charged, the ju ry should be
the o th er by statute which, since the ingredients o f each were indistinguishable, w ould              a   a  directed that the Crown m u st fu rth er prove that the appellant recognised that som e risk
be co-extensive, th o u g h one carried the m a x im u m penalty o f im p riso nm en t for life, and            was involved and had none the less proceeded to take that risk.
the other o f five years’ im prisonm ent only.                                                                     T he ju d g e rejected the submission and gave the Lawrence direction subject only to the
   T he m ean in g o f the words ‘reckless’ and ‘recklessly’ cam e before your Lordships’ House                 om ission o f any reference to the ‘obvious and serious risk . . . o f doing substantial dam age
in tw o cases, nam ely R v Caldwell [ 1981] 1 All ER 961, [1982] AC 341 and R v Lawrence                        to p ro p erty ’: see R v Lawrence [1981] 1 All ER 974 at 982, [ 1982] AC 5 r 0 at 526. In m y
to w hich I have already referred. The form er case arose o u t o f the Criminal Dam age Act                    view, he was entirely right not to refer to dam age to property, a reference to w hich was
 1971- The latter was a tragic case arising u n d e r s 1 o f the Road Traffic Act 1972, as                  Ij irrelevant in this case and m ig h t well have confused the jury. His adm irably clear
am ended in 1977, o f causing death by reckless driving.                                                        direction not only properly reflected the decision o f this House in R v Lawrence bu t also
   T he decisions in this House, in the form er case by a m ajority and in the latter                           Lord A tk in ’s speech in Andrews v DPP. I quote the relevant passage:
unanim ously, m ade it plain w hat the words ‘reckless’ or ‘recklessly’ m eant in these
                                                                                                                                ‘The second question you have to decide: was the driving that caused those
statutes, and in the latter case w hat the proper direction to the ju ry was in a case o f
                                                                                                                            injuries reckless? If so, then it is m anslaughter. If you are not satisfied that it was
causing death by th e reckless driving o f a m o tor vehicle. In R v Lawrence [ 1981 ] 1 All ER
                                                                                                                            reckless, then the verdict is not guilty. To a m o u n t to reckless driving m ere
974 at 982, [1982] AC 510 at 526-527 m y noble an d learned friend Lord Diplock, in a                    p   £             negligence is not enough. His conduct m u st go beyond the question o f com pensation
speech w ith w hich all m y noble and learned friends th en sitting agreed, said:
                                                                                                                            betw een citizens and a m o u n t to, in y o ur view, crim inal conduct requiring
        ‘In m y view, an appropriate instruction to the ju ry on w hat is m eant by driving                                 p u n ish m e n t. You have to be satisfied on the question o f recklessness that he drove
     recklessly w ould be that they m ust be satisfied o f tw o things: first, that the defendant                           in such a m a n n e r as to create an obvious and serious risk o f causing physical h arm
     was in fact driving the vehicle in such a m a n n e r as to create an obvious an d serious                             to som e other person w ho m ig h t happen to be using the road at the tim e . . . Once
     risk o f causing physical injury to do som e o ther person w ho m ig ht happen to be                                   you are satisfied that the m a n n e r o f his driving was such as to create an obvious and
     using the road or o f doing substantial dam age to p ro perty; and, second, that in                 d   d             serious risk o f causing physical h a rm to a person using the road at the tim e, you also
     driving in that m a n n e r the defendant did so w ith o u t having given any th o u g h t to                          have to be satisfied that driving in that m a n n e r he did so w ithout having given any
     the possibility o f there being any such risk or, having recognised that there was                                     t h o u g h t to the possibility o f there being any such risk, or alternatively, having
     som e risk involved, had none the less gone on to take it. It is for the ju ry to decide                               recognised that there was som e risk involved, none the less w ent on to take it; in
     w h eth er the risk created by the m an n er in w hich the vehicle was being driven was                                o ther words, he was reckless. He reckoned not o f the consequences. In d eterm in in g
     both obvious and serious and, in deciding this, they m ay apply the standard o f the                                   the quality o f his driving, you apply the standards o f the ordinary reasonable
     ordinary p ru d en t m otorist as represented by themselves. If satisfied that an obvious           ®   e             m otorist. You, o f course, take into account all the evidence including his
     and serious risk was created by the m an n er o f the d efen d an t’s driving, the ju ry are                           explanation.’
     entitled to infer that he was in one or o ther o f the states o f m ind required to
                                                                                                                          As already stated, the appellant was convicted. He appealed and his appeal to the Court
     constitute the offence and will probably do so; b u t regard m ust be given to any
                                                                                                                      o f Appeal was dismissed. By the date o f the appeal Jennings had been decided in your
     explanation he gives as to his state o f m in d w hich m ay displace the inference.’                             Lordships' House. The reasons given for the dismissal o f his appeal were in substance,
    As to the second question, there had been, as W atkins LJ said in giving the ju d g m e n t          f   f        that since y ou r Lordships' House had held that the ingredients o f the co m m o n law and
o f the C ourt o f Appeal, C rim inal Division in th e present case, a body o f opinion w hich                        statutory offences were identical, the Lawrence direction, which was appropriate w h en
th o u g h t that the co m m o n law offence o f m anslau ghter by the reckless driving o f a m o to r                the statutory offence was charged, m ust be equally appropriate w h en the c o m m o n law
vehicle m u st be taken to have been im pliedly repealed by s 50 o f the 1977 Act, or                                 offence o f m anslau ghter was charged. The C ourt o f Appeal, C rim inal Division granted
possibly earlier. That view was taken by the Divisional C ourt in Jennings [1982] 3 All ER                            the appellant a certificate in the following term s:
104, [1982] 1 WLR 949. But your Lordships’ House in that case unanim ously held                                                ‘W here m anslaughter is charged and the circumstances o f the offence are that the
otherwise. The a rg u m en t founded on im plied repeal was rejected for the reasons given               a   g              victim was killed as the result o f the reckless driving o f the defendant on a public
in m y speech (see [1982] 3 All ER 104 at 113-117, [1983] AC 624 at 639-644) w hich I                                       highw ay; should the trial Judge give the ju ry the direction suggested in R v Lawrence
will not repeat. But I added:                                                                                               in its en tirety ; or should the direction be that only a recognition by the defendant
       ‘No doub t the prosecuting authorities today w ould only prosecute for                                               th at som e risk was involved and he had none-the-less gone on to take it w ould be
     m anslaug hter in the case o f death caused by the reckless driving of a m o to r vehicle                              sufficient to establish the com m ission o f the offence?’
     on a road in a very grave case.’                                                                            fj       In his able subm issions on behalf o f the appellant, counsel accepted, as he was indeed
    My Lords Jennings was decided on 29 July 1982, over a year after Mrs Burrows’s death                              b o u n d to accept, that the co m m o n law and statutory offences co-existed bu t he challenged
and som e six m o n th s after the appellant’s trial at N orth am p to n Crown Court. This trial                      that it necessarily followed that the same direction was appropriate in both cases. He
also preceded the hearing o f Jennings in the Divisional Court. As already stated, the                                fo und ed on the phrase ‘aggravating circumstances’, a phrase used by M r L ittm an QC,
appellant was charged only w ith manslaughter, no do ubt because o f the view w hich the                              counsel for the respondent in Jennings, and adopted in the last paragraph but tw o o f m y
prosecuting authorities took o f the gravity o f the case. Your Lordships were told th at a                           speech. Counsel for the appellant urged that the reference to ‘aggravating circum stances’
plea o f guilty to the statutory offence, had that also been charged, was proffered b u t was            j       :    show ed th at there m ig h t be different degrees o f recklessness in the different cases. He
rejected by counsel for the Crown. 1 agree w ith the view o f the Court o f Appeal that this                          also urged that w h at I had said regarding the ingredients o f the two offences being
was an entirely proper course for counsel for the Crown to have adopted. The ju ry was,                               identical was obiter and should not be followed, especially as there had been no a rg u m en t
o f course, unaw are o f this fact.                                                                                   th at know ledge o f the risk involved was a prerequisite to conviction for m anslaughter
    After the close o f the evidence, counsel for the appellant invited the judge not to give                         th o u g h not for the statutory offence. He also challenged as obiter the sentence (see [1982]
the ju ry w hat I will call for brevity the 'Lawrence direction’ simpliciter, arguing th at that                       3 All ER 104 at 116, [1983] AC 624 at 644) that ‘the offence o f causing death by reckless
direction was applicable only where the statutory offence was charged. He subm itted                                   d riving o f a m o to r vehicle on a road is still m anslaughter by the law o f E ngland . . . ,
 1064                              All England Law Reports                        [1983] 2 All ER               HL                            R v Seymour (Lord Roskill)                                    1065

   saying that the sentence should have read only ‘is still a ^ m l e o f b ein g m a n s la u g h te r . .     m ax im u m penalty for the statutory offence to five years’ im p riso n m en t, the sentence in
       My Lords, I have carefully considered these criticisms b u t I am unable to accept any of a              fact passed by the trial ju d g e on the appellant on his conviction for m anslaughter. This
   th e m as valid. Injennings[i982] 3 All ER 104 at 113, [1983] AC 624 at 639 I had listed                     difference recognises that there are degrees o f tu rp itu d e w hich wUl-vary according to the
   the four prerequisites to a successful application for the extradition o f the respondent o f                gravity o f the risk created by the m anner o f a d efendant’s driving. In these circumstances
   w hich the first was that the crim e charged in California was properly described in                         your Lordships m ay th in k that in future it will only be very rarely that it will be
   England as manslaughter. The arg u m e n t was that it was not properly so described                         appropriate to charge ‘m o to r m anslaughter’: that is where, as in the instant case, the risk
  because o f the suggested im plied repeal o f the relevant part o f the law o f m anslaughter.                of death from a defen dant’s driving was very high.
  T hat argu m ent was rejected for the reasons given at length (see [1982] 3 All ER I0 4 at /}                      My noble and learned friend Lord Fraser drew the atten tio n o f counsel for the Crown
   >13-117, [1983] AC 624 at 639-644). The criticised sentence was the last sentence of                         to the decision o f the H igh Court ofjusticiary in Dunn v HM Advocate 1960JC 55, a case
  that part o f m y speech setting o u t those reasons. It states the conclusion to w hich the                  decided before the change in the law in 1977- It is clear fro m that decision and from
  reasoning had led and is not obiter.                                                                          other cases decided in Scotland since 1977 that the practice in Scotland has been to charge
      As to the passage in the last paragraph b u t two o f m y speech, this was directed to the                both culpable hom icide, an offence identical w ith m ansla u ghter in English law, and the
  fo u rth prerequisite. Since for th e reasons given the tw o offences co-existed and the                      statutory offence and to leave both charges w ith the ju ry for their determ ination
  ingredients were thus the same, there was no room for M r L ittm a n s arg u m e n t on c                     according to their view o f the gravity of the offence proved. I have had the advantage of
   aggravating circumstances'. This passage was also not obiter b u t was essential to the                      reading the speech o f m y noble and learned friend o n the practice which has prevailed in
  reasoning leading to the rejection o f M r L iftm an’s a rg u m e n t in connection w ith the                 Scotland.
  fourth prerequisite.                                                                                               My Lords, there was som e debate before y our Lordships w h eth er in England and
      Counsel for the appellant also su b m itte d that if the Lawrence direction w ere given in                Wales it should, since the decision in Jennings, be perm issible to join in the same
  m anslaughter cases and a conviction followed, the trial ju d g e w h en considering sentence                 in dictm ent one count alleging m anslaughter and anoth er alleging the statutory offence,
  w ou ld not know w hether the ju ry took the view that the defendan t had deliberately                        it now being clear law that these offences co-existed and th eir ingredients were identical
  taken a risk o f which he was aware or not. My Lords, juries do not and should not be                          in point of law.
 asked to explain their verdicts. It is by no m eans unusual for a guilty verdict to be                              I k n o w o f noth in g in the Indictm ents Act 1915 or the In d ictm en t Rules 1971, SI 1971 1
  properly founded for a n u m b e r o f reasons and it is for the judge, w h o is the person best               1253 to preclude such jo in der b u t in m y view there are considerable practical difficulties
 placed to assess the degree o f tu rp itu d e involved in the light o f th e evidence and the                   in perm itting it arising fro m the fact that, as I have just endeavoured to explain, though
 ju r y ’s verdict, to pass such sentence as he thinks right in all the circum stances. That                     the legal ingredients of the two offences are the same, the degrees o f turpitude m ay vary
 sentence is o f course always open to review i f necessary.                                                g    greatly betw een one case and another. U nder the practice in England and Wales the
      My Lords, I would accept the subm ission o f counsel for the C ro w n that once it is                      assessment of differing degrees o f tu rpitude betw een one case and another is not a m atter
 show n that the two offences co-exist it w ould be qu ite w ro n g to give the adjective                        relevant to the determ in atio n by ju ry o f a defendant’s guilt or innocence o f the particular
  reckless or the adverb ‘recklessly’ a different m eanin g according to w h e th e r the statutory              offence charged. It is a m atter relevant to the determ in atio n by the judge o f the
 or the com m on law offence is charged. ‘Reckless’ should today be given the same                               appropriate penalty to be inflicted on a defendant found guilty o f the offence with which
 m ean in g in relation to all offences w hich involve ‘recklessness’ as one o f the elem ents                   he has been charged. Yet a ju ry if required to m ake a choice betw een convicting a
 unless Parliament has otherwise ordained. T hat this has been so in th e past is sho w n by f                   defendant o f m o to r m anslaughter at co m m on law and convicting h im o f the less grave
 the respective decisions o f the C o urt o f Crim inal Appeal and the C ou rt o f Appeal,                       statutory offence would have to be told w hat criteria they should apply in determ ining
 C rim in al Division in R v Church [1965] 2 All ER 72 at 75, [1966] 1 QB 59 at 68 and R v                       on which side o f the boundary line between the tw o offences the case against the
 Lowe [1973] 1 All ER 805 at 808, [1973] QB 702 at 708, to neith er o f w hich was the                           defendant falls. The only criterion that Parliam ent has laid dow n is that the statutory
 attention of this House drawn in eith er R v Caldwell o r R v Lawrence. This was also clearly                   offence does not m erit a pu nishm ent exceeding five years’ im p risonm ent while the
 th e view taken by the Court o f Appeal, C rim inal Division in R v Pigg [1982] 2 All ER                        co m m on law offence o f m o to r m anslaughter may. To tell the ju ry this, w hether they be
 591 esp at 597- 599, [1982.] 1 W LR 762 esp at 770 -77 2 per Lord Lane CJ, w ith all o f n                       told it in the speech o f counsel for the defence or in answ er to a question that a justifiably
 whose reasoning I respectfully agree.                                                                            puzzled jury m ig h t well put to the judge, w ould m ake it difficult to avoid leaving them
     In tru th , the aigum ent o f counsel for the appellant is an a tte m p t to overcom e an                    w ith the im pression that only if they thin k that w hat the defendant did deserved to be
anom aly resulting from the a m e n d m e n t o f the law in 1977, an a m e n d m e n t m ad e not                punished by m o re th an five years’ im p risonm ent should they find h im guilty o f m otor
for the purpose o f effecting a reform o f substantive law but, as m y noble an d learned                         m anslaughter. If the ju d g e were then to sentence h im to five years (as in the present case)
friend Lord Diplock pointed out in his speech in R v Lawrence [1981] 1 All ER 974 at                              or less, as well he m ight, the ju ry would be left w ith a very poor impression o f the trial
98 0 -9 8 1 , [1982] AC 510 at 524, in connection w ith the redistribution o f crim inal /j                       process.
business between the Crown C ourt and m agistrates’ courts. T he very difficulty which                                In England and Wales it is for the prosecution and not for the court to decide w hat
counsel for the appellant encountered in try in g to distinguish betw een a defendant w ho                        charge or charges should be m ade against a particular defendant. The prosecution is
gave no th oug ht to a risk to w hich he was indifferent and w h o even if he had th o u g h t o f                entitled to consider all the circumstances o f the case before so deciding. In the instant
th at risk would have acted in precisely the same way and a defend ant w ho gave no                               case the prosecution properly charged m anslaughter and m anslaughter alone. In doing
th o u g h t to a risk because it never crossed his m in d that the risk existed is eloq uent o f the             so the prosecution took the risk that a jury m ig h t have refused to convict the appellant
need to prescribe a simple and single m ean in g o f the adjective ‘reckless’ and th e adverb j                   o f that crime th o u g h on the evidence it is difficult to see how any reasonable ju ry could
‘recklessly’ throughout the crim inal law unless Parliam ent has otherw ise ordained in a                          have acquitted h im o f that offence. But had he been acquitted he would have gone
particular case. That simple and single m ean in g should be the ordinary m ean in g of those                      unpunished even th o u g h the jury m ig h t have convicted h im o f the statutory offence had
w ords as stated in this House in R v Caldwell and in R v Lawrence.                                                that been charged.
    Parliam ent m ust however be taken to have intended that ‘m o to r m a n sla u g h ter’ should                    In m y opinion that consideration cannot justify th e jo in d er o f b o th charges in a single
be a m ore grave offence than the statutory offence. W hile the fo rm er still carries                             indictm ent. In future if in any case in England and Wales any such joinder should occur
a m a x im u m penalty of im p risonm ent for life, Parliament has th o u g h t fit to lim it the                  I th in k it m ust behove the trial judge to require the prosecution to elect on which o f the
                                 All England Law Reports                      [1983] 2 All ER             CA                                          Amherst v James Walker                          1067

 tw o counts in the ind ictm ent they wish to proceed andT O t to allow the trial to proceed
  on both counts. This m ay result in a different practice prevailing in England and Wales
  from that w hich has prevailed in Scotland, a part o f the United Kingdom over w hich no
                                                                                                                        Amherst v James Walker Goldsmith
 crim inal jurisdiction is exercised by this House. But since it is clear that the substantive                                  & Silversmith Ltd
 law is the same in both countries, differences in practice may be thou ght to be not of
 great im portance.                                                                                       C O U R T O F A P P E A L , C IV IL D IV IS IO N
                                                                                                          L A W T O N , AC K N ER A N D O L IV E R L j j
     I    w o uld therefore answer the certified question as follows: ‘W here m anslaughter is
                                                                                                          1 5, 1 6 , 3 0 MARCH 1 9 8 3
 charged and th e circumstances are that the victim was killed as a result o f the reckless t
 d riving o f the defendant on a public highway, the trial ju d g e should give the ju ry the
 direction suggested in R v Lawrence b u t it is appropriate also to point out that in order to           Landlord and Tenant - Rent - Review —Failure to comply with time limits - Delay in serving
 constitute the offence o f m anslaughter the risk o f death being caused by the m a n n e r o f          assessment notice to initiate rent review - Time not of the essence in serving notice - Whether
 the d efendan t’s driving m ust be very high.’                                                           delay, however unreasonable, precluding landlordfrom relying on notice.
    I w ould dismiss this appeal.
                                                                                                          The tenants were the lessees o f business prem ises u n d e r a lease for a term o f 28 years
 LO R D B R ID G E OF HARW ICH. My Lords, for the reasons given in the speech o f C                       from 24 J u n e 1961 at a rent o f £ 2 ,5 0 0 a year for the first 14 years o f the term and, under
 m y noble and learned friend Lord Roskill, w ith w hich I agree, I would dismiss the appeal.             a rent review clause in the lease, £2,500 a year or the m ark et rent, w hichever was the
                                                                                                          higher, for the second half o f the term . The rent review clause provided that the rent
 LO R D T E M P LEM AN. My Lords, I have had the advantage o f reading in draft the                       review was to be initiated by the landlord s u b m ittin g to the tenants on or before 25
 speech o f m y noble and learned friend Lord Roskill. I agree w ith it, and for the reasons              D ecem ber 1974 his assessment o f the m ark et rent and that if the tenants failed to agree
 he gives I w ou ld dismiss this appeal.                                                              ^   that rent the assessment was to be m ade by an indepen dent surveyor, tim e b ein g o f the
                                                                                                          essence in the a p p o in tm en t o f the surveyor. The landlord failed to serve his assessment
 Appeal dismissed.                                                                                        by 25 D ecem ber 1974 and on 25 January 1975 w rote to the tenants seeking an extension
                                                                                                          o f tim e an d requesting that the rent review be referred to an in dependent surveyor. The
 Solicitors: Sharpe Pritchard & Co (for the appellant);   Director of Public Prosecutions.                tenants refused his request. After taking legal proceedings to assert his right to serve
                                                                                                          notice in itiating the rent review (in w hich it was held that tim e was not o f the essence in
                                                              Mary Rose P lum m er       Barrister,   g   initiating the rent review) the landlord, on 10 May 1979, served a notice on the tenants
                                                                                                          specifying his assessment o f the m arket rent as £ 16,000 a year and on 10 O ctober 1980
                                                                                                          issued an orig in a tin g su m m o n s claim ing a declaration that the tenants were required to
                                                                                                          pay the m ark et rent as determ ined by an in dependent surveyor. The judge granted the
                                                                                                          declaration. T he tenants appealed, conten ding (i) that the landlord’s delay in serving the
                                                                                                          notice was such that he ou g h t to be deem ed to have abandoned his right to serve it, and
                                                                                                          (ii) that the delay was in any event unreasonable and invalidated the notice.
                                                                                                      f
                                                                                                          Held - W here tim e was not o f the essence in serving a landlord’s notice for a rent review
                                                                                                          un d er a lease, m ere delay by the landlord in serving notice, how ever lengthy and even if
                                                                                                          coupled w ith h ardship to the tenant, did not o f itself destroy the contractual right w hich
                                                                                                          the landlord had to serve the notice. In o rder to show that the landlord was precluded
                                                                                                          from exercising his right to serve the notice despite delay, the tenant had to show that
                             Practice Direction                                                           the lease or th e ag reem en t relating to the review o f rent had been abrogated by m u tu al
FAMILY DIVISION                                                                                           agreem en t o r that the contract had been repudiated by the landlord or that the landlord’s
                                                                                                          conduct was such that he was estopped from exercising his right to serve notice. Since
Contempt of court - Release of contemnor - Applicationfor release of contemnor - Contemnor to             tim e was not o f the essence o f the rent review clause and n o th in g had occurred betw een
be present in court - Exception in case of mental health patients.                                        25 D ecem ber 1974 w hen the landlord’s notice should have been served and 10 May 1979
                                                                                                          w h en the notice was actually served w hich disentitled the landlord from relying on the
T he President has directed that on applications for the release o f a co ntem nor from prison            notice it followed that the notice was a valid and effective initiation o f the rent review
the co n te m n o r should be present in court to hear the o u tco m e o f the application.               process. T he appeal would accordingly be dismissed (see p 1074 d to p 1075 g. P 1076 a b
    T he only exception to this practice is in those cases in w hich the provisions o f the               e to j and p 1077 c a n d / to p 1078 b, post).
M ental H ealth Act 1959 apply and it is considered by the solicitor conducting the                          D ictum o f Slade LJ in London and Manchester Assurance Co Ltd v G A Dunn & Co (1982)
application that in the particular circumstances it w ould not be desirable for the                       26 5 EG at 135 applied.
c o n te m n o r to attend.                                                                                  Telegraph Properties (Securities) Ltd v Courtaulds Ltd (1980) 2 57 EG 115 3 overruled.
                                                                                                             Dicta o f L ord Salmon in United Scientific Holdings v Burnley BC [1977] 2. All ER at 89, 93
  Issued w ith the concurrence o f the Lord Chancellor.                                                   not followed.

                                                                                                          N otes
                                                                                     B P T i c k le
25 Ju ly 1983                                                                                             For tim e being o f the essence o f a rent review clause, see 27 H alsbury’s Laws (4th edn)
                                                                               Senior Registrar.
                                                                                                          para 216.
                                           PRIVY COUNCIL                                                             KONG CHEUK KWAN (APPELLANT)                       v.   THE QU EEN (RESPONDENT)                    19
18

1933 th e m a tte r m ay be a p p ro a c h e d d ifferently if th e victim is u n d e r th e ag e o f 16          co llid ed w ith re su ltan t loss o f life. T h e ap p ellan t w as th e ca p ta in o f one o f the
y ears. T h a t c a n n o t b e right. S ection 1 o f th a t A c t is dealing with o ffen ces c re a te d         vessels a n d he a n d his first m a te a n d th e captain an d d e c k officer o f th e o th er
                                                                                                                  vessel w e re all ch a rg e d w ith m an s la u g h ter. A t th e ir trial n o n e o f th e fo u r gave
by th a t se ctio n a n d n o t refo rm ing th e law relating to o th e r offences.
    In th e p r e s e n t case th e le a rn e d ju d g e se em s to have b een led into e r ro r by th e          e v id e n c e . T h e r e w as m u ch an e c d o ta l ev id ence b u t little direct o ra l evidence of
r e p o rt in G ib son (supra) to w hich he h a d b e e n re fe rre d w hen th e su b m issio ns w ere            th e resp e c tiv e relative p o sitio n o f th e tw o hydrofoils an d w h a t precisely was
m ad e. T h e r e fe re n c e (in th e p assage w hich h as b een read o f his d ire c tio n on                   se e n a n d d o n e as a result o f o b se rv atio n s m a d e in th e m in u te s a n d seconds
m a n s la u g h te r) to cu sto d y a n d care a n d to general custody and care g o e s to th e                 b e f o re th e collision. T h e ju d g e w ith d rew th e case against th e ap p e lla n t’s first
w o rd in g o f se ction 1. T h e re w as no m o re justification in th e p r e s e n t case for                  m a te , th e c ap tain an d deck officer o f th e o th e r vessel w e re b o th acquitted and
inferrin g th e p re se n c e o f b o th d e fe n d a n ts o r active participation by th e n on-strik in g       only th e ap p e lla n t w as co nv icted . H e ap p eale d o n th e g ro u n d th a t th e ju ry had
p a r e n t th a n th e r e w as in G ibson. In o u r view , th e passage which h as b e e n q u o te d           b e e n m isd irected on th e q u e s tio n o f m an sla u g h ter by negligen ce, the judge
from th e su m m in g -u p w as telling th e ju ry th a t th ey w ere entitled to d raw in feren c es             hav in g d ire c te d th em th a t th e re le v a n t risk they h ad to c o n sid er w as th e risk
w hich th e ev id en ce did n o t allow, a n d w hich clearly they did d raw b ec a u s e th ey                   “o f cau sin g so m e injury a lb eit n o t necessarily serious b u t n o t so slight th a t an
                                                                                                                  o rd in a rily p r u d e n t ind ividual w o u ld feel justified in tre a tin g it as negligible"
co n v icted b o th d efe n d a n ts.
   A c co rd in g ly , th e convictions on c o u n t 1 m u st be q u ashed . Since th e a p p e a ls              (a d o p tin g a passage in A r c h b o ld , 41 st ed ., p ara. 20- 49 , 2 nd S up p .)
against con v ictio n o n c o u n t 2 are n o t p u rsu e d w e say no m ore ab o u t th e m .                        Held , th a t th e m o del d ire c tio n su ggested by th e H o u s e of L o rd s in L a w r e n c e
   T h e r e su lt, distressing th o u g h it m ay b e , is th a t a serious crim e c o m m itte d by             ( 1981 ) 73 C r .A p p .R . 1 a p p lied in th e p resen t case— th e ju ry sh ould have been
so m e o n e goes u n p u n ish e d . B u t w e ta k e co m fo rt from th e w ords o f L o rd G o d d a r d       d ir e c te d to consid er w h e th e r th e a p p e lla n t’s act o f n av igation created an
C .J . in A b b o tt. A lth o u g h th e strict ap p licatio n o f th e w ording o f section 1 o f th e           o b v io u s a n d seriou s risk o f causin g physical d am ag e to so m e o th e r ship and
C h ild ren a n d Y o u n g P erso n s A ct 1933 to th e facts o f this case falls o u tsid e this                th u s to o th e r p e rso n s w h o m ig ht have b een travelling in th e a rea o f the
ju d g m e n t, w e sug gest th a t so m e co n s id e ra tio n m ight be given to increasin g th e               collision a t th e relev an t tim e. W h e r e such a risk w as c re a te d , th e ju ry should
m ax im u m p e n a lty w hich m ay be im p o sed in cases th a t d o fall w ithin it.                            h a v e c o n s id e re d w h e th e r th e ap p e lla n t had n avig ated w ith o u t giving any
    A cc o rd in g ly , th e ap p eals ag ainst th e co n v iction s fo r m anslaug hter will b e allow ed .      t h o u g h t to th e possibility o f th a t risk o r w h e th e r he h a d recogn ised th a t risk
   W e receiv ed a subm ission on b e h a lf o f J a m e s L a n e against his se n te n c e o f tw o             e x iste d , b u t h a d n ev e rth e le s s g o n e on to tak e it. T h u s, th e r e had b een a
y ears’ im p ris o n m e n t on co u n t 2 . W e se e n o reaso n to distinguish b e tw e e n th e                f u n d a m e n ta l m isdirectio n a n d as th e case was n o t o n e fo r th e o p e ra tio n o f the
a p p e lla n ts in resp ec t o f se n ten ce on th a t c o u n t, an d th a t appeal against s e n te n c e is   p ro v iso to section 2 ( 1) o f th e C rim inal A p p eal A ct 1968 , th e a p p eal w o uld be
dism issed.                                                                                                       allo w ed a n d th e conviction q u a s h e d .
                                            Appeals allowed on count 1. Convictions for                              L a w r e n c e ( 1981) 73 C r .A p p .R . 1 ; [ 1982] A .C . 510 as ex p lain ed by L ord
                                              manslaughter quashed.                                               D ip lo c k in C a l d w e l l ( 1981 ) 73 C r .A p p .R . 13, 19; [ 1982 ] A . C . 341 , 354 and
                                                                                                                  d ic tu m o f W a tk in s , L.J. in Seym our (1983 ) 76 C r .A p p .R . 211 , 216 applied.
     Solicitors: D ir e c to r of Public P ro secu tio n s, fo r th e C row n.                                        [F o r gross n egligence in h o m icid e, see Archbold, 42 nd e d ., p a ra . 20- 49 .]

                                                                                                                      T h is w as an a p p eal by K o n g C h e u k K w an by special leave g ran ted on Ju n e
                                                                                                                   25 , 1984 , against a ju d g m e n t o f th e C o u r t of A p p eal o f H o n g K o n g (M cM ullin,
                                             [p r iv y c o u n c i l ]
                                                                                                                   V - P ., L i a n d Silke, J J . A . ) , w h o on M a rch 9 , 1984, dim issed his appeal against
                                                                                                                   his con v ictio n o n M a rch 25 , 1982 , o f m ansla u g h ter in th e H ig h C o u r t of Justice
                                                    BEFORE
                                                                                                                   o f H o n g K o n g (P e n n in g to n , J .) .
         LORD FRASER o f TULLYBELTON, LORD ROSKILL,                                                                   T h e follow ing facts are ta k e n fro m th e ju d g m e n t o f th e B o a rd .
     LORD BRIDGE o f HARWICH, LORD BRANDON o f OAKBROOK                                                               T h e p ro se c u tio n o f K o n g a n d his ev en tu al conviction arose o u t o f a
                    a n d S i r OWEN WOODHOUSE                                                                     d isa stro u s an d seem ingly in excu sable collision b e tw een tw o hydrofoil ferries
                                                                                                                   o p e r a tin g b e tw e e n H o n g K o n g a n d M a c a u at a b o u t 9.25 h o u rs o n July 11 ,
                                                                                                                   1982 . T h e collision t o o k p lace at full sp e ed in clear fine su n n y w e a th e r with
             KONG CHEUK KWAN (APPELLANT) v. THE QUEEN                                                              visibility wholly u n re stric te d . B o th hydrofoils w ere carry ing passengers. T h e
                          (RESPONDENT)                                                                             Flying F lam in g o was carry in g p assen gers from H o n g K o n g to M acau. T h e
                                                                                                                   Flying G oldfinch w as carry in g p as seng ers fro m M a cau to H o n g K ong. K ong
                                     J u n e 1 7 , 18 , J u l y 10 , 1985                                          w as in c o m m a n d o f th e Flying G oldfinch an d w as at h e r helm . His first m ate
                                                                                                                   N g Y u i-k in ( “ N g” ) w as o n lo o k -o u t d u ty beside K ong. C a p ta in Jo h n Coull
 Manslaughter—Killing by Gross Negligence—Death Following Collision o f Vessels at                                 ( “ C o u ll” ) w as in c o m m a n d o f th e Flying Flam ingo. T h e d e c k officer o f th e
    Sea—Direction to Jury.                                                                                          Flying F lam in go w as H o Y im P u n ( “H o ” ). H e was at h e r helm . Coull was on
                                                                                                                    lo o k - o u t d uty b eside H o . T w o passengers travelling o n th e Flying F lam ingo
           In p e rfe c t w e a th e r co n dition s at a b o u t 9.25 a.m . one m o rn in g in July tw o
        h y d ro fo ils, said to b e travelling at a co m b in e d speed o f so m e 64 m .p .h .,                   w e re killed as a result o f th e collision an d o th e rs w e re in ju re d . T h e C row n
I
i
JO                                          PRIVY COUNCIL                                                                       KONG C H E U K KWAN (APPELLANT)                     v.   THE O U E EN (RESPONDENT)                    21

     ind icted all fou r o f t h e m e n ju st m e n t i o n e d for m a n s la u g h t e r o f those two              is to be b r o u g h t ag ain s t t h e h e lm sm a n or ag ainst t h e lo o k - o u t o r ag ainst b o t h as a
     p as sen g ers wh o w ere so tragically killed. K on g a n d Ng w ere indicted o n one                            result of w h at e a c h is alleged to have d o n e o r to h ave o m i t t e d to d o, it is essential
     c o u n t in th e ind ictm en t, C o u ll a n d H o on an o th e r . S e v e n t e e n witnesses of fact          t h a t t h e case against e a c h s h o u ld be specifically a n d se p a ra te ly p ro v e d with the
     w ere called at the trial by t h e C r o w n including seven p a ssen gers from the                               r eq u ired de g r e e of c ertain ty . B ut the C ro w n , havin g c h a r g e d all fo ur m e n in this
     Flying Flam in go , fo ur s e a m e n a n d tw o ra dio officers, b u t t h e ind ictm en t of all                way a nd thus m a d e it im poss ible for an y o f t h e m t o be called by th e p r o se c u tio n to
     fo ur m e n in this m a n n e r m a d e it im poss ible for an y o f th o s e responsible for                     give their o w n ac c o u n t s of w h at h a d h a p p e n e d , fo u n d itself c o n s train ed to s e e k to
     t h e n avigation o f th e two hydrofo ils b efo re a nd at the tim e of the collision to                         p rove its case by o t h e r m e a n s . In p ar t the C r o w n re lied o n s t a te m e n ts m a d e by
     be called as witnesses for th e C r o w n . T h e r e was thu s m u c h an e c d o ta l evidence                  ce r ta in o f the accu s ed after t h e collision. Such s t a te m e n t s w ere in an y e v e n t only
     b u t little direct oral e v i d e n c e o f t h e respec tive relative positions o f th e two                    ev id en ce against t h e i r m a k e r s. Usin g those s t a te m e n t s , the C r o w n t h e n so u g h t to
     hydrofo ils a n d o f w h a t precisely was seen a nd d o n e as a re su lt of ob se rv ations                    p rove w h at h a d h a p p e n e d with th e aid of e x p e r t e v id e n c e so m e o f which was at
     m a d e in th e m in utes a n d s e c o n d s b efo re the collision. E a c h o f t h e hydrofoils                b est of dou b tful admissibility. T h e evidential position was co m p licated by t h e fact
     was said t o h ave b e e n trav elling at a sp e e d eq uiv alent to 32 m . p . h . If th at were                 th a t o ne o f K o n g ’s s t a te m e n t s , as a result of which t h e lo g was su b s eq u en tly w ritte n
     co rre ct t h e collision t o o k place in p erfect w e a t h e r c on d ition s at a com bined                   u p , was man ifestly u n t r u e . T h e o t h e r , in an im p e r fe c t tran slatio n, was b u t little
     sp e e d o f so m e 64 m . p . h . H yd ro foils are no o r d in a ry vessels. T h e ir speed is                  m o r e th an an a t t e m p t e d r econ stru ctio n o f w h a t it was sug g e sted h ad h a p p e n e d . B u t
      m u c h greater. T h e y can be b r o u g h t to a standstill alm ost instan tly by stopping                     p r o o f of the u n t r u th s , if such they w ere, in these s t a te m e n t s was no t p r o o f o f w h at
      the en g ines. T h e m ain g r o u n d of a p p eal was th at th e trial j u d g e h ad misdirected              in tru th h a p p e n e d .
                                                                                                                           T h e i r L ord ships feel b o u n d t o observ e t h a t they find it str a n g e t h a t th e decision
     t h e jury.
                                                                                                                        to p ro secu te all fou r m e n s h o u ld h ave b een t a k e n . A m o r e obvious c o u r s e , if it
         T h e app eal was a r g u e d o n J u n e 17 a n d 18, 1985.
                                                                                                                        w ere th o u g h t p r o p e r to lau nch a prosecu tio n for m a n s la u g h t e r at all in th ese
                                                                                                                       circum stances, w o u ld h av e b e e n t o decide, after full inve stigation a n d t a k in g of
         David Steel, Q.C. a n d Michael Longman for th e ap p ellan t.
                                                                                                                        st a te m e n ts, ag ainst w hich, if any, o f those on b o a r d which hydrofoil su ch a
         Anthony Clarke, Q.C. a n d Toby Jenkyn-Jones (S e n io r C r o w n Counsel,
                                                                                                                        prosecu tion w ould be m o st likely to su cceed a n d t h e n laun ch th at p rosecu tio n only
     H o n g - K o n g ) for the C r o w n .
                                                                                                                        ag ainst that p e r s o n o r those p erso n s , thus en ab lin g t h e C r o w n t o call as witnesses
        A t the conclusion o f t h e a r g u m e n t the B o a rd a n n o u n c e d t h a t t h e appeal
                                                                                                                        th o se against w h o m it h a d b e e n d e c id e d no t t o p r o c e e d .
     w o u ld be allowed an d th e co nv iction q u a s h e d , reaso n bein g given at a later
                                                                                                                           N o n e of the a c c u s e d gave e vid en ce , u n d e r s t a n d a b l y in these circum stances.
     d ate.
                                                                                                                       Submissions w ere m a d e a t the close of the C r o w n case t h a t n e ith e r t h e a p p e lla n t
        July 10. Lord Roskill r e a d t h e op in io n of th e B o ard .
                                                                                                                       n o r the o t h e r th r e e accu s ed h a d a case to an sw er. T h e l e a r n e d ju d g e w ith d rew the
                                                                                                                       case against Ng b u t o v e r ru l e d th e submissions m a d e on be h a lf o f t h e o t h e r t h ree
    Ju ly 10. T h e following j u d g m e n t o f t h e B o a rd was delivered by L o rd Roskill. O n
                                                                                                                       m en. In the re su lt K o n g a lo n e was convicted by the jury. H o was a cq u itted. So was
M a rc h 25 , 1983 the a p p e l l a n t K o n g C h e u k K w an ( " K o n g " ) was convicted of
                                                                                                                       Coull albeit only by a m ajo rity .
m a n s la u g h t e r af ter a t h r e e w e e k s ' trial b efo re P en n in g to n J. a n d a ju r y in the High
                                                                                                                           T h e evid en tiary difficulty which th us faced the C r o w n was onl y o ne o f the
C o u r t of Justice of H o n g K o n g . O n M a rc h 9 , 1984 th e C o u r t o f A p p e a l of H on g
                                                                                                                       difficulties to whi ch t h e case gave rise at t h e trial. T h e ver y existence o f the
K o n g (M cM u llin V-P .. a n d Li a n d Silke J J . A . ) dism isse d K o n g ’s appeal.
                                                                                                                       evidentiary difficulty m a d e it e v e n m o r e i m p o r t a n t t h a n usual t h a t th e trial ju d g e
S u b s e q u e n t ly o n Ju n e 25 , 1984 K o n g was g r a n te d special leave t o ap peal to H er
                                                                                                                       sh ou ld give to t h e ju r y a c o m p l e t e , clear a n d acc u r a te directio n as to t h e law which
M a je sty in Co uncil. A t th e co n clu s io n o f t h e hearin g o f th e a p p eal o n Ju n e 18 .
                                                                                                                       th ey w e r e to app ly to t h e facts as they f o un d th e m t o be. T h e ir L ord sh ips feel
1985 their L ord sh ips t h o u g h t it right t o sta te , since K o n g h a d b e e n on continuous
                                                                                                                       b o u n d respec tfully to say t h a t , whilst feeling m u c h s y m p a th y for the l e a r n e d j u d g e ,
bail following his conviction a n d h a d b e e n s e n ten ced by t h e l e a r n e d ju dg e to 18
                                                                                                                       the direction which he g ave as to the relev an t law failed to satisfy th ose
m o n t h s ' im p ris o n m e n t, t h a t th ey w ou ld h u m b ly advise h e r M a jesty t h a t his appeal
                                                                                                                       re q u i re m e n ts in m o r e ways t h a n one. T h eir L o rd s h ip s ’ sy m p a th y for t h e l e a r n e d
s h o u l d be allowed an d his co nv ictio n q u a s h e d . T h e ir L ord sh ip s also t h e n sta te d th at
                                                                                                                       j u d g e arises b ecau s e h e was e n c o u r a g e d by counsel t o a d o p t a n d di d a d o p t as th e
th ey w o u ld give th eir re a s o n s for so h u m b ly advising a t a later d a te . T h is they now
                                                                                                                       basis for his d irectio n a long passa ge which first m a d e its a p p e a r a n c e in p a r a g r a p h
d o. [The l e a r n e d Lo rd o f A p p e a l s t a te d t h e facts a n d co n tin u ed )
                                                                                                                       20.49 o f the S e c o n d S u p p l e m e n t to Archbold's Criminal Pleading Evidence and
     If a ch a r g e o f m a n s la u g h t e r , in th eir L o rd s h ip s’ e x p erien ce m o s t u n usual if not
                                                                                                                        Practice ( 1982) 41 st E d . a n d which p u r p o rts t o reflect t h e decisions o f t h e H o u s e of
u n i q u e following loss of life in a collision a t se a, is to succeed, it is essential that
                                                                                                                        L ord s in C aldwell ( 1981) 73 C r . A p p . R . 13; [ 1982] A . C . 341 a nd L awrence
the C r o w n sho uld be able to p r o v e clearly a n d for certain ev e r y act w hether of
                                                                                                                       ( 1981) 73 C r . A p p . R . 1 ; [ 1982 ] A . C . 510. T h e l e a r n e d j u d g e d oes no t a p p e a r to
c o m m iss io n o r om ission by th o se ag ainst w h o m t h a t ch arge is b r o u g h t a n d which is
                                                                                                                       have b e e n in vited t o c o n s id e r th o se tw o au tho ritie s in detail n o r w h e t h e r t h e law,
said n o t only to have caus ed d e a t h b u t to have b e e n o f so grave a c h a r a c te r that a
                                                                                                                        as t h e r e clearly d e c l a r e d by t h e H o u s e of Lo rd s, was correctly su m m ar ise d in t h a t
co nv ictio n for m a n s la u g h te r s h o u ld follow. In th e case o f a collision at sea it is
                                                                                                                        p a r a g r a p h . If t h a t ste p h a d b e e n t a k e n , their L o rdsh ips d o no t d o u b t t h a t th e
 un likely, t h o u g h it is of c o u r s e poss ible, t h a t a single p e r s o n will h ave been
                                                                                                                       l e a r n e d jud g e w o u ld h av e a p p r e c ia te d the erro rs in t h e offend ing pa ssa ge which
 re sp o n s ib le for th e n avigation of e a c h o f t h e vessels in volved. O n t h e c on trary , it is
                                                                                                                        they regre t to o b s e r v e still a p p e a r in the E ig hth S u p p l e m e n t to th e 41 st edition a n d
 far m o r e likely t h a t th e r e will be a t least a h elm sm a n a n d a l o o k - o u t a nd often
                                                                                                                        which they h o p e will be rev ised in th e n ear fu ture. T h e i r L ord ships w ere told by
 o t h e r s as well o n the br idge of e a c h vessel. If for ex am p le a c h a r g e o f m ansla ughter
22                                               PRIVY COUNCIL                                                                           KONG C H E U K KWAN (APPELLANT) v. T H E QUEEN (RESPONDENT)                                                   23
co u nsel t h a t it was t o t h e S eco n d S u p p l e m e n t t h a t the atten tio n of th e le a r n e d                  necessa rily se rio u s b u t n o t so slight a risk t h a t an o rd in ary p r u d e n t individual would
j u d g e was d r a w n at t h e trial.                                                                                        feel justified in t r e a t i n g it as neglig ible” .
    T h e cr ucial p as sag e in th e l earn ed j u d g e ’s direction w hich, as its text show s, was                             W i t h p r o f o u n d resp ec t this d ir e c tio n c a n n o t be su p p o r te d . T h e r e is (as in th e
w ritte n o u t a n d given to t h e ju ry to tak e with th e m w h en they retire d, a p p e a r s at                         p a r a g r a p h in t h e S u p p l e m e n t s t o Archbold) c o n fu sion b e tw e e n ( 1) caus ing d e a t h by
p ages 773/4 o f t h e r eco rd . A co m p arison b e t w e e n its tex t a nd th at of par a g r a p h                        an illegal act o f v io len ce, ( 2 ) w h a t was sa id in R. v. C aldwell (supra) ( 3 ) w hat
20.49 in t h e S e c o n d S u p p l e m e n t o f the 41 st ed ition of Archbold clearly show s t h a t                       was sa id in R. v. Lawrence (supra) a n d ( 4 ) w h a t h ad half a c e n tu r y previously
t h a t la tte r p a r a g r a p h , n u m b e r e d ( 7 ) in t h e s u p p l e m e n t , was its source. T h e le a r n e d   b e e n said by t h e C o u r t o f C r im in al A p p e a l in B ateman ( 1925 ) 19 C r . A p p . R . 8; 28
j u d g e u n d e r s t a n d a b l y a d d e d a few wor ds by way o f oral int er position to the text of                    C o x C . C . 33 .
th a t p a r a g r a p h so as to a d a p t it to th e facts o f the instant case.                                                 T h e C o u r t o f A p p e a l was o b v iou sly critical o f this passa ge b u t in a careful
    T h e i r L o rd s h i p s find it necessa ry to set o u t the text of the direction in full. T h e                        j u d g m e n t felt in t h e light o f all t h e a u t h o r itie s ab le to co n clu d e t h a t o t h e r later
r e le v a n t p a r t a p p e a r s as o n e v ery long single s e n te n c e in the transcript b u t th at                   p as sag es in t h e s u m m i n g u p , i n clu din g r e p e a t e d referen ces t o “ gross negl igence"
v er y lo n g single se n t e n c e requ ires to be b r o k e n d o w n for t h e pu rp ose o f analysis:                      p u t t h e m a t t e r sufficiently right. It is t o b e o b s e r v e d th at f ro m b eg in n in g to e n d o f
“T h e d irectio n I give you, whi ch I have h ad ty p e d becau se I think this is n o t a trial                              th e s u m m i n g u p n e i t h e r t h e w o r d “ r e c k le ss” n o r the w o r d “ r eck lessn ess” ever
involving te s t o f m e m o r i e s so I am going to give y ou a copy of this b efo re you                                    ap p e a r s .
r e tire , b u t I will r e a d (it) o u t , this is the direction o n t h e qu estio n o f m an sla u gh ter                      T h e i r L o rd s h ip s h a v e b e e n gravely c o n c e r n e d th a t th e s o u rce o f this e r ro n e o u s
by negligence. T h a t is t h a t the d e f e n d a n t a n d , of c o u rse, each of th e m c o nsidered                      d irectio n s h o u l d h av e a p p e a r e d in t h e S e c o n d S u p p l e m e n t o f th e 41st ed ition,
se p a ra te ly , is gui lty o f m an s la u g h ter if the C ro w n h ave p ro v ed bey on d reaso n a b le                   es pecially as t h e p a r a g r a p h n u m b e r e d ( 7 ) p u r p o r t e d to reflect th e decisions o f the
d o u b t , firstly, t h a t at the tim e he cau sed t h e d e c e a s e d ’s d e a t h an d , of course, you                  H o u s e of L o rd s in C aldwell a n d L awrence .
m u s t be satisfied t h a t each of t h e accused di d ca use t h e d e c e a se d ’s de a th , t h e r e was                     In t h e 41 st e d itio n itself, “ i n v o l u n t a r y m a n s la u g h t e r ” so far as p resen tly relev an t
so m e th i n g in t h e circum stan ces which wou ld h ave d raw n the attention of an                                        is d e a l t with in p a r a g r a p h 20.48 u n d e r p a r a g r a p h s 1(a) a n d (b). S u b -p a ra g r a p h (a)
o r d i n a r y p r u d e n t individual a n d in this case you w ould cons ider th e o r d in a ry                            refe rs t o d e a t h resu ltin g f ro m gross negligence. S u b -p a ra g r a p h (b) refe rs , in ter alia,
p r u d e n t d e c k officer or h e lm sm a n in the position o f t h e d e f e n d a n t, to the possibility                 to d e a t h r esu ltin g f ro m an u nlaw ful act “su ch as an assault which all s o b e r a nd
th a t his c o n d u c t was c a p a b l e o f causing so m e in jury alb eit n o t necessarily serious to                     r e a s o n a b le p e o p l e w o u ld inev itab ly re alise m u s t su b je ct th e victim to t h e risk of
th e d e c e a s e d in clud ing in jury to h ealth, which d o es n o t ap ply here, a n d t h a t th e                        s o m e h a r m resultin g t h e r e f r o m , a lb eit n o t serious h a r m w h e t h e r t h e accus ed
risk was n o t so slight t h a t an ordin ary p r u d e n t individual would feel justified in                                 realised this o r n o t ” .
tr e a tin g it as negligible a n d t h a t , secondly, b efo re t h e act o r omission which caused                               T h e p r e s e n t case is o f c o u r s e o n e which falls within su b - p a r a g r a p h (a) a n d n o t
t h e d e c e a s e d ’s d e a t h , th e d e f e n d a n t eith e r failed to give any th o ug ht to th e                     within s u b - p a r a g r a p h (b). T h e i r L o rd s h ip s a r e no t c o n c e r n e d with t h e latter th o u g h
possibility o f t h e r e bein g an y such risk or hav ing reco g nised that th ere was such a                                 t h e y s e e n o r e a s o n to d o u b t t h e c o r re c t n e s s o f t h e g eneral p r o p o sitio n ju st state d .
risk h e , n e v e r t h e l e s s , w e n t o n to tak e th e risk, o r was guilty of such a high d eg r ee                   B u t cases falling within s u b - p a r a g r a p h (a) a r e f u r t h e r dealt with in p a r a g r a p h 20.49
of n eg lig en ce in t h e m e a n s t h a t he a d o p t e d to avoid th e risk as to go b e y o n d a                        o f t h e 41 st e d itio n in six n u m b e r e d s u b - p a r a g r a p h s which p reviously a p p e a r e d in
m e r e m a t t e r of c o m p e n s a t i o n b etw een su bjects a nd sh o w ed in your o pinion, such                       th e 40 th e d i t i o n ( 1979 ) in p a r a g r a p h 2533 . T h o u g h C aldwell a n d L awrence ar e
d isreg ard for t h e life a n d sa fe ty of o th er s as to a m o u n t to a crime against the State                          r e f e r r e d to in t h e pr e fa c e t o t h e 41 st e d itio n as “ex tr a o rd in a ry d ecisio n s” (a view
a n d c o n d u c t d e s e rv in g p u n i s h m e n t . ”                                                                    which t h e e d i t o r is o f c o u rse a t lib erty to ex p ress in his p refa ce if h e so wishes)
                                                                                                                               th ey a r e u n d e r s t a n d a b l y no t r e f e r r e d to in t h e original text of p a r a g r a p h 20.49
    It will be s e e n t h a t this direction falls into tw o p arts a n d th e se cond p ar t contains
                                                                                                                               t h o u g h t h e r e is a passing r e f e r e n c e t o t h e m in t h e final s e n te n c e o f p a r a g r a p h
a lte r n a tiv e s, t h e a c c e p ta n c e o f eith er o f which w h en a d d e d to the first part wou ld it
                                                                                                                               20 . 49 . N o d o u b t it was this o m iss io n which necessitated th e a d d itio n o f p a r a g r a p h
was said justify co nvictions for m an sla u gh ter.
                                                                                                                               ( 7 ) in t h e S e c o n d S u p p l e m e n t . B u t t h e vi ew, w h e t h e r co rrect o r n ot, t h a t th e two
  T h e first p a r t includ es t h e phrase “t h e r e was so m e th in g in the circumstance s
                                                                                                                               d ecisio ns a r e “ e x t r a o r d i n a r y ” c a n n o t justify c o m p l e t e m i sr e p r e se n ta tio n as to their
which w o u ld h a v e d r a w n t h e atten tio n o f an o r d in a ry p r u d e n t individual . . . to the
                                                                                                                               effe ct in a text b o o k o f g r e a t a u t h o r i t y widely u se d in E n g la n d a n d W ales a nd
possibility t h a t his c o n d u c t was capable of causing some injury, albeit not necessarily
                                                                                                                               e ls e w h e r e as in H o n g K o n g w h e r e t h e r e l e v a n t criminal law is t h e sa m e.
serious to t h e d e c e a s e d . . . a n d th at the risk was not so slight that an ordinary
                                                                                                                                    It t h u s b e c o m e s n ecessa ry for th eir L o rd s h ip s to r estate t h e c u r re n t position
prudent individual would feel justified in treating it as negligible . . . ” (all em p hasis                                   t h o u g h in so d o in g t h e y a r e largely r e p e a t i n g w h at was said in th o s e tw o decisions
added).
                                                                                                                               w hich h a v e t h e m se lv e s since b e e n a p p lie d in tw o f u rth er decisions in t h e H o u s e o f
    T h e f o r m e r a l te r n a tiv e in t h e se cond p ar t speaks o f '"there being any such risk”                       L o r d s , G overnment of U nited S tates v. J ennings ( 1982) 75 C r . A p p . R . 367 ;
a n d t h e n s p e a k s o f “ such a risk" while t h e latter altern ativ e in t h e se cond p art                           [ 1983] 1 A . C . 624 a n d S eymour ( 1983 ) 77 C r . A p p . R . 215 ; [ 1983] 2 A . C . 493 . In
s p e a k s o f “ the means that he adopted to avoid the risk”. (Again all em ph asis                                          C aldw ell ( 1981 ) 73 C r . A p p . R . 13 ; [ 1982] A . C . 341 t h e H o u s e was c o n c e r n e d with
a d d e d ) . “T h e r i s k ” in this last p a r t clearly m e a n s in t h e con tex t the risk a lread y                    a n d o n ly with t h e m e a n i n g o f t h e w o r d “ reck less” in t h e st a tu t o r y c o n te x t o f
r e f e r r e d to.                                                                                                            se ction 1 o f th e C r i m i n a l D a m a g e A c t 1971 . A n y relation sh ip b e t w e e n “ r ecklessness”
    T h u s t h r e e ti m e s in this long se n ten ce t h e le a r n e d j u d g e is telling th e j u r y t h a t           in a r s o n cases a n d “ reck less n es s” in cas es o f causin g d e a t h by reckless driving o r of
t h e r e le v a n t risk for t h e m t o consider is t h e risk “o f causing so m e injury albeit no t                        m o t o r m a n s la u g h t e r was n o t t h e r e u n d e r co n s id e ra tio n . T h e crucial p assage is in
                                                                                                                                  KONG CHEUK KWAN (APPELLANT) v. THE QUEEN (RESPONDENT)                                                    25
24                                           PRIVY COUNCIL
                                                                                                                             T h e ir Lordships e m p h a s ise t h a t in this passage L o rd D ip lo c k was speaking o f an
t h e sp e e c h o f L o r d D iplock with w hich t h e o t h e r m em bers of t h e m a j o r i ty o f t h e
                                                                                                                         o bv iou s and serious risk o f causing physical in jury c r e a t e d by t h e d efendant. H e
H o u s e a g r e e d a n d a p p ear s a t pp. 19 a n d 354 o f the respec tiv e r e p o rt s . T h e ir
                                                                                                                         was no t th ere c o n c e r n e d t o deal with cases w h e r e t h e c o n d u c t co m p lain ed o f was o f
L o rd s h i p s t h in k it right to q u o t e th is pas sage in full: “ N e v e r th e le s s , to d ecid e
                                                                                                                         a d e f e n d a n t ’s reaction or lack o f reactio n to such a risk c r e a t e d by a n o t h e r perso n.
w h e t h e r s o m e o n e h as b een ‘reckless’ as t o w h e th e r harm fu l c o n s e q u e n c e s o f a
                                                                                                                             T h e next decision o f t h e H o u s e o f L o rd s, to which th eir L o rd s h ip s only refer for
p ar tic u la r k in d will result from this a c t, as distinguished f ro m his actu ally in ten d in g
                                                                                                                         t h e sak e o f c o m p le te n e s s, is G o v ern m en t o f t h e U n it e d S t a t e s o f Am erica v.
such h a r m fu l c on sequ en ces to follow, d o e s call for so m e co n s id e ra tio n o f h o w t h e
                                                                                                                         J e n n in g s, (supra). T h e H o u s e was t h e r e c o n cern ed in t h e c o n t e x t o f an extradition
m ind o f t h e o r d in a ry p r u d e n t in dividual w o uld h ave reacted to a sim ilar situ atio n .
                                                                                                                         tr e a t y with th e U n i t e d S tates o f A m e r i c a w h e t h e r t h e c o m m o n law offenc e o f
 If t h e r e w e r e n o th ing in t h e circum stance s t h a t o u g h t to h ave d r a w n t h e a t t e n t i o n
                                                                                                                         m o t o r m a n s la u g h te r h ad b e e n impliedly r e p e a l e d by t h e creatio n o f t h e
o f an o r d i n a r y p r u d e n t individual t o t h e possibility o f t h a t k in d o f h arm fu l
                                                                                                                         co r re sp o n d in g s t a tu to r y o f fe n c e o f caus ing d eath by reck less driving, since b oth
 c o n s e q u e n c e , t h e accus ed wo uld n o t b e describ ed as reckless in t h e n atu ral
                                                                                                                         offe nces arose in similar factual circum stances. T h e H o u s e h eld t h a t it h ad not.
 m e a n i n g o f t h a t w o r d for failing to a d d ress his m ind to t h e possibility; n o r , if t h e
                                                                                                                             Finally in S eymour (supra) t h e H o u s e o f L o rd s h eld t h a t t h e a p p ro p riate
 risk o f t h e harm fu l co n s eq u en ces was so slight t h a t t h e o r d in a ry p r u d e n t individual
                                                                                                                         direction in m o t o r m a n s la u g h t e r cases was t h e s a m e as h a d b e e n suggested in
 u p o n d u e con sid eration of t h e risk w o uld n o t be d e te r re d f ro m tr e a t i n g it as
                                                                                                                         L awrence (supra) in cases w h e r e o nly t h e sta tu to r y o ffen c e h a d b e e n charged.
 negligible, co u ld t h e accused b e d e s c rib e d as “ reckless” in its o r d i n a r y s e n s e if,
                                                                                                                         T h e i r L o rdship s th ink it right t o a d d t h a t t h e w o r d a d d e d at t h e e n d o f the answer
 h aving c o n s i d e re d t h e risk, h e d e c i d e d t o i g no re it. (In this c o n n e c t i o n t h e gravity
                                                                                                                         to t h e certified q u e s tio n reg ard in g t h e very high d e g r e e o f t h e risk o f d eath w ere
 o f t h e p ossible harm fu l c o n s e q u e n c e s w o u ld b e an im p o rta n t facto r. T o e n d a n g e r
                                                                                                                         a d d e d n o t t o alter t h e pr e-existing law as t o m a n s la u g h t e r by recklessness but only
 life m u s t b e o n e o f t h e m o st g r a v e .) . . . In m y opinion a p e r s o n c h a r g e d w ith an
                                                                                                                         t o p oin t t o th o se cases in w hich it still mig ht b e t h o u g h t a p p r o p r i a t e to ch ar ge t h e
 o ffen c e u n d e r se ction 1( 1) o f t h e C rim in al D a m a g e A ct 1971 is reckless as to
                                                                                                                         c o m m o n law r a t h e r t h a n t h e s t a tu to r y offence.
 w h e t h e r an y such p ro p erty wou ld b e d e s t ro y e d o r dam ag ed if (1) h e d o e s an act
                                                                                                                              I t is plain th at, as o f te n h a p p e n s in English crim inal a n d civil law, t h e law
 w hich in fact cr eates an o bv iou s risk t h a t p r o p e r t y would be d e s t r o y e d o r d a m a g e d
                                                                                                                         appl icabl e to inv olu ntary m a n s la u g h t e r has d e v e lo p e d o n a case by case basis a n d
  a n d (2) w h e n h e d oes th e act h e e i t h e r h as no t given any t h o u g h t t o t h e possibility
                                                                                                                          in deed has d ev e lo p e d rapidly in r ecen t y ears since t h e o ffen ce o f causing d e a t h by
  o f t h e r e b e i n g an y such risk o r h a s r ecog nised t h a t th e r e was s o m e risk involved
                                                                                                                          reckless driving a p p e a r e d in se ction 50 o f t h e Crim inal L a w A c t 1977 .
  a n d h a s n o n e th e le s s gon e o n t o d o it. T h a t w o u ld b e a p r o p e r d irectio n t o t h e jury:
                                                                                                                              T h e ir L ord sh ip s a r e of t h e view t h a t t h e p r e se n t s ta te o f t h e relevant law in
  cas es in t h e C o u r t o f A p p e a l w hich h eld otherwise sh o uld b e r e g a r d e d as
                                                                                                                          E n g la n d an d W ales a n d th us in H o n g K on g is clear. T h e m o d e l direction suggested
 o verruled.”
                                                                                                                          in L awrence (supra) a n d h eld in S eymour (supra) eq ually ap plicab le to cases o f
     L o r d D ip lo c k was in t h a t p as sage th u s stating (in part) a n e g a tiv e p r o p o s itio n .
                                                                                                                          m o t o r m an s la u g h ter r e q u ire s first, p r o o f t h a t t h e veh icle w as in fact being driven in
 H e w as d ealin g with t h e factual situ atio n w h e r e t h ere was n o t h i n g t o a lert t h e
                                                                                                                          such a m a n n e r as to c r e a t e an ob vio u s a n d serious risk o f causing physical injury to
 o r d i n a r y p r u d e n t individual to t h e possibility o f har mful c o n s e q u e n c e s o r w h e r e
                                                                                                                          a n o t h e r a n d se co n d , t h a t t h e d e f e n d a n t so d r o v e e i t h e r w ith o u t having given any
 t h a t possibility was so slight t h a t t h e individual could p r o perly t r e a t t h e risk as
                                                                                                                          t h o u g h t t o t h e possibility o f t h e r e being such a risk o r havin g recognised that t h e r e
 negligible. S u ch con d uct was not “ reck less” within the o r d i n a ry m e a n i n g o f t h a t
                                                                                                                          was such a risk nev erth eles s t o o k it. O n c e t h a t directio n is given, it is for t h e jury
 o r d i n a r y E n glish word.
                                                                                                                          t o decid e w h e t h e r o r n o t o n th eir view o f t h e e v idence t h e relev an t charge h as b een
     T h e i r L o rd s h ip s no w m o v e t o L a w r e n c e (1981) 73 C r . A p p . R . 1; [1982] A . C .
 510. T h e r e t h e H o u s e was d ealin g w ith d e a t h cau sed by reckless driving. T h e                          p rov ed .
                                                                                                                              In principle their L o rd s h ip s see n o reason wh y a c o m p a r a b l e direction sh o uld no t
 H o u s e u n a n im o u sly acce pted t h e view o f t h e m ajority in R. v. C a l d w e l l (supra)
                                                                                                                          h a v e b e e n given in t h e p r e s e n t case as r egards t h a t p a r t o f t h e case which
 as t o t h e m e a n i n g o f “ reckless” a n d o f “ re cklessness” . It ap plied t h a t rulin g t o t h e
                                                                                                                          co n c e r n e d t h e alleged n av igatio n o f t h e Flying Goldfinch by K o n g and in d eed as
 st a tu t o r y o ffen ce o f causing d e a t h by reckless driving a n d su g g e sted a m o d e l
                                                                                                                          reg ard s t h e alleged navigation o f t h e Flying Flamingo by t h e o t h e r tw o d efendants.
 d irectio n in su ch cases.
                                                                                                                          D id th eir respective acts o f n avigation c r e a t e an o bv io u s a n d se rio us risk o f causing
     L o r d D ip lo c k , on this occas ion sp e a k in g for all t h e no ble a n d l e a r n e d L o r d s t h e n
                                                                                                                          physical d a m a g e t o s o m e o t h e r sh ip a nd thu s t o o t h e r p e r s o n s w h o mig ht h ave b een
 p r e s e n t , sa id, after q uo ting f ro m his s p e e c h in L awrence , ( at p p . l l a n d 526
                                                                                                                          travelling in th e a r e a o f t h e collision at t h e m aterial t i m e ? If so did any o f t h e
 resp ec tively ):
                                                                                                                          d e f e n d a n t s by their resp ec tiv e acts o f navigation so n av ig ate eith e r without hav ing
 “ In m y view , an a p p ro p riate instru ctio n t o t h e ju ry o n w h at is m e a n t b y drivin g
                                                                                                                          given any th o u g h t to t h e possibility of t h a t risk o r, w hile recognising th at t h e risk
 reckless ly w o uld b e th at th ey m u s t b e satisfied o f two things: first, t h a t t h e
 d e f e n d a n t was in fact driving t h e v ehicle in such a m a n n e r as t o c r e a t e an o b v io u s            existed, t a k e t h a t risk?
                                                                                                                               U n f o rtu n a te ly this direction was n ot given. T h e directio n given a n d its so u rce in
 a n d se r i o u s risk o f causing physical in ju ry t o s o m e o th e r p e r so n w h o m ig ht h a p p e n
 to be using t h e r o ad o r o f d o ing su b s ta n tia l d a m a g e to p r o p e rty ; a n d s e c o n d , t h a t
                                                                                                                          Archbold, 41st e d ., S e c o n d S u p p l e m e n t , in t h e p assag e w hich reads “his co nd uct
                                                                                                                          w as cap ab le o f causing s o m e in jury albeit no t necessa rily se riou s t o th e decea sed
 in drivin g in t h a t m a n n e r t h e d e f e n d a n t d id so w ithout having given an y t h o u g h t to
                                                                                                                           . . . a nd that th e risk was n o t so slight t h a t an o r d i n a ry p r u d e n t individual would
 t h e possibility o f t h e r e being an y su ch risk o r , having recog n ised t h a t t h e r e was
                                                                                                                           feel justified in t r e a tin g it as negligible” h as b e e n t a k e n f r o m L o r d D ip lo c k ’s
 s o m e risk involved, h ad no n eth eles s g o n e o n t o t a k e it. It is for t h e j u r y t o d ecid e
                                                                                                                           negative p roposition. T h is has t h e n b e e n t u r n e d r o u n d an d t h e proposition t r e a t e d
 w h e t h e r t h e risk cre a te d by t h e m a n n e r in which t h e vehicle w a s b e in g d r iv e n w as
                                                                                                                           as an affirmative s t a t e m e n t of t h e relev an t risk. W i t h all resp ec t, that c a n n o t b e
 b o t h o b v io u s a n d serious an d , in d ecid ing this, th ey may ap ply t h e s t a n d a r d o f t h e
  o r d i n a r y p r u d e n t m o to rist as r e p r e s e n t e d by th em se lv es.”
26                                               PRIVY COUNCIL                                                                         KONG CHE UK KWAN (APPELLANT)                             v.   T H E Q U E EN (RESPONDENT)                       27

                                                                                                                              co nviction q u a s h e d . T h e C r o w n m u s t p ay K o n g ’s co sts at t h e trial, in t h e C o u r t of
justified a n d in t h e i r L o r d s h i p s ’ view vitiates t h e directio n . T h e first p art o f t h e
se c o n d lim b p u r p o r t s t o r e p e a t in p a r t t h e m o d e l directio n in L awrence (supra)                   A p p e a l a n d b e f o re t h e B o ard .
b u t u n h a p p ily t h a t d i r e c t i o n is vitiated by t h e r e f e re n c e b a c k t o t h e st a te m e n t o f                                                                                            Appeal allowed
t h e n a t u r e o f th is risk t o w h ich th eir L o rd s h ip s h a v e a lr e a d y refe rred. T h e se co nd                                                                                                     Conviction quashed
p a r t o f t h e s e c o n d l im b a p p e a r s t o b e a t h r o w b a c k t o B ateman [ 1925] 19 C r . A p p . R .
8. T h o u g h L o r d A t k i n in his sp eech in A n d r e w s v . D ir e c t o r o f P u b lic                                Solicitors: C a m e r o n M a rk ly , for t h e a p p e l l a n t ; M a c fa rla n e s , for t h e C r o w n ,
P r o s e c u t io n s ( 1937 ) 26 C r . A p p . R . 34 ; [ 1937] A . C . 576 did n o t d i sa pp rov e o f w h at
w a s t h e r e sa id, h e cle a r ly t h o u g h t , (at p. 47 a n d p. 583 ), t h a t it was better t o use
t h e w o r d “ r e c k le ss” r a t h e r t h a n t o a d d t o t h e w o r d “ n eg ligence” va rious poss ible
v itu p e r a tiv e e p i t h e t s . T h e i r L o rd s h ips resp ec tfully ag r e e . I n d e e d they fu rth e r
 re sp ectfully a g r e e w ith t h e c o m m e n t m a d e b y W a t k i n s L J. in deliver ing t h e
 j u d g m e n t o f t h e C o u r t o f A p p e a l ( C rim ina l D ivision) in Seym our ( 1983) 76                                                                                  BEFORE

C r . A p p . R . 211 , 216 :
“W e h av e t o sa y t h a t t h e law as it sta n d s c o m p e l s us t o r e j e c t M r . C o n n e ll ’s
                                                                                                                                LORD JUSTICE O’CONNOR, M r . JUSTICE MARS-JONES                                                           a n d M r.

p ersu as ive s u b m is sio n s a n d t o ho ld t h a t t h e j u d g e ’s directio ns w ere co rre ct,
                                                                                                                                                 JUSTICE HODGSON
a l t h o u g h w e a r e o f t h e view t h a t it is n o lo n g er n ecessa ry o r helpful to m a k e
re fe re n c e t o c o m p e n s a t i o n a n d negligence. T h e L awrence directio n o n recklessness
is c o m p r e h e n s i v e a n d o f g e n e r a l application t o all offen c es, including m an s la u g h ter
involving t h e d r iv in g o f m o t o r vehicles recklessly a n d sh ou ld b e given t o ju rie s
                                                                                                                                                                ROY WILLIAM GARNER
w i t h o u t in a n y w a y b e i n g d ilu ted . W h e t h e r a d r iv e r a t t h e m ater ial t im e was
                                                                                                                                                               DAVID FREDERICK BULLEN
                                                                                                                                                              KENNETH CHARLES HOWARD
conscious o f t h e risk h e w as ru n n in g o r g ave n o t h o u g h t t o its existence, is a m a t t e r
w h ich affects p u n i s h m e n t for which p u r p o s e s t h e j u d g e will h a v e t o d ecide, if h e
c a n , giving t h e b e n e f i t o f d o u b t t o t h e co n victed p e r s o n , in w hich st a te o f m ind t h a t
                                                                                                                                                                       May 14, 22, July 31, 1985
 p e r s o n h a d driv en a t t h e m a te r ia l ti m e .”                                                                  Sentence—Combined Sentences o f Imprisonment, Fine and Bankruptcy Order on
     L e a r n e d co u n s e l for t h e C r o w n pressed th eir L o rd s h ip s to ap ply the p roviso t o
                                                                                                                                   Conviction for Fraudulent Evasion o f Value Added Tax—Whether Permissible—
 se ction 2 ( 1) o f t h e C r i m i n a l A p p e a l A c t 1968 e v e n t h o u g h th eir L ord ships felt                      Guidelines to be Followed—Finance Act 1972 (c.4l), s. 38(1)—Powers of
 ob liged t o h o l d t h a t t h e r e h a d b e e n t h e m isd irection a lr e a d y m en tion ed . T h e ir                    Criminal Courts Act 1973 (c.62), ss.30(l), 35(4A), 39(1).
 L o rd s h ip s find t h e m s e l v e s u n a b l e t o t a k e this co u r se. T h e y reg ard t h e m isdirection
 as so f u n d a m e n t a l (esp ecia lly as it w as in w ritin g a n d given to t h e ju r y on                                        By se ction 38 ( 1) o f t h e F in a n c e A c t 1972 : “ If a n y p e r s o n is know in g ly
 r e t i re m e n t ) t h a t it is im p ossible t o assert t h a t a p r o p e r l y directed ju ry m u st                          c o n c e r n e d in . . . t h e f ra u d u l e n t evasion o f tax . . . h e shall b e liable . . . ( b )
 inevitab ly h a v e r e a c h e d a v erd ict o f guilty ag ain s t K o n g . T h e r e was in co nn ection                         o n conviction o n in dictm en t, t o a p e n a l t y o f £1,0 00 o r t h r e e tim es t h e a m o u n t
 w ith this p a r t o f t h e s u b m is sio n o n b e h a lf o f t h e C r o w n m u c h discussion reg ard in g                    o f the tax, w h ichever is t h e g r e a t e r , o r t o i m p ri s o n m e n t for a t e r m n o t
 t h e facts, w ith a view t o sh ow in g t h a t o n a p r o p e r d irectio n a conviction was                                     exceeding tw o years, o r to b o t h . ”
 inev itab le. T h e i r L o r d s h i p s did n o t find it n ecessa ry t o h e a r counsel for K o n g o n                             By se ction 30 ( 1) o f t h e P o w e r s o f C r i m i n a l C o u r t s A c t 1973 : “ W h e r e a
 th is issue a n d it w o u l d n o t b e right for t h e m to o ffer a n y d e t a i l e d c o m m e n ts u p o n                   p e r so n is co nvicted o n in d i c t m e n t o f a n y o ffen c e o t h e r t h a n a n o f fe n c e for
 t h e facts b e y o n d o b s e r v i n g t h a t t h e su m m in g -u p d o e s n o t s e e m t o h av e distinguished             w hich t h e s e n te n c e is fixed b y law, t h e c o u r t . . . m a y im p o se a fine in lieu o f
  b e t w e e n an o b v i o u s risk c r e a t e d by th o se n av ig atin g each hydrofo il by th eir ow n                         o r in add ition to d ealin g w ith h im in a n y o t h e r way in which t h e c o u r t has
  n avig atio n a n d t h e r e s p o n s e b y th o s e o n b o a r d o n e hydro foil t o an y obvious risk                        p o w e r t o d e a l with him . . . ”
  c r e a t e d b y t h e n a v i g a t i o n o f t h e o th e r .                                                                       By se ction 35 ( 4 A ) : “W h e r e t h e c o u r t con sid ers— (a) t h a t it w o u ld b e
      T h e i r L o rd s h i p s t h u s d o n o t find it n ecessa ry t o disc uss t h e ev idence affo rd ed by                    a p p r o p ri a t e b o t h t o im p ose a fine a n d to m a k e a c o m p e n s a t i o n o r d e r ; b u t (b)
  t h e w ritte n s t a t e m e n t s o f t h o s e involved o r th e ir ev id en tial statu s. This last m a t t e r                th a t t h e of fe n d e r h as insufficient m e a n s t o p a y b o t h a n a p p r o p r i a t e fine a n d
  is n o w c o n c l u d e d b y t h e d ecisio n o f t h e B o a r d in L e u n g Kam -Kwok v . R . ( 1985)                         a p p r o p ri a t e co m p e n s a tio n , t h e c o u r t shall give p r e f e r e n c e t o c o m p e n s a t i o n
  81 C r . A p p . R . 83 , j u d g m e n t in whi ch w as given a f t e r t h e h e a r in g in t h e C o u r t o f                  (th ou gh it m a y im p ose a fine as w e l l ) .”
  A p p e a l in t h e p r e s e n t case.                                                                                                By section 39 ( 1): “ W h e r e a p e r s o n is co n v icted o f a n o f fe n c e b e f o r e t h e
     I t w as for t h e s e r e a s o n s t h a t th eir L o rds hip s, in respectf ul disa g re e m e n t with t h e                 C r o w n C o u r t a n d it a p p e a r s t o t h e c o u r t t h a t — (a) as a r esu lt o f t h e o f fe n c e , o r
  C o u r t o f A p p e a l r e g a r d i n g t h e misd irection by t h e le a r n e d ju d g e , felt c on s trained                o f th a t offence t a k e n t o g e t h e r w ith a n y o t h e r r e l e v a n t o ffen c e o r o ffen c es, loss
  h u m b l y t o ad v is e h e r M a j e s t y th a t th is a p p e a l m u s t b e allowed a nd K o n g ’s                          o r d a m a g e ( n o t a t tr ib u ta b le t o p e r s o n a l i nju ry) h a s b e e n s u ffere d by o n e or
                                                                                                                                      m o r e p er s o n s w h o s e identity is k n o w n t o t h e c o u r t ; a n d (b) t h e a m o u n t , o r
                                                                                                                                      ag greg ate a m o u n t , o f t h e loss o r d a m a g e e x c e e d s £ 15 ,000 ; t h e c o u r t m a y , in
     .^aerations. Thus, in Bolton v. Stone*9 utility of j>i,»y*ng cricket as 3 %j*w«                                gate,. - fftat no matter what the circumstances may be, it is justifiable to neg-
Jh      outweighed the remote possibility of a bail hgne hit out of that partial! 1#                                P L feet a r j^ o f such a small magnitude. A reasonable man would only
        cricket-field. An exceptional hit by a batsm!®!;arricd the ball out of                                             neglcc^Rh a risk if he had some valid reason for doing so, e.g. that it
        ground, clearing a considerable wall. Such a thing had happened . -m                                               wijuid involve considerable expense to eliminate the risk. He would
        about six times in 28 years. The cricket club was held not liable to a                                             weigh the risk against the difficulty of eliminating it. If the activity
        trian who was hit by the ball not merely because the likelihood was msu                                            *hich caused the injury to Miss Stone had been an unlawful activity,
        but because so small a risk in balance with other considerations did n                                             there can be little doubt but that Bolton v. Stone would have been
        require them to provide against it. So, too, in Brewer v. Delo,w which w                                           decided differently. . . - What that decision did was to recognise and
        a case of a golf-ball hitting another player, the risk was held to be unfVnc                                       give effect to the qualification that it is justifiable not to take steps to
        seeable, or so slight as to be negligible. If, however, the likelihood vi                                          eliminate a real risk if it is small and if the circumstances are such that
        injury is large, it may well be negligent to pursue or to allow a sport in*                                        a reasonable man, careful of the safety of his neighbour, would think it
        activity, even though it may have some value. In Hilder v.. Associated Pan                                          right to neglect it.”46
       land Cement Manufacturers Ltd,41 the defendants habitually allowed bm*
       to play football on a piece of ground owned by them and adjoining the                                              Emergency, dilemma or sport. Another manifestation of the rule that the 10-69
       highway. The ground was bounded only by a low wall. A ball was kicked                                          ,fegrce of care varies with the circumstances is that a person who takes a
       out of the ground, and it hit and killed a passing motor-cyclist. The defend­                                  r e a s o n a b l e decision as to a course of action in an emergency or dilemma or
       ants were held liable because the likelihood of balls being kicked out ut                                      * the heat of a sporting pastime will not be treated as having acted negli-
       that ground was great, and this outweighed the desirability of keeping chil­                                   pnily if the course of action decided upon turns out to have been the
       dren off the streets. In Miller and Another v. Jackson and Others42 cricket                                    «rong one. All that is necessary is that the decision should not have been
       balls landed fairly often in the plaintiffs’ gardens and the Court of Appeal                                   unreasonable, taking the exigencies of the particular situation into
       held the defendant club liable in negligence and nuisance.                                                      account. This is sometimes referred to as the rule in The By well Castle.
           It is relevant also to mention in this connection the judicial attitude                                     An illustration of action in an emergency is Jones v. Boyce,49 where owing
       towards negligence in the medical profession. In Cassidy v. Ministry of                                         to the defendant’s negligence a coach got out of control while going down­
       Health43 the plaintiff, who underwent an operation because of two stifi                                         hill. A passenger, fearing that it would overturn, jumped off and was hurt.
      fingers, came out of hospital with four stiff fingers. It was held that he was                                   The coach did not in fact overturn and had he remained on board he would
      entitled to damages and that a prima facie case of negligence had been                                           not have been injured. It was held that he could recover, for his action did
      made out against the authorities. This case must, however, be compared                                           not constitute contributory negligence. Again, in Parkinson v. Liverpool
      with Roe v. Minister o f Health,44 where the plaintiffs, who emerged from                                        Corporation49 the driver of a bus braked suddenly to avoid a dog which
      hospital paralysed after receiving spinal injections of anaesthetic into                                         appeared suddenly in front of him and a passenger was thrown to the floor
      which phenol had unforeseeably seeped, were denied a remedy. It was                                              of the bus. The driver was held to have acted reasonably in the emergency.
      emphasised that the risks attending new techniques and advances in medi­                                         On the other hand, in McCann v. J. R. McKellar (Alloys)50 a man who
      cal science should not be allowed to outweigh the desirability of encourag­                                      instinctively released a weight, which he was helping to lift, because a spike
      ing the initiative of the profession.45
                                                                                                                         *      [ 1967] 1 A.C. 617 , 642- 643. Lord Dunedin’s statement in Fardon v. Harcodrt-Rivington ( 193z.) 146
          If an activity has no utility, then even a remote likelihood of injury will                                  L T 391 392 (quoted in § 10- 65) has to be understood subject to Lord Reid’s qualification.
      render it negligent. “It does not follow,” said Lord Reid,                                                         47 ( 1879) 4 P.D. 219. It used to be thought that the principle was limited to fear of personal injury, n o t
                                                                                                                       daneer to property; but this is not so. See per Lord Sumner in SS. Singleton Abbey v.SS. Paludma{\n 7\
                                                                                                                       AC. 16, 28; cf. per Lord Phillimore at p. 33. accepting Collins v. Middle Level Commissioners' O 869) L __
                                                                                                                       4 C.P. 279, doubted by Lord Sumner and Lord Haldane in Canadian Pacific Ry. v. Kelvin Shipping Co.
       39 {1951] A.C. 850. So, too, in Simmsv. Leigh Rugby Football Club Ltd. [ 1969] 2 All E.R. 932, failure to       Ltd. ( 1927) 138 L.T. 369, 370.                                                         n o n i i ill F B
     provide against a foreseeable danger was held not to be negligence where the likelihood was small and was            « . 1816) 1 Starkie 493; followed in British School of Motoring v. Simms and Another [19/ 1] A l i t K .
     taken in conjunction with a lawful activity (rugby) properly conducted                                            117- rf Adams V L & Y Ry ( 1869) L.R 4 C.P. 739. See also Admiralty Commissioners v. Si. Volute
       * [ 1967] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 488.                                                                                   [ 1922]1 A.C. 129; SS. Singleton Abbey v. SS. Paludina [ 1927] A.C. 16; Swadling v. Cooper [ 1931] A C ;
       41 [ 1961] 1 W.L.R. 1434; cf. Lamondv. Glasgow Corp., 1968S.L.T. 291 (Ct. of Sess.): about 6,000 golf           Saul V. Sr. Andrews Steam Fishing Co. ( 1965) 109 S.J. 392; Caterson v. Commissioner for Railways ( 1972)
     balls a year hit over the fence— liable.
       42 [ 1977] Q.B. 966; cf. Kennaway v. Thompson [ 1981] O.B. 88                                                   12*Ml 95oi 1 AU E R. 367; cf. Glasgow Corp. v. Sutherland [ 1951] W.N. 111. where, on similar facts, the
       43 [ 1951] 2 K.B. 343.                                                                                          House of Lords decided the other way, stating that they neither doubted                L°t r
       u [ 1954] 2 Q.B. 66.                                                                                            Parkinson was applied in a similar set of circumstances in Wooller v. L. T. B. [ 1976| R T.R. 2Uo. bee
       45 See especially, per Denning L.J. at pp. 83, 86- 87; and in 33 Pub. Ad. 4- 6 . See also Bolatn v. Friern      Z “       Metropolitan Police District Receiver [19761 R.T.R. 201; Fury v. Council of,he City of Cardiff
     Hospital Management Committee [ 1957] 1 W.L.R. 582. approved by the House of Lords in Whitehouse v                [1977] C.L.Y. 2031; J. Fisher, 143 J.P.N. 58.
     Jordan [ 1981] 1 W.L.R. 246; J. Finch ( 1981) 131 New L.J. 253.                                                     50 1969 S.C.(H.L) 1.


                                                       [502]                                                                                                             [503]
  "hi1rnnlHChed ^             *** heW *ui,t> of negligence, as he admitted *Ji«                                                              or bcaching a damaged vessel in a poor position,58 pr subsequent
    te could have retamed his hold long e n o u g # , warn the plaintiff | R %,                                                               will^p exempt the d e f e n d a n t , provided the actions in question
    Chun Pui v Lee Chuen Tat51 the Privy Council held that the driver * *                                                               reasonable.                                                   ]
   coach who had braked, swerved and skidded when another car h:ul c,-i                                                           h « on this analogy that a participant in a game or competition who, in
    ront of him without warning, had acted reasonably in the emergency P                                                      UN? excitement of the moment, makes a miscalculation is absolved from
   cemen who are pursuing a person suspected of having committed an                                                           twbtiiiy for negligence. Thus, in Wooldridge v. Sumner60 a horseman in the
    able offence are acting in an emergency. So in Marshall v. O sm ond"                                                      <j&*nc of a competitive event galloped round a corner so fast that his horse
   p aintiff, a suspect, was injured when a police car drew up alongside the . *                                              wrong off the arena and injured the plaintiff, a photographer. It was held
    rom which he was starting to run away. It was held that in such cinin­                                                    mm this resulted from pure misjudgment of the horse’s speed and that the
   stances the police action should not be judged by the same standard of c l                                                 infer had not been negligent. In Condon v. Basi61 the Court of Appeal con­
  as would apply when there is time for reflection. In Rigby v Chief C                                                        s i d e r e d the standard of care expected of participants in sport (in this case
                                                                                                                              lielball), which is to show reasonable care appropriate to the particular
  p intiffs shop to flush out at hdangerous
                                   e p o l i c e f i r e d * c a n i s t e r o f « ’* » i " 1" " ’<■
                                                     psychopath. They did not h.s.,                                            sweumstances; and in Harrison v. Vincent62 the same Court observed that
   re-fighting equipment to hand and the shop was burned. They were fu : !                                                             every failure to comply with the rules of a sport is necessarily negli­
  o ave acted negligently in firing the canister without fire-fighting equip*                                                  gence, but that there has to be sufficient reason for doing so.
  ment since there was a substantial risk of fire.                                                                                 The need to act reasonably in all cases is illustrated by Sayers v. Harlow
  r e ^ H SCaflCUlati° n in ^ dilCmma is not treasonable merely because it *..»                                                H £>.C.63 The plaintiff, finding herself locked in the cubicle of a public
  reached after some reflection. The action of the plaintiffs’ captain in n<                                                   fcvatory belonging to the defendants and having failed to attract attention
  City o f Lincoln was not the result of a snap decision. The steering c o n                                                   jedded to take the risk of climbing out. In order to do so s h e placed one
  fhaSS: Cfhar.tS and log,of the Pontiffs’ ship were lost in a collision caused H                                              isot on the seat and the other on the revolving toilet roll. Having decided
  the defendant s negligence. Her captain made for a port of safety, us.ne ,                                                    that she could not clamber over the top, she began to get down and placed
  compass which he found on board. Owing to the loss of proper instrument*                                                      *t»me weight on the toilet roll, which precipitated her to the ground. She
                                                                                                                                •as held partly to blame for her injury, for although it was reasonable for
  was
  was heWlth
      held tha t Ithe
                   T hdefendant
                        f 0? 3"18316  thC Ship
                                  was liable:   pr°hand
                                              “the perly’ofand
                                                             theshe Sounded,
                                                                 original     h
                                                                          wrong­                                                ix t to try to climb out, it was unreasonable to have rested her weight where
 doer was still heavy on his ship and his own navigation was not the sole                                                       the did. In McKew v. Holland and Hannen and Cubitts (Scotland) Ltd. as
 human agency determining her fortunes.”55 Another example is The Ketch                                                         * result of the defendants’ breach of statutory duty the plaintiff suffered
 Frances v. The Highland Loch.56 Very shortly before the Highland Loch                                                          t n j u r y to his hip, which occasionally made his leg give way beneath him.
 was due ,o be L ushed. ,he Ketch France, fouled he, anchor f t t p i j                                                          While descending some steep stairs, which had no handrail, without assist­
 won d T h          reparatl° ns for Punching having already been made, it                                                       ance his leg collapsed. He tried to jump down the remaining stairs so as to
              r       danger° UIS l° W° rkmen and Pr°Perty to have left the                                                      icmain upright rather than fall down, and broke his ankle. The House of
   ghland LocA as she was. In the circumstances the defendants decided to                                                        Lords held that it was unreasonable of him to have attempted to walk down
 proceed with the launching and so run the risk of colliding with the Ketch                                                      tteep stairs without help and that this amounted to a novus actus interve-
It waXiH                 T Ult W‘th extensive damage to the Ketch Frances.                                                       niens so that the defendants were not liable for his broken ankle. But Lord
It was held that the defendants were not liable as they had acted reasonably                                                     Reid added that the act of jumping was not unreasonable in itself.
 ni the dilemma. So, too, where an attempt is made to preserve the plain-
                                                                                                                                      “But if the chain of causation had not been broken before this by put-
               and 50 minimise the ><**, an error of judgment in deciding
upon the best course to pursue will not relieve the defendant from liability
  a re to use engmes to keep a ship damaged by collision stern first on                                                           %7Canadian Pacific Ry. v. Kelvin Shipping Co. ( 1927) 138 L.T. 369.
                                                                                                                                  '* The Genua 11936] 2 AH E.R. 789: and see the observations of Langton J. on Canadian Facijic Ky. v.
                                                                                                                                Kelvin Shipping Co., supra.
                                                                                                                                     The Lucille Bloomfield [ 1967] 1 W.L.R. 697n., affirming [ 1966] 1 W.L.R. 1525-
   1 The Times, May 25. 1988.                                                                        '                    ‘       * 119631 2 Q B 43- cf. Trott v. T. A. Saul, The Times, December 3 . 1963: Wilks v. Cheltenham Home
  52 [ 1983] Q.B. 1034.                                                                                                         a J ^ V o r V c l e and Ugh, Car Club [ 1971] 1 W.L.R. 668: Be,on v. Toone [ 1978] C.L.Y 2055 Woo ­
  53 [ 1985] 1 W.L.R. 1242.                                                                                                     dridge was not applicable where the circumstances that caused a racing accident should have been seen to
[ 1959]11 8C m   D ' 15' See alS°   ClayardS V- De,hkk (1848) 12 0 B- 439: ^     Billings & Sons Ltd. v. Riden                  before the race: Harrison v. Vincem. The Times, March 17. 1981.
                                                                                                                                  *' [ 1985] 1 W.L.R. 866.
Lincoln,                       5 / " S /e' 0 " ^                  [1927> A C   1 6 '2 7 ' f a k i n g o f   The City of           ^ f 19821 R T R. 8 .
                                                                                                                                  -3 j 195g] [ w ’l . R . 623; Rigby v.   Chief Constable of Northamptonshire [ 1985] 1 W.L.R. 1242.
  56 [ 1912] A.C. 312.
                                                                                                                                  04 [1969] 3 All E.R. 1621.


                                                                                                                                                                                        [505]
                ting himself in a position where he might be confnwted with ms                                                   regard to the possibility of deafness through industrial noike, the
                gency, I do not think that he would put himself ctPbf court K * ?                                   P l a n t s were onl\Able for failure to take steps once there w<fc fiware-
                wrongly in the emergency unless his action was so utterly                                           j p T T t h e danger a m protective equipment had become available. For
                                                                                                                     1 * 1 purpose 1963 was adopted as the operative date, and the plaintiffs
                able that even on the spur of the moment no ordinary man w.x, j kj »
                been so foolish as to do what he did. In an emergency it is n.iv.f ;                                         held not to be entitled to damages for impairment of hearing sus-
                try to do something to save oneself and I do not think that his r                                    W ed before 1963. This principle applies equally to faults of commission
                jump in this emergency was so wrong that it could be said t.> <v                                     H wcil as those of omission.
                more than an error of judgment.”65                                                                       On the other hand, the failure to conform to a common practice is not
                                                                                                                    :Mccuarily conclusive of negligence.71 Conversely, a party may conform to
            Finally, although a person’s failings are not ordinarily taken into      ;«                              Hdh a practice and still be held guilty of negligence. This is the case with
         in determining the reasonableness of conduct, yet if such a one is piow.c-1 s,                             »HfU<n types of public undertakings which call for standards of care so
         an emergency, which is not of his making, any judgment on the reas* n .t ; »                               smarting that they may even on occasions be impossible to attain. In Lloyds
         ness of his reaction should take account of his limitations. It is irrclc'. n■*                             :'$mk Ltd. v. Savory & Co.12 the fact that the bank had followed the prac-
         that a normally endowed person could have and would have acted au'ti                                         m t adopted by all other banking concerns did not absolve them from liab-
         ently.66                                                                                                         y. In Manchester Corporation v. Markland1* it was held that to do what
                                                                                                                      #»ef¥ other water authority did was insufficient. In Daly v. Liverpool Cor­
lft-70      Raising the standard of careful behaviour. It has been remarked that f:.;                                 poration74 it was held that an omnibus driver was negligent in driving as he
         concern of the law to prevent injuries requires constant improvement ■ ;                                     £d. although it would have been impossible for him to have fulfilled his
         the standard of what is regarded as ordinarily careful behaviour. Hus                                        JalY of keeping to a reasonable time schedule had he driven more slowly.
         accomplished sometimes by insisting that conformity with common pr.u                                              she words of Stable J., “I think that in this case there was a departure
         tice is not good enough, sometimes by widening the foreseeable likehho. .1                                   f r o m that very high standard of care, a standard which it is impossible to
         of harm and sometimes as a by-product of insurance. In certain ca^V                                           reconcile with the discharge of the duties of drivers of public vehicles.”
         special standards may be prescribed. Each of these will now be considered                                     How high the standard of care expected of owners of vehicles is can be
                                                                                                                       rftustrated by Henderson v. H. E. Jenkins & Sons.16 The brakes of the
10-71       Common practice. Normally conformity to common practice is prim,i                                          defendants’ lorry failed and it killed a van driver. The failure was due to
         facie evidence that the proper standard of care is being taken.67 “Wheie                                      the escape of brake fluid through a hole in a pipe, which could not be seen
         the negligence of the employer consists of what I may call a fault of omis.                                   on visual inspection. The defendants had maintained the lorry weekly,
         sion, I think it is absolutely necessary that the proof of that fault of omis-                                including visual inspection of the pipe. Neither the Ministry of Transport
         sion should be one of two kinds, either to show that the thing which he d i d                                 nor the manufacturers had advocated removal of the pipe for inspection,
         not do was commonly done by other persons in like circumstances, or to                                        and it was said that doing so might fracture or kink it. There was a sugges­
         show that it was a thing which was so obviously wanted that it would be                                       tion that the hole might have been caused by a leak on to it of some corro­
         folly in anyone to neglect to provide it.”68 So employers, who ran a furni­                                   sive substance carried in the lorry, or from travelling near the sea, or over
         ture factory and who kept their information up to date with ordinary trade                                    salted snow. The House of Lords by a bare majority, reversing both the
         bulletins, were acquitted of negligence in not being aware of a danger                                         trial court and a majority of the Court of Appeal,77 held the defendants
         inherent in a certain kind of timber, which had only recently been dis­                                        liable. They could not rely on the defence of latent defect; in order to
         covered.69 Similarly, in Thompson v. Smiths Shiprepairers (North Shields )
         Ltd .70 it was held that where there had long been a general practice of inac-                                 71   Brown v. Rolls-Royce Ltd. [I960) 1 W.L.R. 210. especially per. Lord Keith at p. 214. and Lord Den-
                                                                                                                      ml!? M933] A X . 201; see also, per Lord Tomlin in Bank of Montreal v. Dominion Gresham Guarantee and
           65 At p. 1624. Lord Guest, on the other hand, thought the act of jumping was unreasonable: nn
         1625- 1626.                                                                                          H       Casualty Co. Ltd. [ 1930] A.C. 659, 666: Carpenters Co. v. British Mutual Banking Co. Ltd. 11937] 2 K.B.
           66 Salmond. Torts ( 17th ed.). p. 222.
           67 Per Lord Alness in Vancouver General Hospital v. McDaniel ( 1934) 152 L.T. 56, 57; Whiteford v            73 [ 1936] A.C. 360; and see also [ 1934) 1 K.B. 566. 573.
         Hunter [ 1950] W.N. 553;per Mackinnon L.J. in Mahon v. Osborne [ 1939) 2 K.B. 14. 43: Wright v. Cheshire       ” / « * ' Lt p “ lE44R p l f Russell L.J.: "the more potentially dangerous the manoeuvre of *.d riv er, the
         C.C. [ 1952) 2 All E.R. 789; Simmons V. Pennington & Son [1955) 1 W.L.R. 183; Stokes v. Guest, Keen and      nearer perfection in my view is required of his duty of care . Clarkes. Winchurch [196
         Nettlefold (Bolts and Nuts) Ltd. [ 1968) 1 W.L.R. 1776, 1783.
           68 Per Lord Normand in Paris v. Stepney B.C. [ 1951) A.C. 367, 382, quoting Lord Dunedin in Morton v       on which see Worsfold v. Howe [ 1980] 1 W.L.R. 1175.
         William Dixon Ltd., 1909 S.C. 807, 809.
                                                                                                                        ” S aT s L f.'dfssenting in the Court of Appeal ([ 1969] 2 O B. 188, 195- 196), held that conformity to
           w Graham v, Co-operative Wholesale Soc. Ltd. [ 1957] 1 W.L.R 511.
           70 [ 1984] Q.B. 405.                                                                                       common practice is not enough where there is risk of harm of great magnitude.


                                                         [506]                                                                                                            [507]
28                                    KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                            [1930]        2 K. B.                  KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                                                          29
       1930     notice, an d such a notice could n o t be given a fte r th e e s ta te                an d th a t A. H . T ay lo r never cam e u n d er a n y c o n tra c tu a l or                     1930
     T aylo r   of th e landlord an d th e e s ta te of th e te n a n t h a d becom e                 o th er o b lig atio n to Tw inberrow w hich precluded him from                                TAYLOR
        v.
     T w in ­   u n ited in th e sam e person. M oreover in th a t case th e m erger                  term in atin g his y early ten an cy b y acq uiring th e reversion or                              V.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      T w in -
 berrow .
                h ad been b ro u g h t a b o u t b y a n assig n m en t of th e lease fo r th e       from exercising his rights as th e freeholder a fte r such                                     BBKROW.
Lawrenoe L.J.
                rem ainder of th e te rm an d i t m ig h t p lau sib ly be co n ten d ed              acquisition.                                                                                  Lawrence L.J.
                th a t u n til th e te rm created b y th e lease h ad ex p ired b y                      I n th e resu lt, for th e reasons sta te d , I th in k th a t th e le arn ed
                effluxion of tim e th e lessor w as p ra c tic a lly in th e p o sitio n of           c o u n ty c o u rt ju dg e w as right, an d th a t th is ap p eal should be
                a person deriving title u n d er th e lessee, w hereas in th e p rese n t             dism issed w ith costs.
                case A. H . T ay lo r never was in su ch a position. F o r th ese                                                                           A p p ea l dism issed.
                reasons I am of opinion th a t th e decision in W alter v. Y alden (1)
                                                                                                        Solicitors fo r a p p e lla n t: B raund <fc H ill, fo r B aker & S m ith ,
                does n o t govern th e p resen t case.
                                                                                                      Tewkesbury.
                   I n Tichbom e v. W eir (2) th e q u estio n w as w h eth er th e
                                                                                                         Solicitors fo r re sp o n d e n t: Ivens & Thom pson, Cheltenham.
                d efendant, whose predecessor in title h ad u n d er th e s ta tu te
                acquired a rig h t to th e possession of th e p ro p e rty com prised                                                                                                  J . R.

                in th e lease and h ad p aid th e re n t reserved b y th e lease to
                th e reversioner, w as liable u n d e r th e rep airin g co v en an ts in
                th e lease. T he C ourt of A ppeal in n eg a tiv in g such a lia b ility                                        T H E K IN G v. D IV IN E .                                             1930
                held th a t s. 34 of th e L im itatio n A ct, 1833, d id n o t o p era te                                                                                                            Feb. 1 0 ;
                                                                                                                                   E x parte W A LTO N.                                              March 17.
                to tran sfe r th e title of th e lessee to th e person who h a d g ained
                a title to th e p ro p erty u n d er th e s ta tu te . T h is decision                Coroner— Inquest— Jury— View— Depositions—Coroners Act, 1887 (60 & 51
                definitely settled th e co n tro v ersy w hich h a d previously                           Viet. c. 70 ), s. 4, sub-s. 2 ; s. 6, sub-s. 1.—Coroners ( Amendment) Act, 1926
                existed as to th e legal o p eratio n a n d effect of th e L im itatio n                  (16 <6 17 Geo. 5 , c. 59 ), s. 19.

                A cts, an d i t is som ew hat su rprisin g t h a t i t d id n o t find a place                B y the Coroners Act, 1887, s. 6, sub-s. 1, t h e Court u p o n application
                in th e auth o rized L aw R e p o rts. B ow en L .J ., a fte r having                      m ade u n d e r t h e auth ority of the Attorney-General m a y order a n inques t
                                                                                                           to be held if i t is satisfied either (a) t h a t a coroner refuses o r neglects
                sta te d th a t th e s ta tu te m ade no tra n sfe r of a n y k in d b u t                 to hold a n inquest which ought to be held ; or (6) where a n inques t
                only barred th e rem edy an d ex tin g u ish ed th e title of th e                         has been held, t h a t “ b y reason of frau d, rejection of evidence, irregu­
                lessee, said th a t th e arg u m e n t on b eh alf of th e lessor w as                     larity of proceedings, insufficiency of inq uiry or otherwise, it is necessary
                                                                                                           o r desirable in t h e interests of justice, t h a t an o th er inquest should
                o verstraining th e d ic ta of L o rd S t. L eo n ards an d P a rk e B.                    be held.”
                (to w hich I have already referred), a n d co n stru in g th e m to                           I n exercising its powers under this section th e C ourt will n o t a t t e n d
                m ean m ore th a n w h at is said in th e A ct. T he learn ed L o rd                       to mere informalities, n or minutely criticize t h e sum m ing u p or t h e
                                                                                                           n a tu r e of t h e evidence or th e procedure. B u t if th e inquest is so co n­
                Ju stice th e n cited an d app ro v ed of th e opinions expressed                          du cted t h a t there is a real risk t h a t justice has n o t been done, t h e C ourt
                in D a rt’s V endor an d P u rch aser a n d in H ayn es on C onvey­                        will n o t allow t h e inquisition to stand.
                ancing th a t th e s ta tu te does n o t o p era te as a n alien atio n of                    T he d u ties of coroners in summoning a ju ry , holding a “ view,” takin g
                                                                                                           evidence, a n d directing the jury , considered an d explained.
                th e e sta te of th e rig htfu l owner.
                  A pplying th e principle laid dow n b y T ichbom e v. W eir (2)                        R u l e s N i s i fo r certio rari calling u p on th e coroner for
                to th e p resen t case, i t follows t h a t A. H . T ay lo r’s y ea rly               K ing sto n -u p o n -H u ll to show cause w hy inquisitions on
                ten an cy of th e co ttage was n ev er tra n sfe rre d to T w inberrow                in q uests held b y him on D ecem ber 5 an d 6, 1929, w ith a
                           ( 1) [ 1902] 2 K. B. 304.              ( 2 ) 67 L. T. 735.                 ju ry , in to th e d ea th s of tw o m en should n o t be b ro u g h t u p




                                                                                                  1
30                                               KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                                 [1930]   2 K. B.               KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                                                      31

     1930              a n d quashed. T he in qu ests resu lted in a v erd ict of m a n ­                            As to fresh evidence being ad m itted , th e coroner here                           1930
     Bex               sla u g h te r ag a in st th e ap p lican t, who w as co m m itted for                    desires th a t a new inq u est be ord ered , if th e evidence ap p ears                 R ex
      v.               tria l on th e coroner’s inquisitions. The grounds of th e rules                                                                                                                   v.
 D   iv in e   .                                                                                                 to th e C ourt to be m aterial.                                                     D   iv in e   .
 W   alto n        ,   w ere th a t th e proceedings w ere irreg ular in th e follow ing                             P aley Scott in su p p o rt of th e rule. T he coroner should                   W   alto n        ,
 E x parte.                                                                                                                                                                                          E x parte.
                       p a rtic u la rs (in ter a l ia ) : (1.) T h a t th e ju ry w as im p ro p erly           have read over th e depositions to th e w itnesses before th e y
                       s e le c te d ; (2.) th a t th e coroner view ed a n d discussed a                        signed t h e m : Reg. v. P lum m er (1), p er G urney B. E v en
                       d am ag ed vehicle before th e in q u est w ith a m an who a fte r­                       before th a t case it w as th e se ttle d p ractice th a t th is should be
                       w ard s ac te d as forem an of th e j u r y ; (3.) th a t th e coroner                    done : Je rv is on Coroners (1829), 1st ed., p . 235, w here th e
                       jo in ed th e ju ry in th e ir in sp ectio n ; a n d (4.) th a t th e coroner             a u th o r says th a t th a t is th e u su a l practice, alth o u g h it is n o t
                       failed to rea d over th e no tes of th e ir evidence to th e w itnesses                    essen tial in o rd er to ren d er th e depositions adm issible in
                       before th e y signed them . I t w as sta te d in one of th e                              evidence. T he d u ty of coroners as to evidence in cases of
                       affid av its th a t th e coroner confined his selection of ju ro rs                        m u rd er or m an slau g hter is s ta te d in U m freville’s L ex
                       to a p a n e l of sixteen or seventeen persons.                                            C o ro n ato ria (1761), vol. ii., p. 298, as follows : “ W hich a fte r
                                                                                                                  y ou h av e fu lly ta k e n dow n, rea d it pu b licly o ver to th e w itness,
                           Sandlands for th e coroner show ed cause. T he co ro ner’s                             an d desire his a tte n tio n to w h at y o u read . W hen th is is
                       ju r y is n o t in th e sam e position as th e ju ry in a civil or                         done, ask th e w itness if it be th e whole su b stan ce an d effect
                       crim in al case. I t is n o t im pro p er for th e coroner to view                         of his te stim o n y , an d agreeable to w h at he deposed. If he
                       th e scene of th e accident or th e su rro u n d ing circum stances,                       answ er yes . . . . le t him sign it u n d er th is In fo rm atio n , to
                       a n d th e fac t th a t ju ry m en accom panied h im is n o t a g ro u n d                 th e rig h t h a n d ; an d in th e sam e m an n er proceed w ith th e
                       fo r quashing th e inquisition. T he only grounds u po n w hich,                          re st of th e w itnesses.”
                       according to th e au tho rities, inquisitions have been q u ashed                            [H e referred also to H alsb u ry ’s L aw s of E n glan d, vol. viii.,
                       are interference in th e v erd ic t of th e ju ry or w ith th e ir                        “ C oroners,” p ara . 611.]
                       d elib eratio n s, co rru p t m isleading of th e ju ry , o r p u ttin g                    T here is no express provision on th is p o in t in th e Coroners
                       before th e m w ith o u t w arning evidence w hich is n o t upon                          A ct, 1887, b u t s. 4, sub-s. 2, req uires th e deposition to be
                                                                                                                 “ signed b y th e w itness a n d also b y th e coroner,” an d th e
                       o a th : Reg. v . Coroner o f Staffordshire. (1) I n R ex v. Wood (2)
                                                                                                                 read in g o v er of th e evidence ap p ears to be a necessary
                       th e coroner in terfered w ith th e ju ry ’s deliberations in th e
                       ju r y room . As regards th e read in g over of th e depositions                          p relim in ary.
                                                                                                                    H ere th e re w as such “ irre g u la rity of p ro ce ed in g s” th a t
                       b y th e coroner to th e w itnesses before th e y w ere signed,
                                                                                                                 it is a t least “ necessary or desirable in th e in terests of ju stice
                       R eg. v . P lum m er (3) con tains observations b y G u rn ey B .
                                                                                                                 th a t a n o th e r in q u e st should be h eld ” : Coroners A ct, 1887,
                       w hich su p p o rt th e view th a t th is is e s se n tia l; b u t th e se are
                                                                                                                 s. 6, sub-s. 1 (b). As to th e new evidence, it is su ch th a t
                       n o t ju stified b y th e language of th e s ta tu te (7 Geo. 4, c. 6*,
                                                                                                                 it is desirable th a t th e previous in q u isitio n be qu ashed, as
                       s. 4), w hich w as th e n in force, a n d th e y are ce rtain ly n o t
                                                                                                                 p ro v id ed in th e Coroners (A m endm ent) A ct, 1926, an d
                       ap p licab le to th e Coroners A ct, 1887.
                          [H e referred to T aylor on E vidence, 11th ed., vol. i.,                              a n o th e r in q u est be held.
                                                                                                                     [ T a l b o t J . referred to Garnett v. F errand. (2)]
                       p p . 360-362.]

                               ( 1) ( 1864) 10 L. T. 650.                 ( 2 ) [ 1928] 1 K . B. 302.                                                                         Cur. adv. vult.
                                                 (3 ) ( 1844) 1 C. & K . 600, 604.
                                                                                                                         ( 1) ( 1844) 1 C. & K . 600, 604.          (2 ) ( 1827) 6 B . & C . 611 .
                                      KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                             [1930]     2 K. B.             KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                                        33

   1930           T he C ourt ( T a l b o t , C h a r l e s an d H u m p h r e y s J J .) quashed   wish to ad d th a t we m u st n o t be ta k e n to give an y                1930
  R ex        th e inquisitions an d ordered new in q u e sts to be held before                     en cou rag em en t to applications for fresh in q u ests m erely on         R ex
    v.                                                                                                                                                                           v.
D iv in e .   a n o th er coroner.                                                                  th e grou n d th a t fu rth e r evidence is av ailable. W e m ade D iv in e .
W a lto n ,                                                                                         ab solute th e ru les in th e p resen t case, h av in g reg ard to the W a l to n ,
    parte.        M arch 17. T a l b o t J . read th e ju d g m en t of th e C ourt, w hich                                                                                   Ex parte.
                                                                                                    n a tu re of th e evidence now disclosed, as to w hich for obvious
               w as as follows : These R ules were m oved p u rsu a n t to th e fiat                reasons it is b est to sa y nothing, an d because th e absence of
               of th e A ttorney-G eneral, an d were g ra n te d , calling upon                     it a t th e in q u e sts is fu lly explained. T he fa c t th a t th e new
               D r. D ivine (one of H is M ajesty’s coroners fo r th e C ity an d                   in q u ests are o rd ered w ith th e assent, a n d in deed we th in k we
               C ounty of K ingston-upon-H ull) to show cause w h y a w rit                         m ay sa y by th e desire, of th e learned coroner also weighed
               of ce rtio rari should n o t issue to rem ove in to th is C ourt tw o                w ith us. W e th o u g h t it rig h t to give o u r decision a t once
               inqnisitions ta k e n before him in D ecem ber, 1929, on th e                        upon th is g ro u n d , w hich sufficiently su p p o rts it, as it was
               bodies of tw o m en who h ad been killed in a collision in a                         im p o rta n t in th e circum stances of th is case th a t there
               p ublic ro ad in o r n ear th e city, a n d w hy o th e r inquests
                                                                                                    should be no delay.
               should n o t be held.                                                                    W e deferred o u r decision on th e o th e r p oin ts argued
                  T he R ules w ere applied for under s. 6 of th e Coroners A ct,                    before us, a n d we now proceed to give it.
               1887, an d s. 19 of th e Coroners (A m endm ent) A ct, 1926,                             T he first irre g u la rity se t fo rth in th e o rd er to show cause
               on th e g ro u n d of (1.) irreg ularity in th e proceedings a t                     is th a t th e coroner view ed an d discussed a dam aged vehicle
               an d connected w ith th e in q u e s t; a n d (2.) th e discovery of                  before th e in q u e st w ith a m an who su b seq u en tly acted
              new facts a n d evidence.
                                                                                                    as forem an of th e ju ry .
                  T his second gro u nd depends p a rtic u la rly on s. 19 of th e                      T here is a t H u ll a peculiar practice as to th e sum m oning
              Coroners (A m endm ent) A ct, 1926, en a cted “ for th e rem oval                     of ju ro rs fo r in q u ests w hich is described in D r. D ivine’s
              of d o u b ts,” d o u b ts, th a t is, how fa r th e “ g en e rality of th e           affidavit, as follow s : “ I m ay well hav e referred to th e said
              provisions ” of s. 6 of th e A ct of 1887 em pow ered th e                             Jo sep h R a lp h as one of m y regular ju ry m en . I hold m any
              C ourt to quash an inquisition and o rd er a new in q u e st because                   in q u ests w ith ju rie s an d th e practice of m y co u rt is alw ays
              of th e discovery of new fasts or evidence.                 T he affidavits            to require 11 ju ry m en to be sum m oned. As these are
              filed in su p p o rt of th e rule disclosed evidence as to w hich we                   selected b y th e co ron er’s officer from a list o r p an el of 16 or
              will n o t sa y m ore th a n th a t it ap p ears to be m a teria l an d                17 on ly it necessarily happens th a t som e of th e sam e persons
              im p o r ta n t; th e y also accounted satisfacto rily fo r th e fa c t th a t         are sum m oned as ju ro rs tim e a fte r tim e, an d it follows
              th is evidence w as n o t tendered a t th e in q u e sts a lre ad y held.              therefore th a t m o st of th e ju ry m en who ca n an d who do
              [H is L ordship read passages from th e co ro n er’s affidavit                         a tte n d are reg u la rly sum m oned an d becom e regu lar ju ry ­
              a n d co n tin ued :] Counsel who appeared to show cause sta te d                      m en             I h av e noth ing to do w ith th e ir selection in
              th a t th e coroner w ould prefer th a t if th e C ourt th o u g h t
                                                                                                    an y w ay.”
              fit to o rd er new inq u ests so th a t th is evidence m ig h t be                       T hough i t is, we believe, com m on to use th e V oters’ L ist as
              considered, th e y should be held before th e coroner of a n o th er                  a list of ju ro rs to be sum m oned for coroner’s in qu ests, no list is
              d istric t u n d er s. 6, sub-s. 2, of th e A ct of 1887. I n these                   prescribed b y s ta tu te , an d so long as th e coroner ob tain s th e
              circum stances we considered th a t th e co n d itio n s laid dow n                   atten d a n ce of th e s ta tu to ry nu m ber of d u ly qualified persons,
              b y th e s ta tu te h ad been satisfied, a n d a t th e conclusion of                 th e m ethod b y w hich he does it is le ft v ery m uch to his
              th e arg u m en ts we ordered new in q uests accordingly. We                          discretion. T his is p ro b ab ly to be ex p lained b y th e ancient
34                                  KING'S BENCH DIVISION.                              [1930]     2K .B .               KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                                                   35
     1930 _ h isto ry o f th ese in q uests.           O riginally th e coroner’s d u ty           m en h ad been, a n d th e scene of th e collision. R a lp h w as                   1930
     B ex       w as to go to th e place w here a d e a th w hich was to be
     v.                                                                                            forem an of th e ju ry a t th e inquests. H e h ad also served on                  R ex
 D iv in e .    in q u ired in to h a d occurred, to sum m on th e in h a b ita n ts of            th e ju ry a t a n o th er inq u est held b y th e coroner on                        v.
 W a l to n , th e neighbourhood, a n d in q u ire of th e m upon o a th w h at th e y                                                                                              D iv in e .
 E x parte.                                                                                        D ecem ber 3, a n d th e sam e ju ry ap p ears to h av e been                    W a lto n ,
                knew of th e m a tte r. E v e ry one of tw elve years old o r                      sum m oned an d to h av e served on b o th occasions. [H is                      E x parte.
                upw ards in th e tow nships su m m o n ed w as bo u n d to a tte n d :             L ordship th e n read from D r. D iv in e’s affidavit his account
               see th e S ta tu te D e Officio C o ronatoris (4 E dw . 1) an d th e                of th e in c id en t an d continued :]              I t is ev id en t th a t
               S ta tu te o f M arlebridge, c. 25 (52 H en . 3), b o th now repealed.              th e coroner co n tem p lated th a t R a lp h w ould have a t
               G ra d u ally n o d o u b t (as in th e p a ra lle l case of th e g ran d ju ry )   th e in q u e st know ledge w hich th e o th e r ju ro rs w ould n o t
               th e fu n ctio n s of ju ro rs a n d w itnesses w ere distinguished, an d           o r m ig h t n o t have, an d th a t th e o th e rs m ig h t have to
               for m a n y centuries a lim ited n u m b e r of ju ro rs has been                   depend on R a lp h fo r a re p o rt of w h at h e h ad seen. W e can
               im panelled. W e are n o t to ld how o r b y whom th e panel                        accept w ith o u t reserve th e co ro ner’s sta te m e n t th a t no
               a t H u ll is form ed, o r w h eth er th e origin of th e p ractice                 “ discussion ” of th e circum stances o r causes of th e accident
               p rev ailin g th e re is know n, b u t w e are bo un d to say th a t to             to o k place betw een him an d R a lp h , th o u g h we do n o t suppose
               confine th e are a of selection to six te e n o r seventeen persons                 th a t th e ir ex am in atio n of th e vehicles a n d th e ir v isit to th e
              o u t of a g re a t c ity a p p e a rs to- us to be v ery objectionable.             place of th e collision passed in to ta l silence ; b u t i t is p lain
              A p a rt fro m th e obvious risk of p ra c tic a l inconvenience, it                 th a t th e re w as am ple o p p o rtu n ity fo r discussion if th e y h ad
              is in o u r opinion q u ite c o n tra ry to th e principle of th e ju ry             w ished to discuss.
              system , w hich is th e d e te rm in a tio n of questions of fa c t b y                 I t was pressed upon us b y counsel in show ing cause th a t
              persons ta k e n a t h ap h a za rd fro m th e g en eral body of qualified           an in q u est being a co u rt n o t of tria l, b u t of in q u iry only,
              persons. I t is an en tire d e p a rtu re fro m th is to have a sm all               th e p rocedure is m uch less rigid th a n a t a tria l p ro p er w hether
             p an el of “ reg u lar ju ry m e n ” w ho m u st be perfectly well                    crim inal or civil, a n d it w as argued th a t a p a rt fro m dishonesty
             know n, .and a t a n y ra te can easily be know n, to every one                       or delib erate p a rtia lity th e re was n o th in g to p rev e n t th e ju ry
             in H u ll who ta k e s a n in te re st in th e m a tte r. W e are n o t called        from satisfy in g them selves as to th e fac ts in a n y w ay w hich
             on to sa y w h eth er o r n o t th e p ra c tic e is actu ally illegal, a n d         th e y m ig h t th in k proper, so long as no m a teria l evidence
             we express no opinion as to th a t, b u t i t is in ou r view                         was ac tu a lly excluded a t th e in q u e st, an d no evidence w as
             im proper, a n d i t h as in fac t led to w h a t we hold to be an                    form ally ta k e n ex cep t on o ath. A t com m on law th e regular
             irre g u la rity in th e p resen t case.
                                                                                                   grounds on w hich inquisitions were q u ash ed were defects
               I t ap p e ars fro m th e evidence th a t on D ecem ber 3, 1929,                    ap p earin g on th e face of th e v erd ict, a n d “ m isconduct ” of
            tw o d ay s before th e in q u ests w ere held, th e coroner,                          th e coroner o r ju ry . “ T he v erd ic t,” says S ir J . Je rv is, “ is
            accom panied b y a m a n n am ed R a lp h , visited a garage                           eq u iv alen t to a n in d ictm en t an d m u st be sta te d w ith th e
            belonging to one B ell, to w hom th e co ro n er introduced R a lp h                   sam e legal c e rta in ty an d precision ” : Je rv is on Coroners,
            as “ one of m y reg u la r ju ry m e n ,” a n d desired to see a m o to r              1st ed., p. 253. T his m e an t th a t one arraig n ed on a coroner’s
            car w hich M r. George W alton , a g a in st whom th e ju ry                           in q u isitio n h a d th e sam e rig h t to h av e it qu ash ed fo r defects
            afterw ard s b ro u g h t in a v e rd ic t of m anslaughter, was                       as in th e case of a n in d ictm en t, a n d on such grounds it could
            d riv in g a t th e tim e of th e collision. M r. Bell show ed th em
                                                                                                   be q uashed e ith e r b y th e judge before w hom he was arraigned
            th e car, a n d th e coroner an d M r. R a lp h th e n exam ined it
                                                                                                   or b y th e C ourt of K in g ’s B ench. T h e C ourt could also
            to g eth er. T h ey also exam ined th e lo rry in which th e dead
                                                                                                   quash fo r m isconduct, b u t th is ju risd ictio n was k e p t w ithin
36
                                      KING’S BKNOH DIVISION.                            [ 1930]   2 K. B.               KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                                                     37
     1930
              s tric t Umits. O rd in arily unless th e in q u isitio n was b ad on               of a person killed in th e collision. W e th in k th erefo re th a t                  1930
   R ex
     v.       its  face, it w ould o n ly be quashed on th e g ro u n d of fra u d :              even a t com m on law th e co n d u c t of th e coroner an d M r. R a lp h           R ex
 D iv in e .     «y. v. M cIntosh. (1) E v en w here unsw orn evidence h ad                                                                                                              v.
                                                                                                  in th is case w as m isconduct fo r w hich th is C o u rt w ould h av e
W a lto n ,                                                                                                                                                                          D iv in e .
E x parte. been received th e C ourt w ould n o t quash th e inquisition                          q uashed th e inquisitions.            B u t in o u r opinion th e C oroners       W a lto n ,
              unless it ap peared th a t th e v erd ict h ad been influenced b y                  A ct, 1887, h as m a teria lly en larg ed th e pow ers, an d th erefo re           Ex parte.
             i t : Reg. v. Coroner o f Staffordshire (2 ); Reg. v . Ingham . (3)                  th e d u ty of th e C ourt in th is m a tte r. B y s. 6, sub-s. 1,
               o      m eg. v. Ingham (3) th e C ourt refused ev en to g ra n t a                 th e C ourt m a y quash a n in q u isitio n , a n d o rd er a fresh in q u est
             ru le m si on th e g ro u n d e ith e r th a t th e coroner h a d m isdirected       to be held if satisfied “ th a t b y reaso n of frau d , rejectio n of
             th e ju r y on law , o r th a t th e re w as no evidence to w arra n t               evidence, irre g u la rity of proceedings, insufficiency of inq u iry ,
                e v er ct. A gain i t is clear th a t a coroner’s in q u e st is n o t            o r otherw ise, it is n ecessary o r d esirable, in th e in te re sts of
             bo un d b y th e stric t law of evidence.                                            ju stice, th a t a n o th er in q u e st sh o uld be h eld .”
                   I n Ire lan d th e C ourt, proceeding up o n its com m on law                      These are v ery w ide w ords, a n d th e ir g en e rality is declared
               ju risd ictio n th e C oroners A ct, 1887, never applied to                        a n d g u ard ed b y th e C oroners (A m endm ent) A ct, 1926, s. 19.
               -Ireland held th a t it w as m isconduct or irre g u la rity fo r w hich           M oreover th e fac t th a t th e pow ers conferred b y th e section
               a n m q u est should be q uashed for th e coroner to be in th e                    can be exercised o n ly u p o n a n ap p lica tio n au th o rize d b y th e
               ju r y room while th e y w ere considering th e ir v e rd ic t: see                A ttorney-G eneral in d icates th a t th e y are pow ers beyond
               Keg. v. O B n e n a nd Bourchier (the Ballyragget case) (4) •                      th o se w hich th e C ourt alre a d y h ad . T he sam e ap p ears from
                » re the M itchelstow n Inq uisition . (5) T hese cases were                      s. 35 of th e A ct. T he w ords “ n ecessary o r desirable in th e
              follow ed b y th is C ourt in R ex v. Wood. (6) L o rd H ew art C J                 in terests of ju stice ” are th e critica l w ords. T h e C o u rt is n o t
              th e re rested his ju d g m en t on th e gro u nd th a t i t is                     to a tte n d to m ere info rm alities, n o r to criticize m in u tely th e
                 clearly c o n tra iy to public p o lic y ” for a coroner to go                   su m m in g « u p , or th e n a tu re of th e evidence or of th e
              m to th e ju ry room a fte r th e ju ry have retired to consider                    procedure. B u t if th e in q u e st h a s been so conducted, or
              then- v erd ict M orris C .J. in I n re the M U d U b k m , In q u i­               th e circum stances a tte n d in g it are such th a t th e re is
              sitio n (5) used th e sam e expression. T he gro u n d u p o n w hich               real risk th a t ju stice h as n o t been done, a real
              th e inquisitions w ere q uashed in those cases is n o t ex actly                   im p airm e n t of th e se c u rity w hich rig h t pro ced u re pro v id es
             th a t u p o n w hich th ese rules were g ran ted, th o u g h i t is n o t           th a t ju stice is done a n d is seen to be done, th e C ourt
             unlike it. I n o u r opinion it is “ co n trary to p ub lic policy ”                 o u g h t n o t to allow th e in q u isitio n to sta n d .                   No
             th a t a coroner should ta k e , before an in q u est is held, one or                d o u b t a coroner h as considerable la titu d e as to th e
             m ore persons who are to serve on th e ju r y a n d p riv a te ly                    w ay in w hich h e m a y co n d u c t a n in q u e s t; he is n o t
             in v e stig a te w ith th e m a n y of th e facts of th e c a s e ; a n d th is      fe tte re d b y detailed rules of p ro ced u re ; b u t on th e o th e r
             w h eth er o r n o t it can be show n th a t th e re w as a n y th in g in           h an d , th e proceedings are form al, th e y are co n d u cted on
            th e n a tu re of discussion. I t is obvious th a t th e condition                    lines w hich are now estab lish ed b y long usage, an d th e public
            of th e vehicles involved in a collision an d th e asp ect of th e                    a n d th o se m ore p a rtic u la rly in te re ste d h ave a rig h t to ex p ect
            place a t w hich it occurred, are am ong th e fac ts m aterial                        th a t th e v erd ict will be given u p o n th e sw orn evidence h eard
            to be considered m a n in q u iry in to th e cause of th e d eath                      a t th e in q u est an d u p o n n o th in g else. I t is unn ecessary to
                                                                                                  go in to th is in d etail, b u t we th in k th e language of th e A ct
                     (2 10 L T                           (4) (1882) 17 I r ' L - T ‘ 34'          of 1887 th ro u g h o u t confirm s w h a t we h av e ju s t said. See (to
                       3           s w * C. „            (5) ( 1888) 22 L. R . I r . 279.
                     ( 3 ) ( 1864) 5 B.       &      S. 257, 260 .(6) [ 1928] 1 K . B. 302,304
                                                                                                  ta k e one exam ple) th e w ords “ so fa r as such p articu la rs h av e
38
                                        KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                          [ 1930 ]
                                                                                                    2 K. B.                KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                                                    ;
     1930
                been proved to t h e m ” in s. 4, sub-s. 3, w here “ p ro v e d ”
     R ex                                                                                          h e allowed a police constable to sp eak a n d p o in t th in g s o u t                1930
      v.        m u st m ean “ proved b y sw orn e v id e n c e ” as pro v id ed b y
                                                                                                   to th e ju ry . W e ta k e th ese in order. (1.) T here is of course                 R ex
D i v in e .
                w     ’ ,        L,     w as a rSued th a t th e w ords “ an d to th e             no objection w h atever to a view b y th e iu ry of th e vehicles                   ^ ”■
WAIiTON,
                                                                                                                 .              .                                                      D iv in e .
Ex parte.      in Sch TT°U^ J       *   kn0Wfedge ” in th e form of ju ro rs’ o a th               concerned in th e collision an d of th e place. N o r can we                        W a lto n ,
                          •           ’ Wb6n C° m p a re d w ith s- 3= sub-s. 3, show              say th a t th e coroner is doing an y th in g w rong if h e goes w ith              Ex parte-
               th in k t V + ^ i T ^   COnfined t0 sw o m evidence. W e ca n n o t                 th e ju ry ; th o u g h we th in k th a t p ro b ab ly as a g en eral rule
               J iS - ^        I   6 18 a n y th in g in           I t w ould m ean                it is b etter th a t he should n ot. I f he does, he should
               p ractically th a t a v erd ict could be p ro p e rly based on
                                                                                                   carefully ab stain from a n y discussion of th e ease w ith them .
               Tfffe?          f        jUr0FS ***" °r C°Uld find °Ut’and wouId
                 effect an n u l th e ir obligation to give th e v e rd ic t “ according
                                                                                                   W e accept th e sw orn sta te m e n t of th e eoroner in th e p resen t
                                                                                                   case th a t he d id ab stain .
                 •     . / evidence-” The arg u m ent gives to th e w ords a                           [As to (2.) th e C ourt w as of opinion th a t th e alleg atio n was
                Significance m uch g reater th e n th e y can fa irly bear. I t is of
                                                                                                    n o t proved, b u t as to (3.) th e C ourt considered it im proper
                course no m ore possible a t a coroner’s in q u e st th a n a t a
                                                                                                   for th e constable to give in fo rm atio n to th e ju r y ou tsid e th e
               tria l, eith er crim inal or civil, to secure ab so lu tely th a t
                                                                                                   C ourt an d held th is to be a ground for q u ash in g th e
               ju ry m en will n o t be influenced b y th in g s w hich th e y h av e
                                                                                                    inquisitions.      T he ju d g m en t th e n c o n tin u e d :] T he last
               h eard o r seen outside th e C ourt. B u t a t le ast n o th in g should
                                                                                                   ground of objection was th a t th e coroner failed to rea d over
               be allow ed w hich m akes it certain t h a t th e y J              be so
                                                                                                   his notes to th e w itnesses before th e y signed th e m . This
                    uence      an     it is clear th a t th e proceedings of th e
                                                                                                   m a tte r is now reg u lated b y th e Coroners A ct, 1887, s. 4,
              m u T h an          ,R aIph m th is case> how ever well intended,                    sub-s. 2. W e do n o t d o u b t th a t if a coroner th in k s th a t th ere
              m u st h av e h ad th is effect. I t h as been said o v er an d over
                                                                                                   is a n y u n ce rtain ty as to w h at a w itness m e an t a n d p a rtic u la rly
             again th a t it is h a rd ly m ore im p o rta n t th a t ju stice should
                                                                                                   if a w itness req u ests before h e signs his deposition th a t it
             be done th a n th a t it should ap p ear to be done ; a n d n o th in g
                                                                                                   be read over to him , th e coroner o u g h t to do so ; a n d no
             is m ore certain to d efeat th is th a n th a t i t sh o u ld be ev id en t
                                                                                                   d o u b t a w itness w ould be en title d to refuse to sign u n til th is
            th a t a ju iy h av e form ed a t a n y ra te a p ro v isio n a l opinion
                                                                                                   h a d been done. B u t we h ave no rig h t to a d d a positive
            on th e case before h earing th e evidence.               T h e affidavits
                                                                                                   requirem ent such as is suggested to th o se w hich P arlia m en t
            m ake it clear th a t th a t im pression w as necessarily conveyed
                                                                                                   h as enacted. W e m a y n o tice th a t b y th e In d ic ta b le Offences
            b y th e p a r t w hich Mr. R a lp h as fo rem an of th e juxy t o l k
                                                                                                   A ct, 1848, s. 17 (reproduced b y s. 12 of th e C rim inal Ju stice
            a t th e m quest. I t w ould be w rong to im pose a lim it w hich
                                                                                                   A ct, 1925), th e justices are expressly req u ired to cause a
            th e law h as n o t im posed on th e rig h t of a co ro n er’s ju r y to
                                                                                                   w itness’s deposition to b e read over to him . W e m u st ta k e it
            ask questions of w itnesses; b u t no one can w o n d er th a t a
                                                                                                   th a t th is was d elib erately om itted from th e Coroners A ct, 1887.
              a n ag ain st w hom a v erd ict of m a n sla u g h ter h a s been
                                                                                                       W e are of opinion th a t, a p a rt from th e new evidence,
            found should feel th a t h e h as n o t been fa irly tre a te d w hen
                                                                                                   th e irregularities m entioned a b o u t were good g ro u n d for
            questions are p u t to him by th e fo rem an of th e ju ry
                                                                                                   m aking th e rules ab so lu te a n d quashing th e in q uisitio n s.
            ° ^ >US y 856(1 ° n lnform atio n o b tain ed o u tsid e th e C ourt
                                                                                                                                                               Rule absoltUe.
                I h e n e x t gro un d ta k e n com prises th re e p o in ts : ( 1 .) th a t
             he coroner joined th e ju ry in a n insp ectio n a n d discussion                        Solicitors show ing c a u s e : Collyer-Bristow & Co., fo r Laverock,
            o f th e dam age to a vehicle involved in th e c o llisio n ; (2 )                     Wray, Iveson      <fc   Co., H ull.
            th a t he d id n o t allow o thers to be p r e s e n t; (3.) th a t                       Solicitors in s u p p o r t: Sm ith &         Hudson, fo r Rollit            &
                                                                                                   Farrell, Hull.
                                                                                                                                                                        F. P. F.
 ooo                                 mm    cngiana Law neports                i « » a / j i Ali c n                        u o ici v n a r in g e y n e a i t r t A u tn o r ity ( u o y u

 L^>RD MACKAY OF CLASHFERN. My Lords, for tj^feasons given in the speeches                              member o f that lA fessio n w ho exercised and professed to have that special skill. Where
 o f m y noble and learned friends Lord Hailsham and LordnHndon, with w hich i agree, i               a medical advice h lK e c n given by a doctor the standard o f care required o f the doctor did
 would dismiss the appeal.                                                                              not depend on the context in which the advice was given but on whether there was a
                                                                                                        substantial body o f doctors who would have given the same advice. Since in 1979 a
 LORD ACKNER. My Lords, for the reasons given in the speeches o f m y noble and                         substantial body o f responsible doctors would not have warned o f the risk o f failure o f
 learned friends Lord Hailsham and Lord Brandon, with which I agree, I would dismiss                    the sterilisation operation the health authority was not liable in negligence (see p 891 g h,
 the appeal.                                                                                            p 893 h to p 894 g, p 895 f g and p 896 e to g, post); Bolam v Friern Hospital Management
                                                                                                      b Committee [1957] 2 All ER 118 applied; Sidaway v Bethlem Royal Hospital Governors [ 1985]
 Appeal dismissed.                                                                                      1 All ER 643 considered.
                                                                                                           (2)         The statement that the sterilisation operation was ‘irreversible’ could not reasonably
Solicitors: Mackrell &• Co (for the defendants); Penningtons Ward Bowie, agents for                     be construed as a representation, either express or implied, that the operation was bound
Woodford irAckroyd, Southampton (for the plaintiff).                                                    to achieve its acknowledged objective. It followed that the claim for negligent
                                                                                                        misrepresentation failed (see p 896 b to e, post); Eyre v Measday [1986] 1 All ER 488
                                                              Mary Rose Plummer         Barrister.    C followed.

                                                                                                          Notes
                                                                                                          For the standard o f care required o f doctors, see 34 Halsbury's Laws (4th edn) para 12,
                                                                                                          and for cases on the subject, see 33 Digest (Reissue) 262-288, 2162-2330.
               Gold v Haringey Health Authority
                                                                                                      d Cases referred to in judgm ent
COURT OF APPEAL, CIVIL DIVISION
                                                                                                        Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee [1957] 2 All ER n 8, [1957] 1 WLR 582.
WATKINS, STEPHEN BROWN AND LLOYD LJJ
                                                                                                        Emeh v Kensington and Chelsea and Westminster Area Health Authority [1984] 3 All ER 1044,
 1 0 , I I , 12 MARCH, 1 4 APRIL 1 9 8 7
                                                                                                           [i985]Q B 1012, [1985] 2 WLR 233, CA.
                                                                                                        Eyre v Measday [1986] 1 All ER 488, CA.
 Medical practitioner - Negligence - Duty of care - Standard of care - Advice - Contraceptive           Jones v Berkshire Area Health Authority (2 July 1986, unreported), QBD.
 advice - Failure to warn of risk that sterilisation operation might not succeed - Substantial body   e Maynard v West Midlands Regional Health Authority [1985] 1 All ER 635, [1984] 1 WLR
 of responsible doctors would not have given warning of risk of failure of operation - Whether
                                                                                                           634, h l .
failure to give warning amounting to negligence - Whether context in which advice given relevant        Saif Ali v Sydney Mitchell & Co (a firm) [1978] 3 All ER 1033, [1980] AC 198, [1978] 3
- Whether relevant that advice given in contraceptive context and not therapeutic context.                 WLR 849, HL.
                                                                                                        Sidaway v Bethlem Royal Hospital Governors [1985] 1 All ER 643, [1985] AC 871, [1985] 2
Medical practitioner - Negligence - Surgery - Sterilisation of female patient - Statement by          ,    WLR 480, HL.
doctor that operation ‘irreversible’ - Patient becoming pregnant - Whether statement amounting           Thakev Maurice [198 6] 1 All ER 497, [1986] QB 644, [1986] 2 WLR 337, CA.
to negligent misrepresentation that operation would be successful.
                                                                                                           A pp eal
In 1979 the plaintiff, who already had two children, became pregnant and agreed with                       The defendants, the Haringey Health Authority, appealed against the decision o f
her husband that they would not have any more children. She was referred to a hospital                     SchiemannJ given on 16 June 1986 whereby he held that the defendants, their servants
run by the defendant health authority, where the consultant obstetrician suggested                         or agents had been guilty o f negligence in not warning the plaintiff, Mrs Phyllis Gold, o f
sterilisation but made no reference to the alternative o f the plaintiff’s husband having a           9   the risk o f a sterilisation operation failing and in not recommending other methods o f
vasectomy and gave no warning o f the risk o f the sterilisation operation failing. The                    contraception, and awarded her damages o f £ 19,000. The facts are set out in the
failure rate for sterilisation (20—60 per 10,000) was higher than that for vasectomy (5 per                judgment o f Lloyd LJ.
 10,000). The sterilisation operation was performed on the day after the birth o f the child
but was not a success, with the result that the plaintiff subsequently became pregnant                  Stephen Miller for the defendants.
again and gave birth to a fourth child. She brought an action for damages for negligence              ^ CharlesJ Lewis for the plaintiff.
against the health authority alleging, inter alia, that it had been negligent in not warning
her o f the risk o f failure o f the operation and that a statement made to her that the                                                                                                     Cur adv vult
operation would be ‘irreversible’ amounted to a negligent misrepresentation. The judge
held that the operation itself had not been negligently performed but that, having regard                 14 April. The following judgm ents were delivered.
to the fact that the contraceptive advice had been given in a non-therapeutic context, the
defendants had been negligent in failing to warn the plaintiff o f the possibility o f failure        j   LLOYD LJ (giving the first judgm ent at the invitation o f Watkins LJ). On 20 August
o f the operation. He awarded the plaintiff damages o f £ 19,000. The defendants appealed.                1979 the plaintiff underwent an operation for sterilisation at the North Middlesex
                                                                                                          Hospital. It was on the day after the birth o f her third child. The operation did not
H eld - The appeal would be allowed for the following reasons—                                            succeed, for in October 1982 she gave birth to her fourth child, Darren. In October 1984
  (i)    The standard o f care required o f a medical practitioner was the same as that                   she commenced these proceedings against the defendants, Haringey Health Authority,
required o f members o f every profession or calling which required special skill,                        despite the fact that she and her husband are delighted with Darren, their first boy, and
knowledge or experience, namely the standard o f care required o f the ordinary skilled                   indeed have gone on to have a fifth child, bom in November 1984.
                               All England Law Reports                     [1987] 2 All ER                CA                Gold v Haringey Health Authority (Lloyd LJ)                             891

    In her writ, as amended, she claims damages for nq^ ^ ence in carrying out the                        took place on tn^Bccasion. All we know is that on 31 July he wrote to Miss Witt as
operation. But that claim was rejected by the judge. He found that the plaintiff had              a   a   follows:
 failed to prove that Dr Arzanghi, who carried out the operation, had been negligent.                            ‘Many thanks for considering this patient for sterilisation. She has two children
There is no appeal against that finding.                                                                       aged 10 and 7 years, and she is due for her confinement on 20 August 1979. The
    But the judge went on to hold the defendants liable on another ground. He held that                        patient is aware that this is an irreversible operation.’
they ought to have warned the plaintiff that the operation m ight not succeed, and ought,
in the circumstances, to have mentioned the alternative o f vasectomy. If they had, then,                     It may be that there was som e discussion about vasectomy, and that Dr Gomez
according to the judge’s findings, the plaintiff would not have consented to the operation,       b   b   repeated his earlier advice that sterilisation would be ‘handier’; but we do not know,
and her husband would have been vasectomised instead. By inference, he has found that                     since Dr Gomez was not called, and the plaintiff was not asked.
the vasectomy would have been effective to prevent the birth o f the fourth and fifth                         On 14 August Mrs Gold saw Dr Plummer, the house surgeon. She told her that she
children. The failure rate for vasectomy was accepted as being about five per ten                         wanted to be sterilised, and signed a written consent in the form then current. On 19
thousand, compared w ith a failure rate for female sterilisation o f between two and six                  August she gave birth to Nicola. On 20 August the operation was performed. The judge
per thousand. The judge held that the defendants were negligent in not inform ing the                     has found on the balance o f probabilities that neither Miss Witt nor Dr Plummer nor Dr
plaintiff o f the failure rate for female sterilisation, and that they are liable in damages      C   C   Arzanghi ever clearly explained that there was a risk o f the operation failing. Counsel for
accordingly, which he assessed at £ 19,000.                                                               the defendants does not seek to go behind that finding.
   Before relating the history o f the matter, I wish to make one point clear. We are not in                  In her case as originally pleaded the plaintiff relied exclusively on the absence o f any
this case called on to decide whether it is desirable or not that a plaintiff should be able to           warning as to the failure rate o f the operation, which, as I have said, was accepted as being
claim damages for the birth o f a healthy child, and a child which, in this particular case,              about two per thousand, or about six per thousand if carried out immediately after
the plaintiff and her husband are now delighted to have. In Jones v Berkshire Area Health                 childbirth. But on the third day o f the evidence, when one o f the plaintiff’s experts was
Authority (2 July 1986, unreported), another unwanted pregnancy case, OgnallJ said:               ^   a   being re-examined, the judge raised the question whether it m ight be the defendants’
                                                                                                          duty, not only to warn the plaintiff o f the failure rate for sterilisation, but also to compare
       ‘I pause only to observe that, speaking purely personally, it remains a matter o f                 the failure rate for female sterilisation with the failure rate for male vasectomy. The
     surprise to m e that the law acknowledges an entitlement in a mother to claim                        point was taken up later the same day with the first o f the defendants’ experts. The next
     damages for the blessing o f a healthy child. Certain it is that those who are afflicted             day counsel for the plaintiff applied to reamend the statement o f claim in accordance
     with a handicapped child or who long desperately to have a child at all and are                      with the judge’s indication, so as to allege that the defendants were negligent in failing
     denied that good fortune would regard an award for this sort o f contingency with a e            e   to discuss vasectomy with the plaintiff, and to mention the relative failure rates o f the
     measure o f astonishment. But there it is: that is the law.’                                         two operations. Despite this amendm ent, counsel made clear to us that his main case
   Many would no doubt agree w ith that observation. But the desirability o f permitting                  rested, and had always rested, on the simple failure to warn that sterilisation might not
such a claim does not concern us here. At one tim e there was a conflict o f decisions at                 succeed.
first instance whether it was against public policy to allow a plaintiff to recover damages                   I now turn to the evidence. The doctors were unanimous in their view that though
for the birth o f a healthy child. But that conflict has been resolved, so far as this court is .     j   they themselves would have warned o f the risk o f failure, nevertheless a substantial body
concerned, by the unanimous decision o f this court in Emeh v Kensington and Chelsea and                  o f responsible doctors would not have given any such warning in 1979. One o f the
 Westminster Area Health Authority [1984] 3 All ER 1044, [1985] QB 1012. So in the present                witnesses put the proportion o f doctors who would not have given any such warning in
appeal we are concerned solely w ith the question whether the plaintiff has established                   1979 as high as 50^. How then did it come about that the judge convicted the defendants
negligence against the defendants by reason o f their failure to warn the plaintiff that the              o f negligence?
operation m ight not succeed.                                                                                 In directing the jury in Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee [ 1957] 2 All ER
   The history o f the matter, very briefly, is as follows. The plaintiff’s first and second _        g   118 at 122, [1957] i WLR 582 at 587 McNair J said:
children, both girls, were bom in December 1969 and November 1972. There was then
a long gap before she conceived her third child. In the course o f her third pregnancy, she                       ‘[A medical man] is not guilty o f negligence if he has acted in accordance with a
discussed with her husband the possibility o f him having a vasectomy. According to her                        practice accepted as proper by a responsible body o f medical m en skilled in that
husband’s evidence, they knew about vasectomy because two o f his friends had had a                            particular a r t. . . merely because there is a body o f opinion that takes a contrary
vasectomy, including the plaintiff's brother-in-law. On 9 January 1982 the plaintiff went                      view.’
to see her general practitioner, Dr Gomez. He confirmed she was pregnant. She told h im fo            h
that she and her husband were thinking o f vasectomy. Dr Gomez suggested sterilisation                       In Maynard v West Midlands Regional Health Authority [1985] 1 All ER 635 at 638,
instead. According to the plaintiff's evidence, Dr Gomez was not against vasectomy, but                   [1984] 1 WLR 634 at 638 the House o f Lords applied the Bolam test to a case o f wrongful
that sterilisation would be ‘handier’ as the plaintiff would be in hospital in any event                  diagnosis. Lord Scarman said:
having her third child.
   On 24 July 1982 the plaintiff saw Miss Witt, the consultant to w hom she had been                              ‘It is not enough to show that there is a body o f competent professional opinion
referred at the comm encement o f her pregnancy. The plaintiff told Miss Witt that she j              j        which considers that theirs was a wrong decision if there also exists a body of
did not want any more children. Miss Witt suggested sterilisation. She did not mention                         professional opinion, equally competent, which supports the decision as reasonable
vasectomy as an alternative; but then neither did the plaintiff, although it had been                          in the circumstances. It is not enough to show that subsequent events show that the
discussed between her and her husband the previous January.                                                    operation need never have been performed, if at the time the decision to operate
   Soon after 24 July the plaintiff must have returned to see Dr Gomez, her general                            was taken it was reasonable in the sense that a responsible body o f medical opinion
practitioner. Regrettably Dr Gom ez was not called as a witness, so we do not know what                        would have accepted it as proper.’                                   I
                                                                                                                                  Uoia v Haringey Heaitn AUinority (Lioyu l j ;

r ^ In Sidaway v Bethlem Royal Hospital Governors [1985] 1             643, [ 198 5] AC 871 the                      risks the ex jA n ce o f which a patient should be voluntarily warned and the terms in
  House o f Lords applied the same test to a case in which a ^ ^ o r , before carrying out an g             3        which sucW Brning, if any, should be given, having regard to the effect that the
  operation, failed to warn his patient o f a very small risk o f very serious injur)'. It would                     warning may have, is as much an exercise o f professional skill and judgment as any
  have been open to the House o f Lords to hold that the Bolam test applied to negligent                             other part o f the doctor’s comprehensive duty o f care to the individual patient, and
  diagnosis and negligent treatment, but not negligent advice. In other words, the House                             expert medical evidence on this matter should be treated in just the same way. The
  o f Lords could have adopted the doctrine o f ‘informed consent’ favoured in the United
                                                                                                                     Bolam test should be applied.’
  States o f America and Canada. But the House o f Lords declined to follow that path. Lord
  Diplock said ([1985] 1 All ER 643 at 657-659, [1985] AC 871 at 893-895):                       b          .     How, then, I ask again, did it com e about that the judge found the defendants guilty
                                                                                                              o f negligence, when he accepted that there was a substantial body o f responsible medical
          ‘In English jurisprudence the doctor’s relationship with his patient which gives                    opinion in 1979 who would not have given any warning? The answer is that he drew a
       rise to the normal duty o f care to exercise his skill and judgment to im prove the                    distinction between advice or warning in a therapeutic context and advice or warning in
      patient’s health in any particular respect in which the patient has sought his aid has                  a contraceptive context. In a therapeutic context there was a body o f responsible medical
      hitherto been treated as a single comprehensive duty covering all the ways in which
                                                                                                              opinion which would not have warned o f the failure rate. But in a contraceptive context
      a doctor is called on to exercise his skill and judgment in the im provement o f the          c
                                                                                                            c there was no such body o f responsible medical opinion. Even if there had been, he would
      physical or mental condition o f the patient for which his services either as a general                 still have found the defendants negligent, since in his view the Bolam test does not apply
      practitioner or as a specialist have been engaged. This general duty is not subject to
                                                                                                              to advice given in a non-therapeutic context. He said:
      dissection into a number o f component parts to which different criteria o f what
      satisfy the duty o f care apply, such as diagnosis, treatment and advice (including                                ‘I accept that it was the view o f the majority o f the House o f Lords that in the
      warning o f any risks o f som ething going wrong however skilfully the treatment                                therapeutic context o f that case [Sidaway] the duty to give advice was subject to the
      advised is carried out). The Bolam case [1957] 2 All ER 118, [1957] 1 WLR 582 itself          /j                same test as the duty to diagnose and treat, and that this test, known as the Bolam
      embraced failure to advise the patient o f the risk involved in the electric shock                    d         test after an earlier case, was that a doctor is not negligent if he acts in accordance
      treatment as one o f the allegations o f negligence against the surgeon as well as                              with a practice accepted as proper by a responsible body o f medical opinion even
      negligence in the actual carrying out o f treatment in which that risk did result in                            though other doctors adopt a different practice. This test is different from the one
      injury to the patient. The same criteria were applied to both these aspects o f the                             generally applied in actions in respect o f negligent advice. I see nothing in the
      surgeons duty o f care. In modern medicine and surgery such dissection o f the                                  reasons given for adopting the Bolam test in the sort o f circumstances under
      various things a doctor has to do in the exercise o f his whole duty o f care owed to         g                 consideration in Sidaway w hich compels m e to widen the application o f this
      his patient is neither legally meaningful nor medically practicable. Diagnosis itself                 e        exceptional rule so as to cause it to apply to contraceptive counselling.’
      may involve exploratory surgery, the insertion o f drugs by injection (or vaccination)                        So the judge decided against the defendants on two grounds. First, he held that the
      involves intrusion on the body o f the patient and oral treatment by drugs, although                       Bolam test did not apply at all in a contraceptive context. Instead he applied his ow n
      it involves no physical intrusion by the doctor on the patient’s body, may in the case                     judgment as to what should have been mentioned in that context. Second, if the Bolam
      o f particular patients involve serious and unforeseen risks . . . My Lords, I venture                     test did apply, then he found as a fact that there was no body o f responsible medical
      to think that in making this separation between that part o f the doctor’s duty o f care      f       f    opinion which would not, in a contraceptive context, have warned o f the risk o f failure.
      that he owes to each individual patient, which can be described as a duty to advise                        I have reversed these two grounds, since the first ground raises a question o f considerable
      on treatment and warn o f its risks, the courts have misconceived their functions as                       general importance.
      the finders o f fact in cases depending on the negligent exercise o f professional skill                      Was the judge right when he held that the Bolam test is an exception to the ordinary
      and judgment. In matters o f diagnosis and the carrying out o f treatment the court                        rule in actions for negligence ? If by an ‘exceptional rule’ the j udge meant that the Bolam
      is not tempted to put itself in the surgeon’s shoes; it has to rely on and evaluate                        test is confined to actions against doctors, then I would respectfully disagree. I have
      expert evidence, remem bering that it is no part o f its task o f evaluation to give effect   g       g    already quoted a passage from McNair J’s sum m ing up in Bolam's case. In an earlier
      to any preference it may have for one responsible body o f professional opinion over                       passage he had said ([1957] 2 All ER 118 at 121, [1957] 1 WLR 582 at 586):
      another, provided it is satisfied by the expert evidence that both qualify as responsible
      bodies o f medical opinion. But, when it comes to warning about risks, the kind o f                                \ . . where you get a situation which involves the use o f some special skill or
      training and experience that a judge will have undergone at the Bar makes it natural                            competence, then the test whether there has been negligence or not is not the test o f
      for him to say (correctly) it is m y right to decide whether any particular thing is                            the man on top o f a Clapham omnibus, because he has not got this special skill. The
      done to m y body, and I want to be fully informed o f any risks there may be involved         h       fy       test is the standard o f the ordinary skilled man exercising and professing to have
      o f which I am not already aware from m y general knowledge as a highly educated                                that special skill.’
      man o f experience, so that I may form m y own judgment whether to refuse the                              So far as I know that passage has always been treated as being o f general application
      advised treatment or not. N o doubt, if the patient in fact manifested this attitude by                  whenever a defendant professes any special skill. It is so treated in Charleswortk on
      means o f questioning, the doctor would tell him whatever it was the patient wanted                      Negligence (7th edn, 1983) para 6 -1 7 . The Bolam test is not confined to a defendant
      to know ; but we are concerned here with volunteering unsought information about                  .    . exercising or professing the particular skill o f medicine. If there had been any doubt on
      risks o f the proposed treatment failing to achieve the result sought or m aking the          /       1 the question, which I do not think there was, it was removed by the speech o f Lord
      patient’s physical or mental condition worse rather than better. The only effect that                    Diplock in the Sidaway case [1985] 1 All ER 643 at 657, [1985] AC 871 at 892 where
      mention o f risks can have on the patient’s mind, if it has any at all, can be in the                    Lord Diplock made it clear that the Bolam test is rooted in an ancient rule o f common law
      direction o f deterring the patient from undergoing the treatment w hich in the                          applicable to all artificers. In Saif Ali v Sydney Mitchell & Co (a firm) [1978] 3 All ER 1033
      expert opinion o f the doctor it is in the patient’s interest to undergo. To decide what                 at 1043, [1980] AC 198 at 220 Lord Diplock treated the same test as applicable to
                                  am i   c u y id iiQ u a w n e p o n s        f. t 3 o / j z A i l e r f


* .barristers, although he did not m ention the Bolam case tdfe^me. The question in that                        To which couns^replied: ‘Yes, i f w e apply the Bolam test, I have had it on this lim b
  case was whether a barrister is im m une from an action in i^pigence in relation to advice                a   certainly’.
  given out o f court. It was held that he is not. Lord Diplock said:                                              Indeed as late as counsel for the plaintiffs closing submission the judge observed that
                                                                                                                the defendants were ‘hom e and dry’ if Sidaway applied, as I have held it does. Yet when
          ‘No matter what profession it may be, the comm on law does not impose on those                        he came to give judgment, the judge had changed his mind. For the sake o f convenience
       who practise it any liability for damage resulting from what in the result turned out                    I repeat here verbatim the three relevant findings:
       to have been errors o f judgm ent, unless the error was such as no reasonably well
       informed and competent mem ber o f that profession could have made.’                                 i          ‘(3) That in a non-contraceptive context, for instance if there had been a
                                                                                                                     therapeutic reason for sterilising [the plaintiff], there was a responsible body o f
       Counsel for the plaintiff did his best to argue that the Bolam test is confined to doctors.                   medical opinion which would not, unasked, have mentioned the fact that the
   For the reasons I have given, I cannot accept that argument. I can see no possible ground                         operation involved an element o f risk. (4) That in the context o f someone seeking
   for distinguishing between doctors and any other profession or calling which requires                             contraceptive advice there was such a body o f medical opinion which would not,
   special skill, knowledge or experience. To be fair to the judge, it was not, I think, on this                     unasked, have mentioned that the failure rate o f a post partum sterilisation operation
  ground that he regarded the Bolam test as exceptional.                                                    c        was several times as high as the ultimate failure rate o f a vasectomy. (5) That in the
      In passing, I should m ention that the Bolam test is often thought of as lim iting the duty                    context o f someone seeking contraceptive advice there was no such body o f medical
  o f care. So in one sense it does. But it also extends the duty o f care, as the second o f the                    opinion which would have failed to mention that there was a risk o f failure o f the
   two passages I have quoted from McNair J’s sum m ing up in the Bolam case makes clear.                            post partum sterilisation or that vasectomy was an option or to make inquiries o f
  The standard is not that o f the man on the top o f the Clapham omnibus, as in other fields                        the domestic situation o f the party seeking advice.’
  o f negligence, but the higher standard o f the man skilled in the particular profession or
  calling.                                                                                                         I can find nothing in the evidence which justifies the last o f these findings. Counsel
      Why then did the judge think that it would be an extension o f the Bolam test to apply                d   for the plaintiff relies on the documentary evidence, some o f which is set out in the
  it in the present case ? The reason can only have been that which I have already mentioned,                   judge’s judgment. I need not refer to it in detail. As was to be expected, it emphasises the
  namely the distinction between therapeutic and non-therapeutic advice. Counsel for the                        importance o f counselling before deciding on an operation, whether for male or female
                                                                                                                sterilisation. In addition, the documents published by the medical defence bodies, again
  plaintiff took us through the Sidaway case speech by speech, and paragraph by paragraph,
  in order to point the distinction. But I remain unconvinced. In the first place the line                      as was only to be expected, discourage the giving o f any sort o f guarantee o f success. But
  between therapeutic and non-therapeutic medicine is elusive. A plastic surgeon carrying                       this evidence does not m eet the point made by counsel for the defendants and by all the
  out a skin graft is presumably engaged in therapeutic surgery; but what if he is carrying                 e   witnesses, including those called by the plaintiff, who said that though they would
  out a facelift, or some other cosmetic operation? Counsel found it hard to say.                               themselves have warned the plaintiff o f the risk o f failure, there was a body o f responsible
      In the second place, a distinction between advice given in a therapeutic context and                      doctors in 1979 w ho would not have done so. The judge accepted in his judgment that
  advice given in a non-therapeutic context would be a departure from the principle on                          the distinction between advising in a contraceptive and non-contraceptive context was
                                                                                                                not ‘crystal clear’ on the evidence. W ith respect, that is an understatement. The witnesses
  which the Bolam test is itself grounded. The principle does not depend on the context in
  which any act is performed, or any advice given. It depends on a man professing skill or                  x   were never asked to distinguish between the two cases. There was therefore only one
  competence in a field beyond that possessed by the man on the Clapham omnibus. If the                          finding open on the evidence, namely that there was a body o f responsible medical
 giving o f contraceptive advice required no special skill, then I could see an argument that                   opinion which would not have given any warning as to the failure o f female sterilisation,
                                                                                                                and the possible alternatives, in the circumstances in which the defendants actually found
  the Bolam test should not apply. But that was not, and could not have been, suggested.
  The fact (if it be the fact) that givin g contraceptive advice involves a different sort o f skill             themselves. So I would not accept the second o f the two grounds on which the judge
 and competence from carrying out a surgical operation does not mean that the Bolam test                         decided against the defendants.
                                                                                                            _       That makes it unnecessary to consider whether, if the defendants had been under a
 ceases to be applicable. It is clear from Lord Diplock’s speech in Sidaway that a doctor’s
                                                                                                                 duty to warn, they were entitled to assume that an adequate warning had ben given by
 duty o f care in relation to diagnosis, treatment and advice, whether the doctor be a
                                                                                                                 Dr Gomez, the general practitioner. We know from his letter o f 31 July 1979 that he
 specialist or general practitioner, is not to be dissected into its component parts. To dissect
                                                                                                                 warned the plaintiff that the operation was irreversible. But since he was not called, we
 a doctor’s advice into that given in a therapeutic context and that given in a contraceptive
                                                                                                                 do not know what other warning, if any, he may have given.
 context would be to go against the whole thrust o f the decision o f the majority o f the
                                                                                                                    Counsel for the plaintiff referred us in passing to Thake v Maurice [1986] 1 All ER 497,
 House o f Lords in that case. So I would reject the argument o f counsel for the plaintiff
                                                                                                            h    [1986] QB 644, where it was held to have been negligent on the part o f a surgeon
 under this head, and hold that the judge was not free, as he thought, to form his own
                                                                                                                 undertaking a vasectomy not to warn o f the risk o f failure in accordance with his usual
 view o f what warning and information ought to have been given, irrespective o f any
 body or responsible medical opinion to the contrary.                                                            practice. But in that case, as Kerr LJ pointed out, there was no independent medical
                                                                                                                 evidence called by either side (see [1986] 1 All ER 497 at 506-507, [1986] QB 644 at 679—
    So I turn to the second question, which assumes, as I have held, that the Bolam test
                                                                                                                 80). So, as counsel for the plaintiff sensibly agreed, it does not help him in the present
 applies. Here counsel for the plaintiff acknowledges that he is in some difficulty. For in
                                                                                                                 case. Nor does he get any help from Jones v Berkshire Health Authority (2 July 1986,
 the course o f the defence evidence the judge observed to counsel for the plaintiff:
                                                                                                            j    unreported), for in that case the duty to warn was admitted.
         ‘You are in the happy position o f being able to say, as I understand it, that all of                      Finally, I should mention the plaintiffs claim for negligent misrepresentation. In para
      the defence team, as it were, are all saying that they personally would have advised,                      7A o f the statement o f claim it is pleaded by amendment as follows:
      and in one case they claim they did advise. You are in that happy position. You are
                                                                                                                        ‘By reason o f the matters pleaded in paragraphs 2 -5 above, the defendants
      in the unhappy position that they will say, as you have to accept, that there were
      squads o f people who did not.’                                                                                 negligently misrepresented to the plaintiff that the operation would render her
                                                                                                       v - * u ju j l u p u i                                i i i |w*ui 10 1 1 r o
       permanently sterile and/or that sterilisation was her only contraceptive option and            Cases reported in parts t to J0 a rt listed inside tfia cover o f pa rt 10

       in reliance upon w hich representation the plaintiMfcreed to undergo the said a                                                                                   Part      Pag#                                                                                 Part      Page
       operation.’                                                                                    Addison v B a b c o c k ^ ^ A Ltd [CA]                             [1 2]      784        N and L (minors) (adoption proceedings:
                                                                                                      Adoption application (surrogacy). Re an                                                    venue). Re [CA]                                                        [11         732
                                                                                                        [Fam D]                                                          [1 2]         826     R v Galvin [CA]                                                          [13         851
    The judge deals w ith that allegation at the end o f his judgment, and does so in a very          Clauss v Pir [Ch DJ                                                [1 1 ]        752     R v Mavji [CA]                                                                       758
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n ij
 few words for the sake, as he puts it, o f completeness. He makes no finding as to the               Deutsche Schachtbau- und Tiefbohr-                                                       R v Secretary of State for the Home Dept,
                                                                                                        gesellschaft mbH v Ras Al Khaimah                                                        ex p Turkoglu [CA] . .                                                 [12]        823
 terms of the representation, or whether it was express or implied. All he says is: ‘I find             National Oil Co [CA]                                             [1 2]         7 69    R v Steer [ H L ] ..............................................         [13]        833
 that allegation proved.’                                                                             Duke v Reliance Systems Ltd [CA]                                   [1 3]         858     St Mary's, 8arton-on-Hum ber, Re [Con
    The only possible justification for the judge’s finding on the evidence is that it is to be ^     Etri FansLtd v N M 8 (U K ) Ltd [C A ]                     ..      [1 1 ]        7 63      C t]       ....................................                        [13]        861
                                                                                                      Gold v Haringey Health Authority [CA]                              [1 3]         888     Scott v Martin [CA]                                                      H21         813
 inferred from the fact that the plaintiff was told that the operation was irreversible. But          Guinness Peat Properties Ltd v Fitzroy                                                   Universal Petroleum Co Ltd (in liq) v
                                                                                                        Robinson Partnership (a firm) [CA] . .                           [1 1]         716       Handels- und Transportgesellschaft
 to draw that inference from the use o f the word ‘irreversible’ would be inconsistent with           Harris v Sheffield United Football Club                                                    mbH [ C A ] ..............................................             [11]        737
 the decision o f this court in Eyre v Measday [1986] 1 All ER 488, where a similar                     Ltd [CA]      ..............................................     [1 3]         838     Yuen Kun-yeu v A -G of Hong Kong
 argument was advanced. Slade LJ said (at 494):                                                       Kumar v Dunning [CA]                                               [1 2]         801       [ P C ] ............................................................   [111        705
                                                                                                      McDermid v Nash Dredging and Recla­
                                                                                                        mation Co Ltd [HL]                                               [1 3 ]        878
         There has been some discussion in the course o f argument on the m eaning o f the C
      phrase irreversible” and as to the relevance o f the statement, undoubtedly made by
      the defendant to the plaintiff, that the proposed operation must be regarded as being
      irreversible. However, I take the reference to irreversibility as simply m eaning that          Noter-up
      the operative procedure in question is incapable o f being reversed, that what is
      about to be done cannot be undone. I do not think it can reasonably be construed as             CASES
      a representation that the operation is bound to achieve its acknowledged object, d              Bolam vFriern Hospital Management Committee [1 9 5 7 ] 2 A IIE R 118. A p p lie d ..                                                                   ..                    888
      which is a different matter altogether.’                                                        Eyrev Measday [1 98 6 ] 1 All ER 4 8 8 . Followed ..                                                                        ..                                               888
                                                                                                      Glasbrook Bros Ltd v Glamorgan CC [1 9 2 4 ] All ER Rep 579. Considered                                                                                             ..       838
   So I would reject the plaintiff’s claim for negligent misrepresentation.
                                                                                                      McDermid v Nash Dredging and Reclamation Co Ltd [1 98 6 ] 2 All ER 676. Decision of CA affirmed HL                                                                           878
   For the reasons I have given the plaintiff has failed to make good her claim for                   R vSteer [1986] 3 All ER 6 11. Decision of C A affirmed HL                                        ..                                                                         833
 negligence. Accordingly, I w ould allow this appeal.                                                 St Mary's, Balham, Re [1 9 7 8 ] 1 All ER 9 93 . Dictum applied                                                                                                              861
                                                                                                      Sidaway v Bethlem Royal Hospital Governors [1 98 5 ] 1 All ER 643. Considered                                                             ..                                 888
WATKINS LJ. I agree.                                                                              e
                                                                                                      STATUTES
STEPHEN BROW N LJ. I agree that this appeal should be allowed. In m y judgment                        Criminal Damage Act 1971, s 1 (2 )                            ,,            ..                                                                                               833
 the test laid down in Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee [1957] 2 All ER 118,              Merchant Shipping (Liability of Shipowners and Others) Act 1958, s 3 ( 2 ) (a)                                                                         .,             ..         878
 [ i 957] 1 WLR 582 as further considered and explained by Lord Diplock in Sidaway v                  Official Secrets Act 1911, s 2 ( 1 ) ( a ) ( 2 ) ...........................................................................           ‘ ....................................... 851
                                                                                                      Police Act 1964, s 1 5(1 )          ..           ..             ..                                         ..                                                         ..         838
 Bethlem Royal Hospital Governors [198 5] 1 All ER 643, [1985] AC 871 should be applied to f
the facts o f this case. The judge appears to have been persuaded to find a distinction
between advice given in a ‘therapeutic’ and a ‘non-therapeutic’ context. Such a distinction
is wholly unwarranted and artificial. The general duty o f the doctors treating the plaintiff
is, in the words o f Lord Diplock, not subject to dissection into a number o f component
parts to which different criteria o f what satisfy the duty o f care apply’ (see [1985] 1 All
ER 643 at 657, [1985] AC 871 at 893). I entirely agree with the careful analysis made by or
Lloyd LJ in his judgment.                                                        ;            }
     I feel it right to add that in this case it was unfortunate that the judge was not able to
hear evidence from the general practitioner, who clearly played an important and
relevant role in the story.

Appeal allowed.                                                                               h

Solicitors: Hempsons (for the defendants); PritchardEnglejield & Tobin (for the plaintiff).

                                                                 Azza Abdallah     Barrister.
                                                                             I England L a w Re|



        ~     r

 ieports                      11983] 2 All f A                             QBD                                         .useu v West (McCullough J)                                                                1005

 jagccl a n d I w as a little s u r p r i s e d iKw                           l u t h e re s u l t t h e r e w ill b e d a m a g e s fo r t h e p l a i n t i f f fo r t h e f u n e r a l e x p e n s e s o f £ 3 9 9 - 4 0
 r. I h a v e n o d o u b t th at sh e w asd erp J*                   0     plus £ 1,2 50 fo r loss o f e x p e c t a t io n o f life, that is fo r £ 1,64 9 40,
  t e m i o n to ta k e h e r final e x a m i n a t i o n
 le boat. But it w o u l d n ot b e r ig ht to                             Judgment for the plaintiff'accordingly.
 st a l o n e at t h e t i m e I w as told,
  m u c h o f t h e t i m e at a n y rate, have <                          Solicitors:Mawby Barrie &-Scon, a g e n t s for Gardner & Croft, C a n t e r b u r y ( for t h e p la in tiff ) ;
 i t h e y h a v e a s t r o n g a t t a c h m e n t . But                 loynson-llid’s Co (fo r t h e d e f e n d a n t ) .
 n o m e a n s a l w a y s m a r r y t h e girl t l i x               ft
 h e y a p p e a r e d to b e t h e closest.                                                                                                                                     K M y d e e n Bsq           Barrister.
' have no d o u b t, but w h o m and when
   h a d a n e a r n i n g ca p a c ity ? W o u l d j l *
 e o p l e t e n d t o m a n y th o se f r o m t h r u
 e i n c o m e o f h e r o w n a n d t h e h o p e rw
id his' sis ters? W h a t t h e n w o u l d the                       #                                               Elliott v C (a minor)
n.
                                                                           y t l E U N ’s B E N C H D I V I S I O N
od es t f i g u re to t h e 1 3%, as Griffith* |
                                                                           R O B E R T G O I E I.J A N D 0 1 t i l l U I I I J
 th a t M r W i l t s h i r e w o u l d h a v e l u d
                                                                           5 , 6 , 2 0 MAY 1 9 8 3
 h Picked a n d Gammdl I t h i n k I w o u ld
) n i e t h i n g , b u t n o t v er y m u c h . I shall
‘us to h e 2 5 % o f th e d eceased 's t o u t                            Criminal law - Dam age to property - Recklessness whether property would be destroyed or
                                                                          damaged - Recklessness Whether risk of damage or dest ruction of property must be obvious to a
1,11 t h is 1 ^ ^ ^ to t h e f o l lo w in g figures:                     reasonably prudent man although not obvious to accused by reason of his age, lack of understanding,
                                                                          lack 0/ experience or exhaustion - Criminal Damage Act 1971,5 1(1).
s is £ 8 , 0 0 0 . In p e r i o d A t h e total nei
)a a n d w h e n m u l t i p l i e d by 3 leads 10
                                                                       O n t h e t r u e c o n s t r u c t i o n of s 1(1)" of t h e C r i m i n a l D a m a g e Act 1971 a n a c c u s e d m a y be
>a. O n e - q u a r t e r i s / 1 , 7 5 0 p a . I app ly
                                                                       c o n v i c t e d o f t h e o f i e n c e o f b e i n g reckless as to w h e t h e r . . . p r o p e r t y [ b e l o n g i n g to
 a g a i n t h e total net i n c o m e , o n c e the
                                                                     * a n o t h e r ] w o u l d b e d e s t r o y e d o r d a m a g e d i f t h e risk o f d a m a g e o r d e s t r u c t i o n o f t h e
0 p a . So o n c e a g a i n t h e s u r p l u s is
                                                                       p r o p e r t y m u s t h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s to a r e a s o n a b ly p r u d e n t m a n , e v e n t h o u g h t h e
125. T h a t e v a lu a te s t h e total s u r p l u s
at £ 3 1 , 8 0 0 .                                                     p a r t i c u l a r a c c u s e d h a d n o t t h o u g h t o f th e risk, a n d by r easo n o f s o m e f a c to r s u c h as his
                                                                       age, lack o f u n d e r s t a n d i n g , lack o f e x p e r i e n c e o r e x h a u s t i o n it w o u l d n o t h a v e b e e n
d h a v e b e e n ( a n d will he) e a r n e d by
                                                                       o b v i o u s t o h i m h a d h e t h o u g h t o f it. T h u s , i f a (4 -y ea r-o ld g irl sets fire to a s h e d b y
p r o d u c e very s l ig h tly less by w a y o f
                                                                       p o u r i n g w h i t e sp i r i t o n t o t h e s h e d floor a n d t h r o w i n g a l i g h t e d m a t c h o n t o t h e sp irit,
sonal a l l o w a n c e w o u l d 110 l o n g e r he         j
                                                                       she is g u i l t y o f a n o f t e n c e u n d e r s 1(1) o f tlie 1971 Act n o t w i t h s t a n d i n g t h a t b ecau s e o f
                                                                       h e r ag e a n d lack o f e x p e r i e n c e in d e a l i n g w i t h i n f l a m m a b l e l i q u i d sh e w o u l d n o t h a v e
d e a t h is as follo w s. Year 1, £ '6 , 2 7 8 ;
                                                                       a p p r e c i a t e d t h e risk th a t t h e s h e d a n d its c o n t e n t s w o u l d b e d e s t r o y e d i f sh e h a d g i v e n
ial p e r i o d , £ 1 4 , 5 9 8 . O f t h e p erio d s
                                                                       t h o u g h t to t h e m a t t e r (see p 1008 e f p 1009 a b, p l o i o u f c , p 1011 b a n d p 1012 a a n d /,
 2,600; p e r i o d B, £ 2 , 8 0 0 m u l t i p l i e d
                                                                       post).
1 7i m a k e s £ 1 0 , 5 0 0 ; total £ 4 4 , 6 9 8 .
                                                                              R v Caldwell [1981 ] 1 All I R 9 6 1 , R v Lawrence [ 1 9 8 1 ] 1 All HR 9 7 4 a n d R v Miller
re b e n o a w a r d for loss o f ' s u r p l u s ’ in
                                                                 9 [ [ 9 8 3 ] 1 All HR 9 7 8 a p p l i e d .
netit b e f o r e t h e d ecea sed d i e d t h e r e *
hich w o u l d , a f t e r his d e a t h , c o n t i n u e
                                                                          Notes
 o p r o v i d e his ‘s u r p l u s ' h a d h e lived,
                                                                          I o r t h e o f fe n c e o f d e s t r o y i n g o r d a m a g i n g p r o p e r t y , see 1 1 I l a l s b u r y 's L a w s ( 4 t h e d n )
s total i n c o m e w h i c h h e w o u l d h av e
                                                                          para 1306, a n d f o r cases 011 t h e s u b je c t, see 15 D ig es t (Reissu e) 1 4 3 9 - 1 4 4 0 , < 2 ,6 9 0 -
; as a r esult m o r e ‘s u r p l u s ' m o n e y
                                                                          1 2 , 6 9 .).

         jk »
l i n g a i u ^ ^ u r e s w h i c h h a v e led m e
                                                                              l-'or t h e C r i m i n a l D a m a g e Act 1971, s i, see 41 I l a l s b u r y ’s S t a t u t e s ( 3 r d e d n ) 4 09.
t o f L o r d S c a r m a n ’s i n j u n c t i o n th at
                                                                        Cases referre d to in ju d g m e n ts
J j u d g e m u s t s i m p l y m a k e t h e best
                                                                        K v Briggs[ 1977] 1 All HR 47 5 , [ 1 9 7 7 ] 1 W L R 60 5 , CA.
ive fo r t h r e e reaso ns. First, I w a n t e d
                                                                        K v Caldwell [ 1 9 8 1 ] 1 All HR 96 1 , [ 1 0 8 2 ] A C 341, [ 1 9 8 1 ] 2 W L R 509, I If,.
o n t h e e v i d e n c e th at, l o o k i n g at t h e
nd, i f I h a d s i m p l y said as m u c h it                          K v Lawrence[ 198 1 ] 1 All HR 9 7 4 , ! 1982J AC 510, [ 1 9 8 1 ] 2 W L R 524, IIL .
                                                                 '      K vMajewski[ 1976] 2 All HR 142,! 1977 ] AC 4 4 3 , [ 1 9 7 6 ] 2 W L R 6 2 3 , IIL .
: a c c o u n t of v a r io u s aspects o f t h e
alters o f law s h o u l d be h e l d to b e
 t fallen i n t o e r r o r can b e di sc ov ered.                            Section 1(1) provides: 'A person who without lawful excuse destroys or damages any properly
: r t o be r e m i t t e d for d a m a g e s to be                            belonging to another iniending lo dcsnoy or damage ally such properly or being reckless as to
                                                                              wl ui her any sue h properly would he destroyed or damaged shall be guilty of an offence.'
£ 6 C-<   1
  A llE iiy lan d L aw R e po rts   12 A u gust 19 83
                                                                                                                                                      M i d l a n d Law R e p orts    12 A ugu st 19 83




 1006                                            All England Law Reports                                            [1983] 2 All ER                   QBD                                    Elliott v C (a
  K   v Miller 1 1983 ] i AH HU 9 7 8 , 1 1 9 8 3 ] 2 W L U 539, IIL .
                                                                                                                                                      m o t h e r a n d m a d e n o reply . She was ta
 K v Pigg f 198 2] 2 All HR 591, [ 1 9 8 2 ] 1 W l . U 7 6 >, CA.
                                                                                                                                                      u l l s , w h e r e s h e sle p t u n t i l a b o u t 3 p m
 R v Stephen son [          1979]     2 All HU 1 198, [ 1 9 7 9 ] Q B 6 9 5 , [ 1 9 7 9 ] 3 W l . U 193, CA.
                                                                                                                                                            Al 3 p m o n 16 J u n e 1982 t h e r e s p o n
                                                                                                                                                      pfc se nce of h e r fo ste r m o t h e r . A f t e r ca
 C a se sta te d
                                                                                                                                                      f j l sp irit o n t h e floor a n d set fire t o it
  N o r m a n Hllioil a p p e a l e d b y w ay o f case s l a te d by t h e ju s t i c e s l o r t h e C o u n t y o f Kcitt
                                                                                                                                                      itc to 1b e s h e d a n d that sh e h a d ‘j u s t f
 a c t i n g in a n d f o r t h e p e t t y sessio n d i v i s i o n o f C a n t e r b u r y a n d St A u g u s t i n e i n respeci U
                                                                                                                                                      » u h h e r w h e n s h e e n t e r e d t h e sh e d am
  t h e i r a d j u d i c a t i o n as a m a g i s t r a t e s ’ c o u r t s i l l i n g as a j u v e n i l e c o u r t at C a n t e r b u r y 011
                                                                                                                                                      viii i n t o t h e r o a d a n d h a d b e e n se en
 S e p t e m b e r 1982. O n 17 A u g u s t 1982 a n i n f o r m a t i o n was p r e f e r r e d b y t h e a p p e l l a n t , *
                                                                                                                                                      ■ t j t e m e n t u n d e r c a u t i o n in w h i c h sh e ;
 p o lice officer of t h e K en t C o n s t a b u l a r y a g a in s t t h e r e s p o n d e n t , C, a m i n o r , t h a t on t«
                                                                                                                                                            A l t h o u g h t h e w o r d i n g o f t h e infoi
 J u n e 19 82 sh e w i t h o u t l a w f u l e x c u s e d e s t r o y e d by fire a s h e d a n d c o n t e n t s v a l u t j
                                                                                                                                                      « i m i i u a l D a m a g e Act 1971, alleged
 t o g e t h e r at £ 3 , 2 0 6 b e l o n g i n g to W a l l e r Davies, i n t e n d i n g t o d e s t ro y s u c h p r o p e r t y 14
                                                                                                                                                       i n t e n d i n g to d e s t r o y s u c h p r o p e r t y o r
 b e i n g reckless w h e t h e r s u c h p r o p e r t y w o u l d be d e s t r o y e d , c o n t r a r y to s 1(1) o f iImi
                                                                                                                                                              d e s t r o y e d ’, at t h e h e a r i n g b e f o r e 1
C r i m i n a l D a m a g e Act 1971. 1 h e m a g i s t r a t e s f o u n d t h e r e s p o n d e n t n o t g u i l t y o f tt«
                                                                                                                                                      *(>[>ellaiH, i h e p r o s e c u t o r , was no t lhai
c h a r g e a n d d i s m i s s e d t h e i n f o r m a t i o n . I h e q u e s t i o n s f o r t h e o p i n i o n o f t h e H i g h C o u it
                                                                                                                                                      j i u p e r t y b u t t h a t it d i d p r o v e t h a t tl
w e r e (i) w h e t h e r p r o p e r l y d i r e c t i n g t h e m s e l v e s a n d oil i h e t r u e c o n s t r u c t i o n o f s 1(1) oi
                                                                                                                                                       ».iuld be destroyed. T h e m agistrates J
t h e 1971 Act t h e m a g i s t r a t e s w e r e c o r re c t in t h e i r i n t e r p r e t a t i o n o f t h e m e a n i n g c4
                                                                                                                                                      ihcy m u s t acce p t was t h a t g i v e n by Li
r eckless, n a m e l y t h a t a d e f e n d a n t s h o u l d o n l y be h e l d t o h a v e a c t e d re cklessly by virtu*
                                                                                                                                                      11 v 8 2] AC 341.
of h is f a ilu re to g i v e t h o u g h t t o a n o b v i o u s risk th at p r o p e r l y w o u l d be d e s t r o y e d w
                                                                                                                                                            In Caldwell t h e re l e v a n t o ffen c e chai
d a m a g e d wdiere s u c h risk w o u l d h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s 10 h i m lia^l h e g i v e n a n y i b o u g h l Ut
                                                                                                                                                      i d d am age th e p r o p e n y an d in ten d in g
t h e m a i l e r , a n d (ii) w h e t h e r p r o p e r l y d i r e e l i n g t h e m s e l v e s 011 t h e e v i d e n c e t h e magistrate*
                                                                                                                                                       e n d a n g e r e d , c o n t r a r y 10 s 1(2) o f t h e t ‘
c o u l d p r o p e r l y h a v e c o m e 10 t h e d ecis io n that t h e r e s p o n d e n t h a d a c t e d u e i i h u
                                                                                                                                                       he s t a r t e d i h e fire h e was so d r u n k t h
i n t e n t i o n a l l y n o r reckless ly in d e s t r o y i n g b y tire t h e s h e d a n d its c o n t e n t s . T h e facts ait
                                                                                                                                                       l u e s m i g h t b e e n d a n g e r e d b y t h e fire
set o u t in t h e j u d g m e n t o f C l i d e w e l l ).
                                                                                                                                                       b e h a l f t h a t his d r u n k e n n e s s h a d t h e
                                                                                                                                                       t u n n i n g t h e i n t e n t i o n 10 e n d a n g e r life
/Udd Moses for t h e a p p e l l a n t .
                                                                                                                                                                reckless. If, ii was a r g u e d , h i s d r i
(jVi'l/icy Nice for t h e r e s p o n d e n t .
                                                                                                                                                       i n k t o t h e lives o f o t h e r s , t h e n b e wa
                                                                                                                                                       ( l o u s e o f L o r d s r e j e c t e d this last co n
                                                                                                                              C u r ui/v               Keith a n d L o r d R osk ill a g r e e d , said tl
2 0 M ay. T h e f o l l o w i n g j u d g m e n t s w e r e d e liv e r e d .
                                                                                                                                                       mb-ss (1) a n d (2) o f s 1 of t h e 1971 Aci
                                                                                                                                                        l*u). L o r d D i p l o c k said ([1981 ] 1 All I
 G L I D E W E L L J ( g i v in g t h e first j u d g m e n t at t h e in vital io n o f R o b e r t G o f f LJ). T l i u m
a n a p p e a l b y w ay o f case s l a i e d f r o m ilie j u s t i c e s for llie Polly Sessional D iv isio n U                                                  T11 m y o p i n i o n , a p e r s o n c h a r j
C a n t e r b u r y a n d St A u g u s t i n e i n t h e C o u n t y of K e n t, w h o 011 28 S e p t e m b e r 1982 f o u » J                                 "reckless as t o w h e t h e r o r n o t a n
i h e r e s p o n d e n t , C (a m i n o r ) , n o t g u i l t y of a c h a r g e a n d d i s m i s s e d a n i n f o r m a t i o n w h k k                    h e d o e s a n act w h i c h i n fact crea
a l l e g e d llial s h e 011 16 J u n e 19 8 2 w i t h o u t la w f u l excus e h a d d e s t r o y e d b y fire a s h e d a n j                              o r d a m a g e d a n d (2) w h e n h e doe:
 its c o n t e n t s , i n t e n d i n g to d e s t r o y s u c h p r o p e r t y o r b e i n g reckless w h e t h e r s u c h p r o p e m                     p o ss ib ility o f t h e r e b e i n g a n y su
 w o u l d b e d e s t r o y e d , c o n t r a r y to s 1(1) o f t h e C r i m i n a l D a m a g e Act 1971.                                                   i n v o l v e d a n d h a s n o n e t h e less gc
      T h e s h e d was i h e p r o p e r t y o f a M r W a l l e r Davies , o f 1 G l e b e W ay, W h i i s t a b le ,                                        i h e j u r y ; cases in t h e C o n n o f A
 ft w a s a l arg e w o o d e n she d, a n d s i o o d at ( h e b o t t o m o f t h e g a r d e n o f M r D a v i e s ’s I i o i i m                           o v erruled.’
 In it h e s t o r e d tools, v a r i o u s pa iills, a n d t u r p e n t i n e o r w h i l e sp irit.
                                                                                                                                                            W h e n Caldwell w as d e c i d e d t h e m
       I lie r e s p o n d e n t w as a s c h o o l g ir l w h o h a d r e a c h e d t h e ag o of 14 years in M a y 1982. Siif
                                                                                                                                                       m e a n i n g of ‘r e c k le ss’, 011 w h i c h t h e r
l i v e d w i t h h e r foster m o t h e r a n d w as in a r e m e d i a l class at school. O n t h e e v e n i n g o f i t
                                                                                                                                                       |u i y, w as R v Stephenson [ 1979] 2 All
J u n e 198 2 t h e r e s p o n d e n t w e n t o u t w i t h a n o l d e r girl f ri e n d . She h o p e d 10 sta y ih e ni^l*
                                                                                                                                                     , I il i e LJ g i v i n g t h e j u d g m e n t o f t h e 1
at i h e f r i e n d ’s h o m e , bill w as n o t a b le to d o so. T h e r e s p o n d e n t d i d n o t r e i u r n t o liei t o *
                                                                                                                                                       , i t lies o u t t h e d e l i b e r a t e act a p p r e c i a t
h o m e bill st a y e d o u t all n i g h t , n o t s l e e p i n g for t h e w h o l e n i g h i .
                                                                                                                                                       l o u l t fro m his act.’
      At a b o u t 5 a m o n t o J u n e 19 82 t h e r e s p o n d e n t e n t e r e d M r D a v i e s ’s g a r d e n sh e d Vt*
                                                                                                                                                            T h a t was, i n essen ce, t h e vi e w sh a re
f o u n d t h e w h i t e sp ir it i n its p las tic c o n t a i n e r . S he p o u r e d w h i l e sp ir it 01110 t h e carpet ► *
                                                                                                                                                             As I h a v e said, t h e m a g i s t r a t e s acc
t h e floor of t h e s h e d a n d t h r e w t w o l i g h t e d m a t c h e s o n t o t h e sp ir it, i h e s e c o n d o f u l n . 1
                                                                                                                                                       i l l ect i o n ’ o f L o r d D i p l o c k w h i c h 1 hi
i g n i t e d it. T h e lire i m m e d i a t e l y flared u p o u t of c o n t r o l a n d ilie r e s p o n d e n t lefi the
                                                                                                                                                       i ^ j i l i b e f o r e 11s by c o u n s e l fo r t h e res|
      A M r l l u b b a r d , w h o w as d e l i v e r i n g m i l k in i h e area, sa w t h e r e s p o n d e n t in
                                                                                                                                                        ihe c o u r i is m u c h i n d e b t e d f o r t h e i r
v i c i n i t y at a b o m 5.-40 a m , a n d a few m i n u t e s l ater saw t h e s h e d 011 fire a n d raised it*
                                                                                                                                                        I o l d D i p l o c k r e f e r r e d 10 ‘a n act whi
alarm .
                                                                                                                                                        I * d e s t r o y e d o r d a m a g e d ’, h e m e a n t a
   1        h e po lice a r r e s t e d i h e r e s p o n d e n t al h e r h o m e at 8 a m o n 1 6 j u n e 19 82 011 su s p k » j*
                                                                                                                                                         th is a r g u m e n t was accepted by th e 1
of a r s o n a n d t w o offe nces of b u r g l a r y . She was c a u t i o n e d i n t h e p r e s e n c e o f h e r fiaam
                                                                                                                                                        passages in p a r a 7 o f t h e case st a le d :
                                                                                         nglandl_aw Reports        12 August 1983




^         eports                         [19831 2 All CR
                                                                                    QBD                                   Elliott v C (a minor) (Glidewell J)                                                             1007
!39 , M L .
jt. CA.
                                                                               m o t h e r a n d m a d e n o r ep ly . S he w as t a k e n to W h i t s t a b l e p o lic e s t a ti o n a n d p laced in t h e
^ 95 , [1979] 3 WLR .93, (;A.                                                t fells, w h e r e s h e sle pt u n t i l a b o u t 3 p m o n t h e a f t e r n o o n o f t h e s a m e day.
i                                                                                   At 3 p m o n 16 J u n e 1982 (lie r e s p o n d e n t was i n t e r v i e w e d by t w o p olice officers 111 t h e
                                                                              p r esen c e o f h e r fo ste r m o t h e r . A f t e r c a u t i o n s h e a d m i t t e d t h a t s h e hatl e n t e r e d 1lie s h e d
    hy t h e justices for i | , c ( o l l n l v n f ,,                        p i t sp irit o n t h e floor a n d set fire t o it. S he said t h a t sh e d i d n ot k n o w w l . y sh e h a d set
                                                                              lire t o 1lie s h e d a n d t h a t s h e h a d 'just felt like i t ’. S h e sa id th a t sh e h a d h a d t l i c m a t c h e s
    a a . l " v n . i l c ( - o u r i a i ( : i, n i n h m y „ M „   ,        w ith h e r w h e n she e n t e r e d t h e s h e d a n d tb ai a l t e r s h e b a d set lire to t h e s h e d sh e b a d r u n
     ^ - > n vv « p , c ( c , , r d b             |lf.    j          I
                                                                          * "lit m i o t h e r o a d a n d h a d b e e n se en b y t h e m i l k m a n . She a g r e e d 10 m a k e a w r i n e n
                                                                              s t a t e m e n t u n d e r c a u t i o n in w h i c h sh e a d m i t t e d e n t e r i n g t h e s h e d a n d s e t t i n g fire t o it.
         b X ,uic7 ’V’3 n,i,,w’
                                                                                   A l t h o u g h t h e w o r d i n g of t h e i n f o r m a t i o n , f o l l o w i n g t h e w o r d i n g o f s t ( i ) o f t h e
i -ini
    n-endm g a Sd                 a n d Sl|f|i
                                         C o n tents vahtr,}
                                                        "
                                                                             ( r t m t n a l D a m a g e Act , 0 7 , , a l l e g e d th a t t h e r e s p o n d e n t d e s t o y e d b y fire t h e s h e d
                                                                              i n t e n d i n g to d e s t r o y s u c h p r o p e r t y o r b e i n g reck less as to w h e t h e r s u c h p r o p e r t y w o u l d
L  f etire" r'e s p o"n dTe n t”n ot g*u*i(l-
►unci                                       t y "!"»
                                                nf
                                                                             N- d e s t r o y e d , at t h e b e a r i n g b e f o r e t h e m a g i s t r a t e s t h e c o n t e n t i o n o n b e h a l f o f i h e
                                                                         t a p p e l l a n t , t h e p r o s e c u t o r , w as n o t th a t t h e e v i d e n c e p r o v e d a n i n t e n t i o n to d e s t r o y t h e
i        01 ,h c ln ic construction o f s i ( , \               r4           p r o p e r t y b u t t h a t it d i d p r o v e t h a t t h e r e s p o n d e n t w a s reckless w h e t h e r i h e p r o p e r t y
                                                                             N'ould be d e s t r o y e d . I he m a g i s t r a t e s a c c e p t e d th at t h e d e f i n i t i o n o f recklessness w h i c h
    tl    »           C a f l c d r « ' k 'essly b y v i n w                t h e y m u s t accep t w a s t h a t g i v e n b y L o rd D i p l o c k in R v Caldwell [ i q 8 ,1 1 All HR 961
                                                                            I.1982J AC 341.                                                                                                                 y
■ s ! o h i h 0 | r 7 | VV' m ld b c d « " " V e d , w
n, ?                  I,ad lie S lvcn a n y t h o u g h t -                            In Caldwell t h e r e l e v a n t o ffen c e c h a r g e d w as o f d e s t r o y i n g p r o p e r , v b y fire, i n t e n d i n g
o slv e ^ .b e e .id e n c e th e n tn g isn ,,,, '                      f         t o d a m a g e t h e p r o p e r t y a n d i n t e n d i n g to e n d a n g e r life o r b e i n g reckless w h e t h e r life was
le sh e S r’"’              ad 3 n c d                                            e n d a n g e r e d c o n t r a r y to s i ( 2 ) o f t h c 1971 Act. At h is trial, t h e d e f e n d a n t said t h a t w h e n
     ed a n d its c o n t e n t s . T h e facts 3,,                               he s t a r t e d t h e fire h e w a s so d r u n k th at t h e t h o u g h t t h a t t h e r e m i g h t b e p e o p l e w h o s e
                                                                                  lives m i g h t be e n d a n g e r e d b y t h e fire n e v e r crossed b is m i n d , ft w a s c o n t e n d e d o n his
                                                                                  b e h a lf t h a t his d r u n k e n n e s s h a d t h e effect n o r m e r e l y o f m a k i n g h i m i n c a p a b l e o f
                                                                                  f o r m i n g t h e i n t e n t i o n t o e n d a n g e r life, b u r was also r e l e v a n t to t h e q u e s t i o n w h e t h e r he
                                                                         ,       was reckless. If, it was a r g u e d , his d r u n k e n n e s s r e s u l t e d in h i m not t h i n k i n g a b o u t t h e
                                                                                 risk to t h e lives o f o t h e r s , t h e n h e w as not reckless. Ry a m a j o r i t y o f t h r e e to t w o , t h e
                                             Cur adv 11,’f                       M ou se of L o r d s r e j e c t e d t h is last c o n t e n t i o n . L o r d D i p l o c k , w i t h w h o s e s p e e c h L o rd
                                                                                 K eith a n d L o r d Roskill a g r e e d , said t h a t ‘reck less’ m u s t b e g i v e n t h e s a m e m e a n i n g in
                                                                                 sub-ss (1) a n d (2) o f s 1 o f t h e 1971 Act (sec f >98 1 ] 1 All HR 961 at 0 6 4 , (1982.] AC 34 1 at
^ r a t i o n o f R o b e rt f ; o f r i J ) l T h M |                           3 5o). L o r d D t p l o c k said ([ 198 1) 1 All HR 961 at 9 6 7 , [ 1982] A C 341 at 3 54):
 f o r t h e P e tty Sessional D ivision of
 • w h o o n 28 S e p t e m b e r 1982 f o u n d                                             'I n m y o p i n i o n , a p e r s o n c h a r g e d w i t h an o ffen c e u n d e r s i ( t ) o f t h e 1971 Act is
                                                                                        "reck les s as t o w h e t h e r o r no t a n y p r o p e r t y w o u l d be d e s t r o y e d o r d a m a g e d ” i f (1)
u s e h ^ T '          " i , l f o r n , a t i o n w h ic h
use h a d d e s t r o y e d by fire a s h e d a n d                                      lie d oes a n act w h i c h in fact cr eates a n o b v i o u s risk t h a t p r o p e r t y will be d e s t r o y e d
                                                                                        o r d a m a g e d a n d (2) w h e n h e d o c s t h e act h e e i t h e r h as n o t g i v e n a n y t h o u g h t t o t h e
^ n g reckless w h e t h e r such proper,*
'I Damage Act i 97 i.                            1     '                                p o s s ib ility o f t h e r e b e i n g a n y s u c h risk o r has r e c o g n i s e d t h a t t h e r e w as s o m e risk
. o f , G le b e w a y , W l u t s , a b l e , K , ,,,          <                       i n v o l v e d a n d has n o n e t h e less g o n e o n to d o it. T hat w o u l d be a p r o p e r d i r e , li o n to
                                                                                        t h e j u r y ; cases in t h e C o u r t o f A p p e a l w h i c h h e l d o t h e r w i s e s h o u l d b e regarded as
                                M r , w '...                                            o v erruled.'
    he a g e o f 14 y cars j „ M
                                                                                   W h e n Caldw ell was d e c i d e d t h e m o s t r ecen t d ecis io n in t h e C o n n o f A p p e a l o n t h e
'awai sclK.nl. O,, ,|,c rvL iu p ,,f ,                                        m e a n i n g o f 'r e c k l e s s ', o n w h i c h t h e r e c o r d e r in Caldw ell h a d b as ed h e r d i r e c t i o n t o t h e
                                                                             j u r y , was R y Stephenson [ , 9 7 9 ] 2 All HR , , 9 8 at . 2 0 3 , [ 1 9 7 9 ] Q R 6 9 5 at 703 . G eo ffrey
                                                                             L a n e L,J g t v t n g t h e j u d g m e n t o f th e c o u r t in that case s a id : ‘A m a n is reck less w h e n l/e
s d S r - " " .
    e r e d M r D av ies s g a r d e n shed. SI.,                            result n ’o in ' h i s ' ^ ' t ' ' ™ ' 0 ^    a p p r c f i a , i " * , l , a ' t l,crc is a risk , l , a ' ‘l a v a g e t o p r o p e r t y m a y
    r e d w h i t e sp ir it o n t o t h e c a r p e t , , ,,                     T h a t was, in essence, t h e v i e w sh a r e d b y t h e m i n o r i t y in t h e I lo u s e o f L o r d s in Caldwell
      r      7 p , r l t ’ ,l,c s c r , , n d o f "i>H*-                          As I h a v e said t h e m a g i s t r a t e s a c c e p t e d t h a t t h e y w e r e b o u n d to fo llo w t h e 'm o d e l
    >1 a n d t h e r e s p o n d e n t left t h e sl„-,l                     d i r e c t i o n o f L o r d D i p l o c k w h i c h I h a v e read. It was, h o w e v e r , a r g u e d b e f o r e t h e m a n d
     area, saw t h e r e s p o n d e n t in , f „ '                          a g a i n b e f o r e ns b y c o u n s e l (or t h e r e s p o n d e n t (to w h o m , a n d t o c o u n s e l for t h e a p p e l l a n t ,
    W tHe sl,cd ° » ('-re a n d raised t h r                                 t h e c o u r t is m u c h i n d e b t e d f o r t h e i r a r g u m e n t s ) t h a t w h e n , in t h e first part o f hi s test
                                                                             L o r d D i p l o c k r e f e r r e d t o a n act w h i c h in fact c reates a n o b v i o u s risk t h a t p r o p e r t y w ill
    a m o n , 6 J u n e 1982 o n sttsp id,,,,                                be d e s t r o y e d o r d a m a g e d ' , b e m e a n t a risk w h i c h was o b v i o u s t o t h e p a r t i c u l a r d e f e n d a n t .
    " e d in t h e p r e s e n c e o f h e r f o u r ,
                                                                                 u s a r g u m e n t w as a c c e p t e d b y t h e m a g i s t r a t e s a n d is set o u t b y t h e m in t h e f o l l o w i n g
                                                                             p assa ges i n p a r a 7 o f t h e case s t a te d :
                                                                                                                                                          Ail England Law RapoUs           12 August 1 983
All E nyla n d L a w Repuits    12 August 1 983




1008                                            All England Law Reports                                             [1 9 8 3 ] 2 All ER                   QBD                                     Elliott v C (a minor) i


            •| I. T h a t w h i l e tlie r e s p o n d e n t l u d realise d th ai i h c c o n t e n t s o f t h e b o t t l e w l m h                        m ajority in Caldwell th a t i n t o x i c a t i o n , e v e n i f it
        c o n t a i n e d w b i t e sp ir it w e r e p o ssib ly i n f l a m m a b l e , s h e h a d n o t h a n d l e d n b e f o r e an d         ^         <1 all w h e t h e r t h e r e w as a risk th at p r o p e r t y or
        h a d no t a p p r e c i a t e d h o w e x p lo s iv e ly it w o u l d b u r n a n d i m m e d i a t e l y b e c o m e o u t ol                       Jid n o t t a k e h i m o u t o f i h e sta le of m i n d p ro perl;
        h e r t o n l i o l , t h e i e b y d e p l o y i n g t h e s h e d a n d c o n t e n t s a n d also p l a c i n g h e r o w n Ilk                    .a m y v i e w w i l h t h e i r L o r d s h i p s m e a n i n g by t h
                                                                                                                                                              < risk o b v i o u s to t h e r e a s o n a b ly p r u d e n t p e rso n.
        ai risk.                                                                                                   .
            I. T h a t t h e r e s p o n d e n t h a d g i v e n n o t h o u g h t at t h e t i m e t h a t sh e s t a r t e d t h e I m                          That i h e s u b m i s s i o n ol c o u n s e l l o r t h e a p p el
        t o t h e p o ss ib ility o f t h e r e b e i n g a risk that I h e s h e d a n d f o m e n t s w o u l d be d e s t r o y 'd                         jail b e y o n d a p c i a d v e n i t i r e by t w o l aier decisioi
        b y h e r actio n s. T h a t in t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s th is risk w o u l d no t h a v e b e e n o b v t o u s i»                  ^         ! jverciicd | 1y 8 1) 1 All UR 974, | iy8.>] AC 51 o,
        h e r o r b e e n a p p r e c i a t e d by h e r ii she h a d g i v e n t h o u g h t to t h e m a i tei.                                               icckles sly’ in s 1 ol i h e R o a d T r a l l i c Act 1972 (as
            |. W e w e r e u n a b l e to l o n n a n y c o n c l u s i o n o n t h e q u e s t i o n w h y she h a d sta lled                                  \ct 1977), t h e m e m b e r s o f t h e i r I ,o r d s h i p s ’ I | o u
                                                                                                                                                               • M a j o r i t y in Caldwell as to i h e m e a n i n g o f ‘reckli
        t h e lire.
             K. T h a i in r e a c h i n g o u r f i n d i n g s set o u t h e r e i n w e h a d d u e r e g a r d to i h e age ami                            dial ease, L o r d D i p l o c k sa id ([ 1y8 1] 1 All LR 97.
        understanding o f i h e r e s p o n d e n t , h e r lack ol e x p e r i e n c e ol d e a l i n g will) i n f la m m a b l e                                       'I11 o r d i n a r y usa ge " r e c k l e s s l y ” as descrii
        sp irit a n d 1he fact th at s h e m u s t h a v e b e e n t i r e d a n d e x h a u s t e d at t h e t i m e .                              t               m o t o r v e h ic le w h i c h c a n be p e r f o r m e d i n <
            l„ Thai w e a c c e p te d t h e i n t e r p r e t a t i o n ol t h e elleci ol t h e d e c is io n in i h e case ol                                     e n t a i l i n g d a n g e r a n d s o m e o f i l i e m no t, rc
        K v Caldwell p u l f o r w a r d o n b e h a l f of t h e r e s p o n d e n t .                                                                              d o e r o f t h e acl w h e n h e d ecid es lo d o il bu
             M. T h at in p a r t i c u l a r w e f o u n d il i m p l i c i t in t h e d e c is io n in t h a t case t h a t j                                      act itself is p e r f o r m e d . O n e d oes n o t spe
        d e f e n d a n t s h o u l d o n l y b e h e l d 10 h a v e acted reckless ly b y v i r t u e ol his l a i l u i e to give                                   t h o u g h h e h as g i v e n 110 t h o u g h t al all to r!
        a n y t h o u g h t l o an o b v i o u s risk t h a t p r o p e r t y w o u l d be d e s t r o y e d o r d a m a g e d , w h e n                              is o n e t h a t p r e s e n t s a real risk ol h a r m f u l
        s u c h risk w o u l d h av e b e e n o b v i o u s t o h i m i f h e h a d g i v e n a n y t h o u g h t lo the                             (    *         r e a s o n a b le p r u d e n c e w o u l d r e c o g n i s e a n d )
         m ailer.                                                                                           ,
            N. A c c o r d i n g l y h a v i n g r e g a r d 10 o u r f i n d i n g s set o u t a b o v e w e f o u n d Hu                                        Again, h is I . o r d s h i p said (| 1y 8 1] 1 All HR 9 7 l
         r e s p o n d e n t n o t g u i l t y ol t h e c h a r g e a n d d i s m i s s e d i h e i n f o r m a t i o n .                                                ‘R e ck lessness 011 t h e p a r t o f t h e d o e r
      ISefore us, co u n s e l for t h e a p p e l l a n t has a r g u e d f o rce fu lly th at t h e m a g i s t r a t e s w c i t                                  s o m e t h i n g in t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s t h a t w o u lt
 w r o n g to ad o p t th a t i n t e r p r e t a t i o n ol t h e d ecis io n in C'aidwell. I le s u b m i l s that t h e ph i j x                                  p r u d e n t i n d i v i d u a l 10 t h e possibility t h a t 1
 'c t e a i e s a n o b v i o u s risk' m e a n s t h a t i h e risk is o n e w h i c h m u s t h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s n. 4                        *         se rio u s h a r m f u l c o n s e q u e n c e s d ial t h e secti
 r e a s o n a b ly p r u d e n t m a n , 1101 necessa rily to i h e p a r t i c u l a r d e f e n d a n t i f he o r sh e l u .l                                    to p r e v e n t , a n d that t h e risk o f th o s e liar
 g i v e n t h o u g h t to it. It follows, says co u n s e l, t h a t if t h e risk is o n e w h i c h w o u l d h a v e been                                       sl i g h t t h a t a n o r d i n a r y p r u d e n t i n d i v i d u a
 o b v i o u s to a r e a s o n a b ly p r u d e n t p e r s o n , o n c e il has also b e e n p r o v e d th a l t h e parlicul.ii                                   n e g l i g i b l e . Ii is o n l y w h e n lliis is so th at 1
 d e f e n d a n t g a v e n o t h o u g h t lo t h e po ssib ility o f th e r e b e i n g stu b a risk, il is 1101 a cIcTciki                                        b e f o r e d o i n g t h e act, h e e i t h e r fails to g i \
  th a t b e c a u s e o f l i m i t e d i n t e l l i g e n c e o r e x h a u s t i o n s h e w o u l d mil h a v e a p p r e c i a t e d ll.i                       b e i n g a n y s u c h risk or, h a v i n g r eco g n ised
  riiU e ven ii bite h a d t h o u g h t a b o u t it.                                                                                                                goes 011 to d o il.’
       Il     b r i g h i to bay, a:> o n i n s o l l o r t h e a p p e l l a n t p o i n t e d o u t to           t h a t t h e r e ar e p a ^ a g < ,            H v Millet |T y 8 .)] 1 All LR y 7 » , 1 1y » 3 ] 1 W
  in t h e sp e e c h o f b o l d D i p l o c k in I'.i M well w h i c h s u g g e s t that h i s l o r d s h i p was indcc ,1                                   fa* C r i m i n a l D a m a g e Act 1971, in r e la tio n 1
  u s i n g i h e p h r a s e 'c reates an o b v i o u s risk ' as m e a n i n g , Y reaics a risk w h i c h was o b v i o u s 1.                                * hose s p e e c h i h e r e m a i n d e r ol t h e i r L o rd s h i p ;
  i h e p a r t i c u l a r d e f e n d a n t . ' 'I h u s , his I .o r d s h i p s a i d (| i y 8 I | 1 All l:R yt>i at y6-|, [ 1982) Al
                                                                                                                                                                  ,7 8 3]   2 W L R 53y at 544):
   3 11 35 ‘ ):
                                                                                                                                                          *                '. . . w h e r e t h e sla le o f m i n d relied o n
               ' A m o n g i h e w o r d s | P r o le sso r K e n n y ] u se d w as recklessness , t h e n o u n d e i i \ » . l
                                                                                                                                                                       p h y sic al act o f i h e a c c u s e d d i a l p r o p e r t y
          f r o m t h e ad j e c t i v e "reckless,'' o f w h i c h t h e p o p u l a r o r d i c t i o n a r y m e a n i n g 1.                                       m u s i be o n e d ial w o u l d be o b v i o u s 10
          "careless, regardle ss, o r h eed les s o f ih e possible h a r m f u l c o n s e q u e n c e s ol o n e's ai(>                                              w h a t e v e r is i h e r e l e v a n t l i m e l o r d e i e r i
          Ii p r e s u p p o s e s iliat, if t h o u g h t w e r e g i v e n 10 t h e m a i l e r by i h e d o e r b e l o r e th e j . 1                              accu s ed l i n e d d i e d e s c r i p t i o n “b e i n g re
          w as d o n e , il w o u l d h a v e b e e n a p p a r e n t to h i m t h a t t h e r e w as a real risk o f its h a \ u >                                    d a m a g e d ”: see K v Caldwell 1 l y 8 1) t All
           d i e r e le v a n t h a r m l y l c o n s e q u e n c e s . .                                                                                 *            also K v l.awi enee | 1981 ] 1 All lilt 9 7 4 a
       S p e a k i n g of a n o t h e r ea r lie r d e c is io n o f i h e C o u r t ol A p peal, in K v Briggs I >977] 1 At.                                          r e q u i r e m e n t 111 i h e m e n t a l e l e m e n t in lh>
   b i t 4 7 5 ,1 >977] 1 W I U <)lJ5 ' llL‘               (F' y « 1J 1 A " l;U y ° ‘                 I i y 8 2 l AC 34 « al IS *                                   In th e liglil o f th e s e Iasi tw'o a u t h o r i t i e s , W
   \ . . ev eii i h o t i g h d i e risk is g r e a t a n d w o u l d b e o b v i o u s if a n y t h o u g h t w e r e g i v e n to il .                              vuird reckless in s 1 ol t h e C r i m i n a l D a i n a
   m a l l e i by i h e d o e r of t h e aCl,                                                                                                                     1. counsel for d i e a p p e l l a n t . Il is o n l y lair lo
      I le said (| 1981 | 1 All I U y o i al 9 6 7 , | i y 8 i ] AC M i al 355):                                                                                  ;.«t 11 s e e m s t h a t t h e y w e r e 1101 r e f e r r e d to tl
               'So, in t h e in stan t case, t h e fact lliai t h e r e s p o n d e n t w as u n a w a r e o f t h e risk .J                                      u T not, w h e n t h e y r e a c h e d ll i e i r d ecis io n, bet
           e n d a n g e r i n g i h e l i v e s o f r e s i d e n t s in t h e h o te l o w i n g to his s e l f - i n d u c e d im o xicati...                     I he q u e s t i o n s p o se d b y t h e case are:
           w o u l d b e n o d e f e n c e if d i a l risk w o u l d h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s 10 h i m h a d he b e e n s o U .
                                                                                                                                                                             ‘ 1. W h e t h e r p r o p e r l y d i r e c t i n g o u r sel
         T h e last pa ssa ge w as b a s e d 011 i h e e a r l i e r d e c is io n ol t h e I lo use ol I .o ld s in R v MajenA                                          U 1) o f t h e C r i m i n a l I )a m a g e Act 1971 \»
   | 197.01 1 All 1:U 142, 11977 ] AC 4 4 3 , a d e c is io n r e l a t i n g to i h e effect o f s e l t - i n d m . J                                                  m e a n i n g ol reckless , n a m e l y , that a d e f
    i n t o x i c a t i o n 011 i m e n l . Hut, q u i t e a p a r t f r o m t h e Majewiki lest, t h e d e c is io n ol it.,                                            u c k l e s s l y by v i r t u e o f his f ailu re l o g i v e a
                                                                             * » { n g la n d L a w Reports       1 2 A u 8 usl 1983




>orts                    [1 9 8 3 ] 2 All ER                                 QBD
                                                                                                                       Hlliot t v C (am inor) (Glidewell J)
                                                                                                                                                                   ____________                                       1009
it ilie c o n t e n t s o f th e b o ttle u h i . 1
  sh e hail no t h a n d l e d it b efo re .in f
rn a n d i m m e d i a t e l y h e r o i n e out - •               , « 'lit;;                                     i    t    s      S i , i : ; , T , ' if *     x * * * «* *                * » * « » . .•* * * «
t e n t s a m i also p l a c i n g h e r o w n lif'
                                                                         •m m y v i e w w i l h th eii I o n k b i n s                               1      1     1’              ‘is ic c k lc s s is only <o n s i s t e n .
                                                                         *       ^      o b v io u s   to                                                       |ih ^                                               e r e .,.,
H t h e l i m e tliai sh e s i a n e d ih c (ir'
d a n d c o n t e n t s w o u l d h e dost r o w )                             I h a t t h e s u b m i s s i o n o f c o u n s e l l o r t h e i m i r l l i m tv
k w o u l d 1101 h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s r->                       r-« b e y o n d a p e r a d v e n t i i r e b y i w o later d J d i o n s o f t h e ‘1S v V f S " ? ' 1' ’
lotighi 10 i h e m a l l e i ,                                     ,     l.ivvmice f 1 9 8 1J , All IK 9 7 4 I , 9 8 2 ] AC s i n , , 1 , . ; .                    ,                     111 R v
 t h e q u e s t i o n w h y she h ad s ta in I                          i'-i klessly’ in s 1 o f i l i e Koad T raffic Aci            - / ' 1 ^ ■Sl° 1' 1"'         " le a n in g o| the w ord


i w e h a d tine r e g a r d lo i h e ag e an I
 ience o f d e a l i n g w i t h i n l l a m m a b l r                  .i-i™ .i,.„ i,» r^                         k „ i a (l . * > 8 . ,,   ah   , ri . J 7 . , o « , .                                               '■ ' n
n d e x h a u s t e d at i h e lim e .
■ffeci ol t h e d ecis io n in t h e case ol
enl.
i t h e d ecisio n in that case ili.ii ,i
■ssly b y vivlne o f his failu re to give
d b e d e s t r o y e d o r d a m a g e d , wlicie
ie h a d g i v e n a n y i h o u g l u lo d ir                                   K           :
                                                                   *             -                                                                                                                                   ..
gs set ^ ^ . i l x n e w e f o u n d die
th e inform al ion.’                                                                                                                   I , AM | u 7j . „ 0              8     j   , AC 5 , „
: e f u l l y tliai i h e m a g i s t r a t e s weie
Idnell. I le s u b m i t s ilia. d i e phr ase
 ich n i u s l h av e b e e n o b v i o u s to ,i
:u lar d e f e n d a n t if he o r sh e li.ul
isk is o n e w h i c h w o u l d h a v e been
^ b e e n p r o v e d ih at t h e particu lar
 i n g su c h a risk, it is not a d e f e i u e
 w o u l d nol h av e a p p r e c i a t e d ilie
                                                           i
 ou l to us, that i h e r e are passages
.'st t h a t his L o r d s h i p was i n d eed
eaics a risk w h i c h was o b v i o u s io
i] i All (;i( 961 at 9 64, [ 198 2) AC


"r ecklessn ess", i h e n o u n d e r i v e d            *
Hilar o r d i c t i o n a r y m e a n i n g is
n f u l c o n s e q u e n c e s o f on e's a d s",                            ! i K                         :'r                                                         ^ ' i ! " v ‘y " ' T " 1-1' ^             ' --B -a
l a t t e r by i h e d o e r b efo re t h e a d
t h e i c w as a real risk of its h a v i n g

          •                                                    *
                   '■ B | W ' I 1977] 1 All
1 at 9 6 5 , 1 1 982] A ( . 34 1 at 353):                                                                                                ...
if a n y t h o u g h t w e r e g i v e n to ihe

355 ):
lent w as u n a w a r e o f i h e risk of              *
5 t o his self i n d u c e d i n to x ic a tio n
v io u s 10 h i m h a d lie b een sober.                               1 lie i|lie.slions po se d b y il,c case a r e :

: I louse o f I .ords in K v Mtijewskt
 ig l o t h e eflocl o f se lf- in d u c e d
jewski lest, t h e d ecisio n o f the                                    m e a n i n g o f reck less m m H v t h , a
                                                                            ii
                                                                                                                                     T'          "7" mT'         <H'r i n , c , F-<--'*i<>n «»'■!«•
                                                                                         i . ,L,lKlt;,s' . n 3 ,) u ')> , h ‘» <) d e f e n d a n t s h o u l d o n l y b e h e l d 10 h~,w. , , . i
                                                                         -            y by v irt ue of his f a i l u r e t o g i v e a n y . b o u g h t to a n o C i l T ^
                                                                                                                                                       •»* I   j l a n d l <iw Reports   12 August 1J
All England Law Reports        12 August 1 98 3




1010                                          All England Law Reports                                          [1983] 2 All I*                         (lBD                                Elliott

                                                                                                                                                                p ossib ility of t h e r e h e i r
       w o u l d he d e s t r o y e d o r d a m a g e d , w h o r e s u c h risk w o u l d h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s n.
                                                                                                                                                                i n v o k 'd a n d has n o n e it
       il he luul g i v e n .m y i h o i t g l n lo i h e m a l l e t ?                                                                      «                  t h e j u r y ; cases in t h e G
           i. W h e t h e r p r o p e r l y d i r e c t i n g o u r s e l v e s o n i h e e v i d e n c e w e c o u l d p r o p e r! ) l u ■                    o v erruled.’
       c o m e l o o u r deci.sioa lh.it i h e r e s p o n d e n t li.ul a c t e d n e i t l i e r inleiilion.i l!) i .
       r e ik le ss ly in d e s l r o y i n g b y lire (h e .shed a n d c o n t e n t s ?                                                                    '. m i ', i f ih at test is a p p l i e d
    I w o u l d a n s w e r N o lo b o t h q u e s t io n s , a n d a l l o w t h e a p p e a l .                                                           ii, o n t h e f a d s f o u n d b y ih
                                                                                                                                                       . .1 l o i i t e n i s w o u l d be d e s tr
R O H E R T G O F F I J . I a g r e e w i t h t h e c o n c l u s i o n r e a c h e d by Glide-well J, h u t I . 1, * *                                    •k th at t h e p r o p e r t y w o u l d
s i m p l y b e c a u s e I b e lie v e m y s e l f c o n s t r a i n e d lo d o so by a u t h o r i t y . I feel m o r e o v e r tl..                  ; . po ssibility o f i h e r e b e i n g
w o u l d h e l a c k i n g in c a n d o u r i f I w ere l o c o n cea l m y u n h a p p i n e s s a b o u t t h e cone his.                                 W-t, i f I n e x t p a u s e (as I ha'
w h i c h I feel ( ( i m p e l l e d to rea c h . lu m y o p i n i o n , a l t h o u g h ol c o u r s e i h e c o n n s ol i ‘ *                          •i t.lio n ) a n d ask m y s e l f tl
c o u n t r y are b o u n d by t h e d o c i m i o o f p r e c e d e n t , sensibly i n t e r p r e t e d , n e v e r i h e k                   ■         . .a i l i n g ol i h e w o r d , con su l
w o u l d he ii te s p o n s i h l e for j u d g e s lo act as . i i i i o u i a m n s , ri g id l y a p p l y i n g a u i h o n . . .                           s h e d a n d c o n t e n t s w'ot;
w i t h o u t r e g a r d lo conse(|tH'nces. W h e r e t h e r e f o r e il a p p e a r s al l u s t sig h t t h a t auilim                              . ^.nive. T h is is n o t a case
( ( i m p e l s a j u d g e t o r each a c o n c l u s i o n w h i c h he senses lo he u n j u s t o r i n a p p r o p ria te                           i. i o a g e o r i n j u r y o f a certai
is, I c o n s i d e r , u n d e r .1 p o s i t i v e d u t y 10 e x a m i n e t h e r e l e v a n t a u t h o r i t i e s w i t h s e ru p u l -•         . Tillerence t o .1 risk o f su c h
care 10 a s c e r ta i n w h e t h e r h e can, w i i h i n t h e l i m i t s i m p o s e d b y t h e d o c t r i n e o f p r e . c . l >                   :.tcxt o f m o t o r i n g offences
(alw ay s s e n sib ly ititei p reled ), l e g i t i m a t e l y i n t e r p r e t o r q u a l i f y t h e p r i n c i p l e e x p r e s s , .I ■       . ii ev en a case w h e r e lailu
 t h e a u t h o r i t i e s to a c h i e v e i h e r e s u h w h i c h h e perceiv es 10 h e j u s t o r a p p r o p r i a t e 111                    * m e b l a m e w o r t h y cause, si
 p a r t i c u l a r case. I d o no t d i s g u is e i h e fact lliai I h av e s o u g h t to p e r f o r m th is fn n cti.a -                           . k basis o n w h i c h t h e acc
 1h e p r e s e n t case.                                                                                                                                    j lopi iate test to he a p p
      I stari o f c o u r s e w i t h t h e facts o l 111c case, w h i c h h a v e b e e n set o u t w i t h clar ity In p -                             ■ . u m s t a n c e s he t h o u g h ju:
 m a g i s t r a t e s , l o r p r e s e n t p u r p o s e s , t h e salie nt f e a t u re s ar e t h e s e ; (1) t h e r e s p o n d e n t , i .       - . i n , u la ily w h e r e t h e w o r d
 y ear - o k l sc h o o lg ir l, set lire to a s h e d b y p o u r i n g w h i l e sp i r i t o n t o a c ar p et o n th e I k , . «                    * .1 su c h a test d o es n o t ap]
 t h e s h e d a n d t h r o w i n g t w o l i g h t e d m a t c h e s o n t o t h e s p i r i t , t h e se c o n d o f w h i c h igi.. <               . lei c o n s i d e r a t i o n in i h e {■
 it; (2) w h i l e she r ealised th at t h e c o n t e n t s o f t h e b o t t l e w h i c h c o n t a i n e d t h e w h i l e 4 . »                        ...led t o a p a r t i c u l a r conse
 w as p o ssib ly i n f l a m m a b l e , sh e h a d noi h a n d l e d il b e l o i e a n d h a d n ot a p p r e c i a t e d k »                          ..i c o n s i s t e n t l y w i t h t h e
 ex p l o s iv e l y it w o u l d b u r n a n d i m m e d i a t e l y b e c o m e o u t ol c o n t r o l , t h e r e b y d e s t r.x *                       i n n lie o r q u a l i t y t h e p r i n c
 I101 h t h e s h e d a n d its c o n t e n t s ; (3) she g a v e n o t h o u g h t at t h e l i m e w h e n sh e started <■                            *'..<! t c o n c e i v e lo he t h e a\
  lire to t h e p o s s i b i l i t y o f t h e r e b e i n g .1 risk t h a t t h e .shed a n d its c o n t e n t s wcmlJ *-                                 Mid ihat th o se facts are vet
  d e s t t o y e d ; (4) t h i s risk w o u l d n o t h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s 10 h e r o r h a v e b e e n a p p r e c i a u .1 *                  i t o n l s in Caldwell, w h e n
  h e r if she h a d g i v e n t h o u g h t t o t h e m a i l e r .                                                                                           •u i c a t i o n .
       I a d d d i a l t h e s e c o n c l u s i o n s w e r e r e a c h e d b y d i e m a g i s t r a t e s , h a v i n g r e g a r d 10 il.<                I Icie a g a i n , it w o u l d he i
  a n d u n d e r s t a n d i n g ot t h e r e s p o n d e n t , h e r ku k o f e x p e r i e n c e o f d e a l i n g w i t h i n f la n m .* -»          * ii th e s t a t e m e n t o f princ
  s p ir it, a n d t h e fact th a t sh e m u s t h a v e b e e n t i r e d a n d e x h a u s t e d at t h e ti m e .                                        *i1111eiit, m u c h ol il cr itica
       I t u r n n e x t t o t h e c r i m e w i i h w h i c h she w as c h a r g e d , viz t h a t sh e w i t h o u t U » * "                            < lltese articles w i t h in ter
  e x c u s e d e s t r o y e d hy fire t h e s h e d a n d c o n t e n t s , i n t e n d i n g to d e s t r o y su c h p r o | v n . -                       >-..fusion i n t h e p r e s e n t <
   b e i n g reckless w h e t h e r s u c h p r o p e r t y w o u l d be d e s t r o y e d , c o n t r a r y to s 1(1) "I “ *                        *         .jn c e d on th e respondei
   C r i m i n a l D a m a g e Act 1971. H i e case a d v a n c e d ag ain s t h e r w as n o t t h a t sh e i n t e n d i                                 ■ i n , tple a q u a l i f i c a t i o n sirn
   d e s t r o y t h e p r o p e r t y , b u t th at .she w as reckless w h e t h e r t h e p r o p e r t y w o u l d be desit. • • <                   « n . l e 'R eck less n es s R e d e fi r
        P lain ly , sh e d i d d e s t r o y t h e s h e d a n d iis c o n t e n t s b y (ire ; p l a i n l y , to o , she                       *       *■d i d o n l y be r e g a r d e d as
   w i t h o u t la w f u l e x c u s e . lUil w as she reckless w h e t h e r t h e s h e d a n d it c o n t e n t s w u u U '»                          ' . e i g h t t o a n o b v i o u s risk
   d e s t r o y e d ? I lerc I t u r n , as G l i d e w e l l | has d o n e , 10 a u t h o r i t y ; a n d 111 t h e decision U *•                  t .k * o u l d h a v e b e e n o b v i o l
   I lo u s e o f Lords in R r t ' a l M I [ 1 9 8 1 ] 1 All liR 9 6 1 , [ 1 9 8 2 ] AC 341 I f i n d a n a u t U . .                                    '■ • • m g s t u d i e d L o rd Diploi
   b i n d i n g o n t h i s c o u r t , w h i c h w\is c o n c e r n e d w i t h t h e i n t e r p r e t a t i o n of t l u »                               * ...n in g lo i m p o s e a n y su(
   'r e c k l e s s n e s s ’ as use d in t h e very s u b s e c t i o n u n d e r w h i c h t h e r e s p o n d e n t w a s c h a t * * .» *•            * * > not a p p e a r i n t e r m s in
   t h a t case, a l t h o u g h t h e I lou se w as d i v i d e d , t h e r a t i o d e c i d e n d i o f t h e decisio n >4 <'•                        * ’ it c o n s i d e r i n g e a r l i e r in
   I lo u se is to he f o u n d in t h e s p e e c h ol l . o i d D i p l o c k , w'ith w h i c h b t n h L o rd Keid> *'*-                                     .e jected as b e i n g l o o nai
    I .o rd Roskill a g r e e d . 1,01 d Diploc k a n a l y s e d t h e w o r d reckless as use d in this s u b * . ’ *                                   * M illio n p r e s u p p o s e d t h a t
   a n d h i s a n a ly s is c u l m i n a t e d in t h e c o n c l u s i o n w h i c h r e a d s as f o llo w s ([1 9 8 1 ] 1 U- •*                     » * as d o n e , il w o u l d have
  961 at 9 6 7 , [ 1 9 8 2 j A C 341 at 3 54 ):                                                                                                               • i. levant h a r i n l u l c o n s e c
                                                                                                                                                             • =. m y e m p h a s i s ) . It se e r
               'I n m y o p i n i o n , a p e r s o n c h a r g e d w i t h a n o l l e n c e u n d e r s 1(1) o f t h e l y ' i * *
                                                                                                                                                          ' t. \sor K e n n y ’s test, a n d
           " reck les s as t o w h e t h e r o r no t a n y p r o p e r t y w o u l d h e d e s t r o y e d o r d a m a g e d •'
                                                                                                                                                              • itiil.uion o f t h e c o n c e p t .
           h e d o e s .111 act w h i r l , in fact cr eates a n o b v i o u s risk t h a t p r o p e r l y will b e d o c . -
                                                                                                                                                                . a . in a case u n d e r t h i s j
           o r d a m a g e d a n d ^2) w h e n h e d o e s t h e a d h e e i t h e r h a s n o t g i v e n a n y t h o u g h t :
                                                                            u fn g la n d L a w RepoHS     1 2 August 1 98 3




                                                                            QBD                                Elliott v C (a minor) (Robert Goff LJ)
orts                     [1 9 8 3 } 2 All E»

                                                                                    p oss ib ility of t h e r e b e i n g a n y s u c h risk o r h as r e c o g n i s e d t h a t t h e r e w as s o m e risk
l w ould       h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s I" *                                   i n v o l e d a n d h a s n o n e i h e less g o n e o n t o d o it. T h a t w o u l d be a p r o p e r d i r e c t i o n to
                                                            •       *               i h e j u r y ; cases i n i h e C o u r t o f A p peal w h i c h h e l d o t h e r w i s e s h o u l d b e r e g a r d e d as
e evidence we could p r o p e ib I > -
                                                                                    ov erruled.’
I a c t e d n e i t h e r i n i e n i i o n a l b >■ ■
:n t s ? '                                                               N o w if-that test is a p p l i e d literally in i h e                    p r e s e n t case, i h e c o n c l u s i o n a p p e a r s in e v i t a b l e
 ap p e a l.                                                          that o n’ t h e facts f o u n d b y i h e m a g i s t r a t e s ,            i h e r e s p o n d e n t w a s reckless w h e t h e r t h e s h e d
                                                                      m d c o n t e n t s w o u l d b e d e s t r o y e d ; b ecau s e             Inst sh e d id a n act w h i c h c r e a t e d an o b v i o u s
c a c h e d by ( d i d e w ell J, bu t I .I          ■      *       * ,,sk that i h e p r o p e r t y w o u l d be d e s t r o y e d ,             a n d s e c o n d s h e b a d not g i v e n a n y t h o u g h t to
ty a u t h o r i t y . I leel m o i e o s c i 11>■                           die p o s s ib ility of t h e r e b e i n g an y s u c h risk.
 u n h a p p i n e s s a b o u t t h e c o m l i t ' 1 ••                          Yet if I n e x t p a u s e (as I h a v e d o n e , in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h w h at I c o n c e i v e 10 b e m y p r o p e r
h o u g h o f c o u rse t h e c o u r t s of i ‘                             f u n c t i o n ) a n d ask m y s e l f t h e q u e s t i o n : w o u l d I, h a v i n g r e g a r d o n l y t o i h e o r d i n a r y
■nsibly i n t e r p r e t e d , n e v e r t h e l ' '<                       m e a n i n g o f t h e w o r d , c o n s i d e r th i s girl to h a v e b e e n , o n t h e lacis f o u n d , m i 'l r s s w h e t h e r
n o u s , rig id ly a p p l y i n g a u d i o t e •                          the s h e d a n d c o n t e n t s w o u l d b e d e s t r o y e d , m y a n s w e r w o u l d , I confess, h e 111 t h e
a p p e a r s at first si g h t that a u ih .'f •>          *       *        n egative. T h i s is 1101 a case w h e r e t h e r e w a s a d e l i b e r a t e d i s r e g a r d o f a k n o w n n s k ol
;s to be u n j u s t o r i n a p p m p i iat>                                d a m a g e o r i n j u r y o f a c e r t a i n t y p e o r d e g r e e ; n o r is it a case w h e r e t h e r e w as m i n d l e s s
.■levant a u t h o r i t i e s w i t h scrupn!-                              in d iff er en ce t o a risk o f s u c h d a m a g e o r i n j u r y , as is e x p r e s s e d in c o m m o n sp eech 111 t h e
iposecl by t h e d o c t r i n e o f p m e d ' •                             c on tex t o f m o t o r i n g offenc es ( t h o u g h n ot. I t h i n k , ol a r s o n ) a s ‘b l a z i n g 011 reg ard le ss ; n o r
r q u a l i f y t h e p i i n c i p l e express-'.f -                        ,s it e v e n a case w h e r e f a ilu re t o g i v e t h o u g h t lo t h e p o ss ib ility of t h e l isk w as d u e to
ves to be just o r a p p r o p r i a t e in i'                      „         so m e b l a m e w o i t l i y cause, s u c h as i n t o x i c a t i o n . T h is is a case w h e r e 11 a p p e a r s t h a t t h e
s o u g h ^ ^ p e r f o i m th is limcii.M)                     *   *         only basis o n w h i c h i h e a c c u s e d m i g h t b e h e l d lo h a v e b e e n reckless w o u l d be il t h e
                                                                               uM.vopviate test t o be a p p l i e d w a s p u r e l y o b j e c t i v e : a test w i n c h m i g h t m s o m e
ave b e e n set o u t w i t h clarity b \ i*                                  . i i c u m s i a n c e s b e t h o u g h j u s t i f i a b l e in r e l a t i o n t o c e r t a i n c o n d u c t ( e g reckless d r i v in g ) ,
>ar e t h e s e : ( i ) t h e r e s p o n d e n t . .1 11                     p a r t i c u l a r l y w h e r e t h e w o r d ‘reck less' is use d s i m p l y to c h a r a c t e r i s e t h e r e le v a n t c o n d u c t .
e spirit o n t o a c a r p e t 011 t h e Hoot                                 Hut s u c h a test d o es no t a p p e a r at Inst sight t o be a p p r o p i i a t e to a c r i m e s t u b as that
: sp ir it, t h e s e c o n d o f w h i c h i g n i " '                        u n d e r c o n s i d e r a t i o n in t h e p r e s e n t case, es pecially as reck less n es s i n t h a t c r i m e h as t o be
le w h i c h c o n t a i n e d t h e w h i t e s p " 1 •                *     u-lated t o a p a r t i c u l a r c o n s e q u e n c e . I t h e r e f o r e n ex t ask m y s e l f t h e q u e s t i o n w h e t h e r I
e f o re a n d h ad not a p p r e c i a t e d h> »                             can, c o n s i s t e n t l y w i t h t h e d o c t r i n e o f p r e c e d e n t , se nsib ly i n t e r p r e t e d , l e g i t i m a t e l y
■ o u t o f c o n tr o l, t h e r e b y d e s t r o j i r t                    1oust r u e o r q u a l i f y t h e p r i n c i p l e st a te d by L o rd D i p l o c k in Caldwell so as to a c c o m m o d a t e
;ht at t h e t i m e w h e n she s ta rted 1* '                                wliat I c o n c e i v e to b e t h e a p p r o p r i a t e result o n t h e facts o f t h e p r e s e n t case, h e a l i n g 111
ie s h e d a n d its c o n t e n t s w o u l d t -                             m i n d t h a t t h o s e facts a r e very d i f f e r e n t f r o m t h e facts u n d e r c o n s i d e r a t i o n by t h e I louse
; to h e r o r have been appreciated t •                                ,      o f L o r d s in Caldwell, w h e r e t h e d e f e n d a n t h a d set fire t o a h o t e l w h e n in a state ol
                                                                          intoxication.                                                                                                                ..
n agistrates, h a v i n g r e g a r d to th e . v                              H e r e a g a i n , it w o u l d be u n r e a l i s t i c il I w e i e 10 d i s g u is e t h e l a d t h a t I a m w e I a w aic
e r i e n c e o f d e a l i n g w i t h in fla m n i.il                   th at t h e s t a t e m e n t o f p r i n c i p l e b y l o r d D i p l o c k in Caldwell has b e e n t h e su b je ct ol
                                                                          t o m m e n t , m u c h o f it critical, in articles w r i t t e n b y j u r i s t s ; a n d t h a t I h a v e s t u d i e d c e n a m
 e x h a u s t e d at t h e t i m e ,
la r g e d , viz t h a t sh e w i t h o u t l a v f                       o f th e s e a r ticles w i t h in t e r e s t . I f in d it s t r i k i n g t h a t t h e ju stice s, tn r e a c h i n g t h e i r
e n d i n g to d e s t ro y s u c h p r o p e m -                         c o n c l u s i o n in t h e p r e s e n t case, h a v e d o n e so ( n o d o u b t in r e s p o n s e t o a n a r g u m e n t
le s tr o y e d , c o n t r a r y t o s 1(1) ot i * ' *                 9 a d v a n c e d o n t h e r e s p o n d e n t ’s b e h a l f ) b y i m p o s i n g o n L o r d D i p l o c k s s t a t e m e n t ol
                                                                          p t i n c i p l e a q u a l i f i c a t i o n s i m i l a r t o o n e c o n s i d e r e d by P ro f e s s o r Cdanville W i l l i a m s 111Ins
 n st h e r was n o t t h a t she i n t e n d e d •
ier th e p ro p erty w o u ld be d e s i r o v ‘                          article ‘R eck less n ess R e d e f i n e d ’ (19 8 ■) 40 Cl.J 2 52 at 2 7 0 - 2 7 1 . T i n s ,s th a t a d e f e n d a n t
i t s b y fire; p lain ly , too, sh e d id ’                               sh o u l d o n l y b e r e g a r d e d as h a v i n g acted re cklessly by v i r t u e o f Ins f a ilu re t o g i v e a n y
;r t h e she d a n d it c o n t e n t s w o u ld                           t h o u g h t t o a n o b v i o u s 1isk t h a t p r o p e r t y w o u l d be d e s t r o y e d o r i l a m a g e d , w h e r e s u c h
a u i h o r i ^ f e m d in i h e decisio n ot t> -                        lisk w o u l d h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s to him if h e hail g i v e n a n y t h o u g h t to t h e m a t t e r . I lo w cv er,
 , [ l y S ^ K C 341 I f in d an a u t h o r *.         *               * h a v i n g s t u d i e d l o r d D i p l o c k 's s p e e c h , I d o n o t t h i n k i t w o u l d be c o n s i s t e n t w i t h his
i h t h e i n t e r p r e t a t i o n of th e                             re a s o n i n g to i m p o s e a n y s u c h q u a l i f i c a t i o n . I say dial n o t o n l y b e c a u s e d n s q u a l i f i c a t i o n
h i c h t h e r e s p o n d e n t w as c h a r g e d ’•                   ■ l.-es no t a p p e a r in t e r m s in h is c o n c l u s i o n w h i c h I h a v e al r e a d y q u o t e d , b u t also becau se,
tio d e c i d e n d i o f t h e d ecis io n o f ' l >-                    vdien c o n s i d e r i n g ea r l i e r in h is s p e e c h Pro fessor K e n n y ' s d e f i n i t i o n o f reck lessness ( w h i c h
k, w i t h w h i c h b o t h L o rd Keith J ’ '                           (>.• rejected as b e i n g t o o n a r r o w ) , L o rd D i p l o c k ex p r e s s ly a d v e r t e d to t h e fact th at th at
d ‘reckless’ as use d in t h is subs et n •"                              d e f i n i t io n p r e s u p p o s e d th at ‘i f t h o u g h t w e r e g i v e n t o t h e m a t t e r by t h e d o e r b e f o r e t h e
ch read s as f ollo w s (| 1981 ] t All I »                             ' i, 1 was d o n e , it w o u l d h a v e b e e n a p p a r e n t lo him t h a t t h e r e was a real risk o f its h a v i n g
                                                                           die r e l e v a n t h a r m f u l c o n s e q u e n c e s . . .’ (see j 1 9 8 1 J 1 All L R 961 at 9 6 4 , j 19 82 ) AC. 341 at
                                                                            t s r m y e m p h a s i s ) . It s e e m s t o m e t h a t , h a v i n g ex p r e ss ly c o n s i d e r e d th a t e l e m e n t in
(fence t i n d e r s 1(1) of t h e 1 9 7 1 A.'                             Profes sor K e n n y 's test, a n d h a v i n g (as I t h i n k ) p l a i n l y d e c i d e d t o o m i t it f r o m Ins o w n
o u l d b e d e s t r o y e d o r d a m a g e d if                         f o r m u l a t i o n o f t h e c o n c e p t o f recklessness, it w o u l d n o t n o w h e l e g i t i m a t e for a n i n f e r i o r
s r i s k t h a t p r o p e r t y w i l l b e desti<>>>'                   , .t in t, in a case u n d e r t h i s p a r t i c u l a r s u b s e c t i o n , to i m p o s e a q u a l i f i c a t i o n w h i c h h a d so
[h e r lias n o t g i v e n a n y t h o u g h t t"
All England Law Repods            12 August 1983                                                                                                                  Aii England Law Repo<ts            12 August 1 983




                                                 All England L a w Reports                                           [ 1 9 8 3 ] 2 All ER                         HL                               W a ite v Gc
1012

b o o n re je c te d by ho tel I J i p l o t k h i m s e l f . It fo llo w s t l u i l o r t h a t r easo n a l o n e I d o no t I d
,bk- to u p h o l d t h e r e a s o n i n g o f t h e m a g i s t r a t e s in llie p r e s e n t case. But I w i s h t o a d d lliui (                                      Waite v Gov
lo r m y p a n , I d o u b t w h e t h e r th i s q u a l t l i . a t i o n can be j u s i i l i e d in a n y e v e n t . W h e r e t h e n
ii n o t h o u g h t o f t h e c o n s e q u e n c e s , a n y I'n i t h e r i m |t i i r y n ecessary lo r t h e p u r p o s e s ul
e s t a b l i s h i n g g u i l t s h o u l d p r u n a l a c i t be d i r e c t e d to t h e q u e s t i o n w h y s u c h t h o u g h t wu.                     uotisr: 01 1o itns
no t g i v e n , r . i ih e r t h a n t o t h e p u r e l y h y p o i h e i i c a l q u e s t i o n ol w h a t t h e p a r t i c u l a i petsuii                  >o»i)     lU A sin       m-     i m . i vui.i.TO N,
 w o u l d h a v e a p p r e c i a t e d h a d he d i r e c t e d his m i n d to t h e m a t t e r .                                                              I I \ KW1C I t A N D I o u t ) T t i M l ’ t . l i M A N
    W e w e r e r e f e r r e d t o t h e d e c is io n o f t h e C o u r t o f A p peal in K v Pigg f 1982] 2 All hl<                                    (   j    1 ), 1 -1 J U N I ' , 2 I (111 y 1 9 8 3
     | |        , j 1 \VI K / 0 2 , a case dec id ed a l t e r ( ahhvell a n d t h e t e l a t e d d ecis io n ol the
 | louse o f f o r d s in K v i.uw’r a u v [ i y 8 i J 1 All b R y 7 -4, [ ' 9 ^ 1 AC 510, I n n c o n c e r n e d t i c                                          I n/ciir tliiinissal - Right not to bet
 w i t h s 1(1) o f t h e C r i m i n a l D a m a g e Act 1971 h u ( w i t h s 1 o f t h e S ex ual O l l e t u c .                                               iu'i 111d/ retiring age or specified ag
 ( A m e n d m e n t ) Act 1970. The d e f e n d a n t h a d b e e n c o n v i c t e d ol r a p e ; a n d o n e g r o u n d ol                                    fioviiliiig for ceHiijui/sex'y retirem>
 ap p e a l was c o n c e r n e d w i t h a d i r e c t i o n g i v e n b y t h e j u d g e t o t h e j u r y 011 t h e q u es tio n                              .11 until lie was 65 limyloyee cot
 w h e t h e r h e k n e w t h a t t h e c o m p l a i n a n t d i d n o t c o n s e n t t o i n t e r c o u r s e o r was r eck less j» (                    t       Whether eontraetual retiring «
 10     w h e i h e r sh e c o n s c m e d o r 1 1 0 1 . The j u d g m e n t ol i h e ( .o u n ol A pp eal w as d e l i v e r e d In                              h.n'iitg jitnidk 'licit 10 enlerlain elci
 l o r d I a u c C). l i e r e f e r r e d 10 t h e d ecis io n s ol t h e I louse ol L o rd s i n taLlwell a n d m                                                1.<(/>)-
 tawienee, a n d q u o t e d e x t e n s i v e l y f r o m t h e sp e e c h e s ol L o rd D i p l o c k in b o t h cases, lie
 t h e n said (1 1 9 8    2 ] >   All b i t 591 at 5 y y , ( 1982] 1 W l . l t 702 at 772):                                                                       In D e c e m b e r iyC> 1 t h e a p p e l l a r
                                                                                                                                                                  III t h e r e s p o n d e n t d e p a r t m e n t
             ' O f c o u r s e it is p l a i n t h a t t h a t o p i n i o n c a n n o t , so t o sp e a k , b e li l t e d b o d ily and
                                                                                                                                                              j lie b e c a m e e s t a b l i s h e d in t h a t g
         a p p l i e d 10 rape. f l i c i e h as to be a m o d i f i c a t i o n in c e r t a i n ol t h e m a i l e r s w h i c h j u
                                                                                                                                                                  die C iv il Service Pay a n d Co
         t h e r e deali w iili. l l m , in t h e e n d , u s e e m s 10 us t h a t in t h e lig h t ol t h a t decision, *
                                                                                                                                                                  i d i i i n g ag e f o r a p e r s o n in t h e
         far as r a p e is c o n c e r n e d , a m a n is reckless il e i t h e r lie w as i n d i l l e r e n l a n d gave »•.
                                                                                                                                                                  d isc re tio n a r y p o w e r t o k e e p hi:
         i h o n g h i to t h e p oss ib ility lh ai t h e w o m a n m i g h t m u be c o n s e n t i n g in c i r c u m s t a n c e ,
                                                                                                                                                                  die a p p e l l a n t , t h e n a g e d 6 0 J , \
          w h e r e i f a n y t h o u g h t h a d b e e n g i v e n 10 t h e m a t t e r il w o u l d h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s that
                                                                                                                                                                   gears’ r e c k o n a b l e se rv ice t o qu;
         t h e r e w as a risk sh e was no t 01 lie was a w a r e o f t h e p o ss ib ility th a t sh e m i g h t not U
                                                                                                                                                               I in a l o w e r g r a d e as a clerical (
         co n s e n t i n g b u t n e v e r t h e l e s s p e r sis te d reg ard le ss ol w l i e t b e r sh e c o n s e n t e d o r nut.
                                                                                                                                                                   t r ib u n a l t h a t h e h a d b e e n u n f a
       N o w 11 c a n n o t be d i s g u i s e d t h a t i h e a d d i t i o n 0! t h e w o r d s was i n d i l l e i e n t a n J                                  had n o ju r i s d i c t i o n t o e n t e r l a i t
  cons t it tiled a gloss 011 t h e d e f i n i t i o n ol let k lessnes s p r o p o s e d by l o r d I )iplo c k in Ctihhu.t                                      i c i i r i u g a g e ' b e l o r e his e m p l o y
  I 111 l h e r m o i e , if it w e i e l e g i u m a i e so 10 i m e r p r e t l . o n l D i p l o c k 's sp e e c h in r e la tio n to *                          lull')11 ol Sell 1 t o t h e T r a d e
  c a s e a r i s i n g no t t i n d e r s 1 o f t h e S exual l )lle nces ( A m e n d m e n t ) Act 1976 b u t u n d e r s m                                      c o m p l a i n t ol u n f a i r dism issal.
  o f ih e t 1i m i n a l D a m a g e Act 197 ,, t h e eli'eci w o u l d b e dial t h e se c o n d q u e s t i o n pose d b.                                   1 entertain the c o m p la in t a n d
  t h e m a g i s t r a t e s in t h e case now b e f o r e th i s c o u i t w o u l d be a n s w e r e d in t h e a l l i r n i a n w                             d e p a r t m e n t a p p e a l e d t o th(
  a n d t h e a p p e a l w o u l d b e d i s m i s s e d , b ecau s e t h e r e is 110 f i n d i n g o f fact t h a t t h e r e s p o n d e d                     d e p a r t m e n t ' s c o n t e n t i o n th a t l
   in 11ie c ase b e f o r e us w as i n d i l l e r e n t t o t h e risk ol d e s t r u c t i o n b y li i e o f t h e s h e d a n d 10                            ap pellan t a p p e a l e d u n s u c c e s s fi
  c o n t e n t s . T h i s is a n a p p r o a c h w h i c h I w o u l d g la d ly a d o p t , i f I lelt t h a t I was free t o d o y ,                            .il I ,oids, c o n t e n d i n g (i) t h a t tli
   I l o w e w r , I lId n o i i o u m J lt Iluit il           o p e n 10 i l m n m n , in a               a r i s i n g m n l e r ihe w-i*                         age at w h i c h p e r s o n s h o ld ing
   s u b s e c t i o n t o w h i c h L o rd D i p l o c k 's sp e ech was e x p ress ly d i r e c t e d , t o i m p o s e lD .                                 I . vents, (ii) t h a t t h e c o n l r a c i u a
   ( p u b l i c a t i o n , w h i c h I feel w o u l d in this c o n t e x t C o n s titu te l o o s u b s t a n t i a l a d e p a r t ni<                         1          icj p r a c t i c e to es tab lish a tis
   f r o m t h e test p r o p o s e d b y h i m .                                                                                                                   . h lle r e n t ages, t h e n t h e r e was
        lie,til th ese p o s s i b l e a v e n u e s aie , I believ e, closed t o t h e c o u r t in t h e p r e s e n t case. I lu>.                               para io((>), n a m e l y t h e a g e o f
   c o n s i d e r e d a n x i o u s l y w h e t h e r t h e r e is a n y o t h e r i n t e r p r e t a t i o n w h i c h t h e c o u r t cm,I.!                     clic'Ct ol a p r o v i s i o n i n t h e
   l e g i t i m a t e l y place 011 L o rd D i p l o c k 's s t a i e m e n i o f p r i n c i p l e in Caldwell, w h i c h woi.L:                                   lecko n .i ble s e rv ice ' s h o u l d ' be
   lead 10 t h e c o n c l u s i o n w h i c h I w o u l d p r e f e r to r each , t h a t t h e r e s p o n d e n t was n o t reckl, *                         t . I c p a n m e n i c o n t e n d e d that
   w h e t h e r t h e s h e d a n d c o n t e n t s w o u l d be d e s t r o y e d by lire. I h a v e d i s c o v e i e d n o n e win t                             ap pellan t's p o s i t i o n conclusive
    w o u l d no t i n v o l v e w h a t I w o u l d r e g a r d as c o n s t i t u t i n g , in r e l a t i o n t o t h e r e le v a n t o l l c n , .              Mom it in p r a c t i c e w as irre lev;
   a n i l l e g i t i m a t e d e p a r t lire I r o m t h a t s t a t e m e n t ol p r i n c i p l e .
       In th e s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s , I a g r e e t h a t t h e q u e s t i o n s m u s t b e a n s w e r e d as p r o p o s e d I .                        ( l e l d - f lie c o n t r a c t u a l r e i i r i r
   t d i d e w e l l ), a n d t h a t t h e a p p eal m u s t be allo w ed .                                                                                         . i n p l o y m e n t d i d no t c o n d u s i
                                                                                                                                                                      1., o f Sell 1 t o t h e 1974 Aci. I
    1(>jv,iI allowed. Leave li1tififeal ic/11 m <I.                                                                                                                  age ap p l i c a b l e to n e a r l y all t h e
   S o licito rs; S/ui 1j v  Pritchard & Co, a g e n t s for Riehard .1 Crabb, M a i d s t o n e ( l o r t h e appell.ii.,                                            1 tc b u u a b l e p r e s u m p t i o n a r o s
   (,‘irfiHg U iImhi       & liarvie, C a n i c r b u r y ( lo r t h e r e sp o n d e n t ) .                                                                         .gc lo r t h e g r o u p . In d e t e n n i i

                                                                                              Si,'pala M u n a s i u g h e lisq           Barruc.                         t’.K.i^iapli o,. bu t.n ,ib u ialcm l
