HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                  Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                    At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                    On

           27th February, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes Qf J.L. Harpham, L t d .»
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                   Page

     D.A.   ILLINGWORTH Sworn

            By The Coroner                           1
            Cross-Examined   bv M r . Payne         21
            Cross-Examined   by M r . Isaacs        2a
            Cross-Examined   bv M r . Manning        /
            Cross-Examined   by M r . King
            Cross-Examined   by M r . Catchpoie    M2,
            Cross-Examined   by Mrs . McBrien      45
            Cross-Examined   by M r . Russell      58
            Cross-Examined   by Miss Addleman      62
            Further by The   Coroner               67

ARGUMENT                                            67

     J.O. PACKER Sworn

            By The Coroner                         /6
            Cross-Examined   by   M r . Payne      83
            Cross-Examined   by   M r . Isaacs     84
            Cross-Examined   bv   M r . King       84
            Cross-Examined   by   Mrs . McBrien    89
            Cross-Examined   bv   Miss: Addleman   90
            Cross-Examined   bv   M r . Russell    91
                FIFTY NINTH DAY *S PROCEEDINGS

                WEDNESDAY. 27th FEBRUARY 1991


               DAVID ALFRED ILLINGWORTH Sworn

                       Bv THE CORONER

Q. I have got your name right, have I not, David Alfred
   Illingworth? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. You are in the South Yorkshire Police, and you are PC
   417? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. Just tell me when you joined? How many years ago was
   it? Can you remember approximately? - A. I will tell
   you exactly, sir.  I joined 7th November 1968.

Q. So you have been an Officer for quite some time? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. I think I am right in saying in about 1987 you started
   as a Community Constable in F Division? - A. That is
   right, sir, yes, at Hammerton Road Police Station.

Q. One of your tasks was, amongst others no doubt, was to
   police matches at Hillsborough Football Ground? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. I think not exclusively but a lot of your time was
   spent on the perimeter track, would that be right? - A.
   That was my usual duty, yes, sir, but at the Leppings
   Lane end.

Q. You had a colleague who was also at that end, PC Smith?
   - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Q. Would I be right in thinking that by convention you
   tended to take the Leppings Lane end which was more
   towards the North Stand and he tended to take the other
   end or is that wrong? - A. That was the normal
   practise, yes, sir.

Q. In a normal situation we know there are actually seven
   gates but would I be right in thinking that there were
   not seven Officers to each of the gates? In other
   words, was there an Officer to each of the gates or was
   it that you covered more than one gate as a general
   rule? - A. As a general rule, sir, in a minor football
   match there would be a segregated area which would
   normally be the north section of the Leppings Lane.

Q. You mean the north or the south section? Do you mean
   the one nearest the* Police Control Box or the one
   furthest from the Police Control Box? - A. I would say
   in normal practise there is only the centre section
   full. The outer sections are kept to what are known as
                                                              2

                                              D. A. ILLINGWORTH


   sterile, sir. So they do not need any Police Officers
   there to man the gates.

Q. In a bigger match where you were using the whole of the
   terrace how many Officers would be on the gates which
   you tended to cover? - A. In normal circumstances
   myself and PC Smith.  That was the situation in 1988.

Q. That is what I had understood.  By the way, before we
   go any further your Christian names are David Alfred? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Are you ever known as John? - A. I think if somebody
   does not know you they would say, "Are you all right,
   John?".

Q. Only in that sense? - A. Yes.   I am never known as
   John.

Q. You are not known as John? - A. No.

Q. I just wanted to sort that out and you will see why in
   a little while but it is not important actually.

Q. Before we move on to the perimeter track side I think
   you also at some point or other had done duties on the
   concourse area, is that right? - A. That is right, sir,
   yes, some years ago.

Q. When would that have been? Can you remember when it
   was the last time that you worked on the concourse? -
   A. I would say, sir, off the top of my head the mid
   eighties but I cannot be clear now.

Q. The mid eighties.  So by that time would I be right in
   thinking that the radial fences were already in place
   by then? - A. Yes, definitely.

Q. Can you recollect from your days, so to speak, when you
   were at the back? I will call it the back.   Do you
   know what I mean by the concourse area? - A. I know
   what you mean exactly, sir.

Q. We will just make sure that we have got the right area.
   Mr. Griffiths, could you just point on the model to the
   concourse area? Would you just have a look so that we
   are sure? It is that area there. That area is the one
   I am interested in? - A. Yes, sir, I would agree with
   that.

Q. You worked in there? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                                  3

                                                D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. You know there is a tunnel which leads to the centre? -
   A. I know it vesry well, yes, sir.

Q. There are various other ways round to the south.  Do
   you know from your knowledge, not what you have been
   told, whether that tunnel was ever sealed off by
   closing doors or in any other way to divert fans? - A.
   I have seen the tunnel sealed off, sir, with the doors.

Q. Tell me the sort of situations where that might have
   happened? - A. I can only repeat what I have just said,
   sir, the mid eighties.

Q. That was the actual timing. What I am interested in is
   when would the tunnel have been sealed off. Would it
   have been done when the centre pens were not being used
   or what other reasons might there be for sealing the
   tunnel? - A. The only conceivable reason that I can
   see, sir, for sealing the tunnel off is that that
   section of the ground is full.

Q. Did you yourself ever seal the tunnel? - A. No, sir.

Q. When I say seal, I do not mean hermetically seal? - A.
   Close the doors, no, sir.

Q.   But you saw it done by others? - A. No, sir.

Q.    I thought you had said that you had seen it? - A. I   had
     seen the doors closed.    I have never seen anybody
     physically do it.   I am not trying to confuse.

Q. In other words, what you are saying is that you do not
   know who did it? - A. No, I do not.

Q. So far as you remember on some occasions you have seen
   the doors shut? - A. Certainly.

Q. Did you ever see temporary barriers being put across
   the tunnel to divert fans? - A. No, sir, I have only
   seen the big blue doors closed.

Q.    It sounds to me as if although you saw this you did not
     know whether this was, because you never saw anybody dc
     it, whether this was part of a plan or whether it just
     happened.   Did you have any knowledge about the
     arrangements when that might occur? - A. I had no
     specific knowledge, sir, no.   I would have assumed it
     was something that the Club had organised at some
     stage.
                                                                 4

                                                D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. In other words, apart from saying that you saw it done
   you really know nothing more about it? - A. Nothing
   more about it, sir.

Q. Are you all right? Have you got a drink of water
   there? - A. I am fine, sir.

Q. That in fact was not your main task.  Your main task,
   as you have already indicated to me, was on the
   perimeter track? - A. In the last two or three years,
   yes, sir.

Q.   Does that mean that you were on the perimeter track   for
     the Semi Final in 1987, I think that was Leeds and
     Coventry? - A. No, sir.

Q.   That was not a match you policed? - A. I was on duty,
     sir, but I was in the city centre at the railway
     station.

Q. On that particular occasion you were not on the
   track? - A. No, sir.

Q. Were you there in 1988? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you remember that? - A. Yes.

Q. The Semi Final, the equivalent match? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Were you that year also in the same location at pens 4,
   5, 6 and 7? - A. Exactly the same place, yes, sir.

Q.    In 1988 then, if we just take that very briefly if we
     may, did you have any problems in 1988 so far as you
     can now remember? - A. If you could elaborate, sir,
     because I do not really understand "problems".

Q. Did you have any problems?    Did you have any crushing
   in 1988? - A. No, sir.

Q.   Did you have any injuries so far as you remember? - A.
     I remember that there was one young man injured his
     leg.

Q. Do you recollect how that happened by any chance? - A.
   There were two boys, two young men, who climbed over
   the perimeter fence as the football teams came out,
   somewhere round about five to three, and ran on the
   pitch.  It was not to do any damage or anything like
   that but just to see the footballers and obviously ran
   back to try to get back to their original positions and
   they climbed*the fence and one of them fell.
                                                                       5

                                                     D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q.   They climbed back in, in other words? - A. Yes,        I was
     told later on that he had been taken out by the
     ambulance.

Q.   We have heard from     a St.J o h n ’s man who also said that
     somebody hurt in 1988? - A. Yes.

Q.   So that would fit in with what you have just told me
     but apart from that, was there any other event?  - A. I
     do not recollect any, sir, no.

Q. That you can now recollect which caused you concern? -
   A. No.

Q. Do you recollect whether the pens were - how full did
   they appear to you in 1988? Remember that we are
   talking about 1988? - A. Yes, I would say they were
   full.  I cannot be any clearer than that.

Q. Were you    concerned about the people within the pens         in
   1988? - A. Their condition?

Q. Yes. - A. No, sir.       If I can elaborate, if it helps at
   all?

Q. Yes, please. - A. The boy who fell over the fence, who
   climbed up the fence and dived back in - of course, I
   was trying to arrest him - he landed on concrete.   He
   did not land on people’s heads if that explains.   There
   was ample space for him to hit the deck.

Q. That was more or less from when the teams were coming
   out because that is when he went out? - A. That is
   right.

Q. He wanted to see the players? - A. Yes.          The players
   were o u t .

Q. In 1988 and again we       are sticking to 1988 at this
   moment, all right? -       A. Yes, sir.

Q. If I had asked you to tell me what you were doing here,
   if I had walked round the perimeter track and said,
   "Hello, Mr. Illingworth, what is your job?", how would
   you have replied in 1988? - A. I would say my job is to
   look after the security and the safety of the football
   fans and nothing more.




                                      /Q. Again in 1988.
                                                           6

                                         D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. Again in 1988, tell me how much noise there was that
   year from the people around? - A. I understand your
   question, sir, but it is very difficult to answer.   The
   volume of noise at a capacity football match is
   extreme.  I don't what level it gets to.

Q. Thinking back to 1988, I am really just considering
   that at the moment, were you able in 1988, or can you
   remember now, being able to distinguish words or
   sentences or anything, or is it just a general noise
   that one hears?  I have never been in that position and
   I don't know. - A. I would describe it as a general
   hullabaloo.

Q. You have told me, of course, that when you were at the
   back of the concourse you remembered those gates being
   shut, though you don't know who .... - A. That is
   right, sir, yes.

Q. Or you are not certain why it was done, though you can
   hazard a guess? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Q. Do you have any knowledge of what happened in 1988?
   Were the gates shut in 1988, as far as you know.  If
   you don't know then say, "I don't know". - A. I have    no
   knowledge, sir.

Q. We are going to move now back to 1989, all right, and
   in 1989 you have already told me you took up the same
   position, basically, as in 1988, along the perimeter? -
   A. To the right of the goal, sir, yes.

Q. I think you took up your position relatively early on?
   - A. Approximately round about noon, sir.

Q. About noon, and I take it that at that point there
   really was not anything happening? There were very few
   people? - A. Very few, yes, sir.

Q. And I suppose you passed the time of day with the odd
   spectator? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Or anybody else who happened to be nearby? - A. That is
   right, sir, yes.

Q. You presumably had attended the briefing but would I be
   right in thinking that you knew your job because you
   had done it many, many times? - A. Exactly, sir, yes.

Q. Did you anticipate any particular difficulties for that
   match?  Forget hindsight, because we all know that
   there were difficulties.  What I want you to tell me is
   when you first started that morning were you
   anticipating any unusual problems? - A. No, sir.
                                                              7

                                               D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. You stayed, I think, in that location until about 2
   o'clock? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Q. Then you went off and had a meal? - A. Eventually, yes.

Q. Do you know what time you set off to go for your meal,
   can you remember? - A. I would say it was exactly 2
   o'clock.

Q. When you left at 2 o'clock what did the terracing look
   like to you at that point? Do you remember? - A. I
   would say, to be honest, sir, I was surprised how few
   people were in at that stage.

Q. That was your observation at the time as far as you
   remember? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it normal in big matches for the centre pens to fill
   up before the wing pens? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Because they are more popular, is that right, or why is
   that? - A. If I could elaborate, when the first fans
   came in on the Leppings Lane terraces at 12 o'clock,
   the earliest people went to the centre section.  They
   didn't go to the outer wings.  That is traditionally
   the most popular place to stand.

Q. So that is why the tend to fill up .... - A. Quicker.

Q. Quicker.  You then went off to have your meal.  In
   fact, there was a delay because for some reason .... -
   A. There was a delay, yes, sir.

Q. The canteen had closed for a few minutes? - A. There
   was a mess up, yes.

Q.   And in due course you did get yourmeal?     - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think P.C. Smith went as well? The pair of you went?
   - A. That is correct, yes, sir, we went together.

Q. Is it right, in fact, some other Officer had come along
   to take your place while you were gone? - A. I can't
   really answer that, sir.  I just went.  I understand
   somebody did take up my position but I did not see
   anybody arrive when I left. There was somebody there
   when I got back.

Q. Can you say what time you got back? - A. I can't, to be
   honest, sir, no.

Q.    How   long was the canteen shut for? When you got there
     what did they, tell you? - A. When I left at 2 o'clock a
     message came over the radio which was quite audible,
                                                              8

                                              D. A. ILLINGWORTH


     which said, "The canteen is going to close in 20
     minutes".

Q.    In 20 minutes? - A. In 20 minutes.    By the time I got
     there I saw the lady in the canteen    and she says,   I
     have just told you, we're shut for    20 minutes".   It was
     like the thing about the grey dog,    the message had got
     mixed up, so they were shut for 20    minutes.

Q. In other words, the message was wrong, they were
   shutting for 20 minutes? - A. Well, somebody got it
   wrong.  It might have been the canteen lady who said it
   wrong, I don't know.  Either way it was shut until 20-
   past-2.

Q.   Until what time? - A. 20-past-2.

Q.    Then can you remember what you ate? - A. Chicken,
     chips, peas, gravy and tomato sauce.

Q. The only reason why I asked that is because I wanted to
   know whether you had a proper meal as opposed to
   sandwiches. - A. Sorry, I didn't realise.

Q. So that would have taken you a few minutes, presumably
   to eat? - A. Yes, quarter of an hour.

Q. Did you have coffee or anything like that afterwards?
   All I am trying to find out is when you got back, that
   is all. - A. Yes, if I could try and clarify this, the
   reason I left the canteen was I heard a message come
   OVeri|the rfldio that said, "It's pandemonium in Leppings
   Lane".   That was what spurred me on to get back.

Q. You don't know who the message came from? - A. It came
   from the Police Control room.

Q. Do you recollect, apart from saying it is pandemonium,
   do you recollect whether it gave any instructions or
   directions of any sort? - A. That is the only specific
   thing that registered in my mind.

Q. So as a result of hearing that you decided you had
   better get back? - A. Yes.

Q. On to the pitch to see what is going on? - A. Quick
   sharp, yes.

Q. P.C. Smith went with you as well, did he? - A. Yes.

Q. Then you walked. I take it - the canteen was in the
   gymnasium,'wasn’'t it? - A. That is right, sir, yes.
                                                             •   ?
                                               D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. Then you came along and walked along the North Stand? -
   A. The back of the North Stand, sir.

Q.    The back of the North Stand? - A, Yes.

Q.    How d i d y o u get on to the front? - A. There is a little
     gate, sir, I would think 20 yards from the corner of
     the North Stand.

Q. I see, and you can get on .... - A. You can get on to
   the track there, yes.

Q. That is how you .... - A. Go down the steps, through
   the little wicket gate.

Q.    And you came out? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Q.    Of course, you were going back to your position? - A.
     Yes, sir, that was my intention.

Q. At pens 4 to 7, that would be right, wouldn't it? - A.
   I would say I was responsible for the right hand side
   of the goal.

Q. Do you remember whether the teams had or were being
   announced when you came out? - A. I can't remember,
   sir, no.

Q. Do you recollect seeing a beach ball being knocked
   about? - A. It is very difficult this, sir.  I have
   seen videos ...

Q. So you can't distinguish any more? - A. It gets very
   confused about what you can remember and what you have
   seen on a picture.  I wish I had not seen them.

Q. Well, water under the bridge.  The teams, can you
   remember whether they were on the pitch or not? - A. I
   would say they were definitely not.

Q. Definitely not, okay.       So you then went back on to the
   track? - A. Yes.

Q. You were looking in towards the crowd, is that right? -
   A. That is right, sir, yes.

Q.    Tell me what you saw at that point? - A. When I got
     back to the track I was still surprised how few people
     were in the terracing.

Q.    When you say   the terracing, the whole of   the terracing
     or ...? - A.    The whole of the terracing,   yes, sir.
                                                          10
                                         D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. Including the centre sections? - A. No, sir, I would
   say the centre sections were full.

Q. I see, well that is what I am trying to find out. Are
   you saying the centre sections were full but the wing
   sections appeared to be empty, or emptier? - A.
   Emptier, yes, to a great degree - not slightly emptier.




                /Q. Did that at
                                                       11


                                    D.A. ILLINGWORTH    •



Q. Did that at that point strike you in any way as
   surprising? -• A. It surprised me, yes sir.

Q. Did you draw any - you may not have done of course
   - but did you draw any conclusions or did you think
   why that could be? - A. I was surprised sir that the
   fans had distributed themselves in such a manner.
   I could not understand why everybody wanted to go
   behind the goal.

Q. Did you know how the fans were going to distribute
   themselves? I don't want you to tell me whether you
   had any function in regard to that, but excluding
   any activity of yours did you know how the fans
   were going to distribute themselves along that
   terrace on a capacity match? - A. I understand what
   you mean.  If you can go back to my duties on the
   concourse in years gone by I have always found that
   a fan will find some space in each section.  If he
   goes to a section and it is full he comes out and
   goes somewhere else and takes up a position there.

Q. And in addition to that sometimes the gates used
   to be shut you said? - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q. Which would have prevented them going into that
   section at all? - A. Exactly.

Q. You had no part to play with the organisation of
   the concourse area in 1989. That is right, isn't
   it? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. Having observed what you have just described where
   did you take up your position? - A. When I initially
   walked back on to the track I saw P.C. Helliwell
   who was stood directly behind the Leppings Lane
   goal.

Q. Do you know his first name by any chance? - A. I
   certainly do.

Q. What is it? - A. Hedley.

Q. Thank you. Yes carry on, that was just an aside.
   - A. I had a short conversation with him. The fans
   at that stage were comfortable.  He pointed out to
   me the fans that were climbing up into the Stand.
   They weren't climbing up from the centre section,
   they were climbing up from the North section.
   He brought that to my attention so I moved from the
   goal.  He walked back to his normal position in front
   of the South Stand and I walked to the area roughly
   round about Gate 5 where I could see the fans climbing
   up which they do every capacity match and I tried to
   attract the attention of a Policeman who was near
   the end of the Stand.
                                                          12


                                       D.A. ILLINGWORTH




Q.   Did you succeed in   getting his attention as far as
     you remember? - A.   No, the situation changed, as you
     appreciate.

Q.   So what was the next thing that happened or that
     occurred as far as you can recollect? - A. As I
     recollect it there was a great deal of pushing,
     shoving and swaying that was having, I would say,
     an adverse effect on the front.   Perhaps "adverse
     effect” is not strong enough, they were becoming
     distressed.  So I put a radio message over to say
     that there was a problem at the front and waited a
     few seconds for a reply.   I did not get one with
     the volume of noise and took the responsibility
     myself to let them out.

Q. Now before you tell me about that just tell me this:
   do you remember whether the players had yet arrived
   on the pitch or not at this point? I am not saying
   were they playing but were they there for their
   pre-match warm up. That is what I am trying to find
   out? - A. I can't help you on this sir because I did
   not see a footballer all day. That is dead honest
   that.

q . After you came back from the canteen did you sit
     down at all as far as you remember? - A.No sir.

Q. You did not sit either on the steps outside Gate 5,
   did you sit there? - A. No sir, I certainly would
   not sit on any steps.

Q. I think you are supposed to have a stool to sit on?
   - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q. Did you sit on that at all? I don't mean earlier but
   I mean after you came back from the canteen? - A. No
   sir.

Q. Definitely not? - A. Definitely not.  The normal
   practice is you remain standing until the match is
   under way and started and the crowd is settled and
   then you sit down to avoid obstructing the view of
   the spectators.

Q. Obviously at all big matches there are Press reporters
   and photographers? - A. Yes sir.

Q. On the sidelines there to take pictures.  Did you know
   any of them? - A. Perhaps one or two usual faces.
   Nobody I am particularly familiar with.

Q. Do you know somebody called Mr. Ellis? - A. Vaguely,
   yes sir.
                                                           13


                                   D.A. ILLINGWORTH



Q. Do you remember him being there? - A. No sir.  I am
   not saying he was not there but I don't remember
   seeing him.

Q. Do you recollect any conversations which you might
   have had with him? - A. No sir.

Q. You said - I am coming back to your story now ....
   - A. It is not a story sir, it is true.

Q. I did not mean it in that sense. What I meant was
   I had interrupted your flow. You say that you noticed
   that there was swaying and movement? - A. Yes sir.

Q. People appeared to you to be getting distressed? - A.
   Yes sir.
Q. Did you hear cries or calls? Where were these people
   who were being distressed, in which of the sections?
   —    They were at the front of what is known as Pen 4.

Q. When you first noticed this were you actually still
   at Pen 5 looking at these people who were apparently
   climbing or had you already moved back towards
   Pen 4? I know they are very near to each other. -
   A. Exactly.  If I am at Gate 5 I am at the side of
   the people, but I would say sir the further you went
   down towards the central radial fencing the condition
   of the people were worse than it was towards Gate 5.

Q. In other words what you are saying is as you got
   nearer to the gate of Pen 4? - A. Yes.

Q. So it appeared to be getting worse? - A. Exactly.

Q. As you were approaching the gate did you hear calls
   or cries in 1989? - A. Yes sir, definitely.

Q. Were you able to distinguish what was being said?
   You have already said you could see people were
   distressed but could you distinguish the sounds? ~ A.
   Yes sir.
Q. And can you say what sort of things were being said?
   - A. There were definitely words of "Help.  Get us
   out. We are getting crushed".

 Q. Have you heard that sort of cry - I don't know whether
    the word "cry" is the right word - but those sort
    of remarks at other matches that you can recollect?
    - A. No.
                    *

 Q. So this w$s very unusual? - A. Very much so, yes.
                                                             14


                                    D.A. ILLINGWORTH     .



Q. Was it at that point that you put the radio message
   through to say "We are having trouble" words to that
   effect? - A. Yes sir.

Q. You don't recollect getting any response.  Is that
   right? - A. I don't recollect a response, no sir.

Q. Does that surprise you either that you did not get a
   response or that you could not hear it or that you
   can't remember it? - A. It does not surprise me sir
   no because the volume of noise it is very very
   difficult to hear.

Q. So having not heard you decided you had better open
   one of the gates, is that right? - A. Gate 4, yes.

Q. And you opened Gate 4. What did you do. Tell me what
   you did? - A, I thought it was quite a simple exercise
   to do I could do it myself, was to evacuate a few
   hundred people or so and get them into the North
   section.  I could not see a problem.




                    *   Q. What I would like
                                                          15

                                           D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q.   What I would like you to tell me is how you set about
      doing it, if you can remember.  You opened the gate? -
     A. Yes.   I can remember it clearly, sir.

Q.   Tell me. - A. The first man out was a young fellow, I
     would think about in his early 20s. He had injured
     his leg and I sat him on the little wall.    The other
      people kept coming out and I tried to take them down
      the track to get them into Gate 5, where they would
      have been safe.  Some followed me.   I thought they
      were all following me at that stage.   I didn't realise
      there were some people going in the opposite
      direction.  I couldn't get the people who were behind
      Gate 5 to go backwards, so I ultimately had to take
      them down to No.6.

Q.   Let us just make quite sure about this, that we are
      talking about the right pens.  Can we have the plan
      up, 274. Hr. Griffiths will help you by finding it in
      that black volume.  Orientate yourself, find your way
      about. You can see the goal and you can see Pen 4,
      can you, that is the one to the left of the goal? - A.
      Yes sir.

Q.   Then there is the little narrow gap, which we call Pen
      5? - A.-Which is not, in actual fact, a pen.

Q.   Yes, and then we have got the next one which we call
     Pen 6? - A. That is right, yes.

Q.   Then we have got another one further on, which is Pen
     7? - A. That is by the side of it.

Q.   WhatI want to find out is when you  were taking the
     people, as you have just described, from Pen 4 and you
     said you were trying to get them into Pen 5 but you
     could not get them into Pen 5, did you mean Pen 5 or
     did you mean Pen 6? - A. I meant Pen 5 initially, sir.

Q.   But were there actually people in that pen?  - A. Yes,
     not many but there were people stood directly behind
     the gate,.

Q.   So what you are telling me is that you opened the gate
     to Pen 4? - A. Yes sir, left it open.

Q.   You   left it open? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Then you went off with what you thought was a
     crocodile of people? - A. A good description, sir,
     very good.

Q.   Towards Pen 5? - A. Yes.
                                     D. A. ILLINGWORTH

Could not get them in and went on to Pen 6? - A. Yes.

You are saying that   you never ever shut the gate at
all, is that rignt,   once you had opened it? - A. I
opened three gates - 4, 5 and 6 - and never shut any
of the three.

That is not to say,of course, that other people  might
not have touched them, but you yourself did not, is
that w.iat you are telling me? - A. Yes.

As you were taking the people towards --   A. Down the
track.

Yes, down the track, so to speak, had you noticed
another serial coming along? - A. Eventually, sir,
yes.

Particularly a serial led by Sergeant Swift? - A. I
can't say who it was led by, sir.

Do you remember somebody with an exceedingly bald
head? - A. I know Sergeant Swift;  I know he is bald.

That is a most convenient feature, if I can put it
like that. - A. Distinguished.

Because you can find him wherever he is? - A. Yes.

When did he first impinge on your consciousness and
his serial? - A. A serial impinged on my consciousness
I would think three or four minutes after opening Gate


After opening Gate 4? - A. Yes.  To be frank, I
thought, 'When is some bugger going to turn up here'
and I thought eventually, 'Thank God somebody's
coming'.  I remember them specifically walking along
the front of the North Stand.

He was accompanied by various people, including a lady
Police Officer who used to be known as PC Akred.   Did
you know her at all? - A. I don't know any of them
particularly.

Okay. Were there any other Police ladies, not men, in
the vicinity of Gates 4, 5 and 6 after you arrived
back from the canteen?   Between the time of you
arriving back from the canteen and you opening the
gate, can you remember any ladies? - A. Do you mean
from th^ goal to the north corner?

Yes, that is right, your patch. - A. There were no
Police Officers.
                                                            17

                                            D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q.   No Police Officers, neither male nor female? - A.
     Exactly.

Q.   You do not remember, as you now tell me, who
     accompanied Sergeant Swift, you don't recall that? -
     A. I don't even recollect seeing Sergeant Swift.

Q.   You have just told me that you remember he impinged on
     your consciousness, I think was the word you used
     because I put it to you, about four or five minutes
     after you opened the gate.  Did you actually see him
     then or not? - A. No sir, I said a serial impinged on
     my consciousness.  I didn't know the individuals who
     were in it.

Q.   You did say that, and I may have misunderstood it.   In
     fact I did misunderstand you.  I am going to stop in
     about three minutes so that we can have a break for
     coffee and so on, if you could just allow me to go on
     for two or three more minutes. - A. Yes, sir, fine by
     me.

Q.   When   you opened the gate and took your crocodile, if I
      may use that term again, you said you left the gate
      open. Were people at that point issuing out of the
      gate under their own steam, as far as you can
      recollect? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   The people who were following you, or who you thought
     were following you, in what state or condition did
     they appear to you at that point in time? Can you
     understand the question? - A. I understand your
     question perfectly, sir.  It is very difficult to
     answer.  Some were distressed, perhaps heading towards
     being tearful, sweaty and distressed.  I would not say
     at that stage they were gasping for breath.

Q.   When   you looked at them, that initial crowd shall we
      say, were you in fact at that point concerned for
      their safety in the sense of their lives? - A. I think
      it would be fair to say when I opened Gate 4 I
      thought, 'If somebody doesn't take some action quick
      time, somebody's going to get injured'.   I didn't
      think anybody was going to die at that stage.   I
      thought that later.

Q.   Do you know when you personally first realised   that we
      were not talking about a normal event? Well, it is
      never a normal event, but something quite exceptional,
      that people were going to die? - A. Do you want me to
      say what time it was?

Q.   Yes. - A. I don't know the time,   sir, I didn't   look at
      my watch, I don't know.
                                      D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Was it after you noticed this other serial coming
along, or before? - A. It was well before, sir, well
before.

Did you come back towards Gate 4 at all? - A. I
ferried people, sir, from 4 to 6. I was back and
forth, as it were.

Do you recollect Police Officers at Gate 4 at any
point? - A. Yes sir.

How many ferries, or journeys, had you done before you
recollected Officers at that gate? - A. That is a
very, very difficult question to answer.  When you are
under pressure time goes by like that (Click of
fingers) It is difficult to answer.  I would say at
least three. You know.the kid with the leg injury I
told you about, the first kid out of the gate, I put
his arm round my shoulder and we limped down to the
ambulance station and the ambulance people were still
there.

You mean on the corner? - A. On the corner, yes, the
St. John's station, and nobody had arrived at that
time.

      THE CORONER: We will pause for a few minutes.  We
will have our coffee break now - my quarter-of-an-
hour.   Remember, Mr. Illingworth, you are now on oath.
Technically you are still in the witness box.   Do have
a coffee, by all means, but do not discuss the
evidence.   You know the rules anyway but I have to
remind you.

     THE WITNESS:   Of course.

                (Short adjournment)
                                                 D. A. ILLINGWORTH


     THE CORONER:   Mr. Illingworth, I have just two or
three more things that I want to deal with.  You might
actually be able to help me with regard to the timing
when you returned on to the pitch by having a look at a
couple of photographs.

    MR. GRIFFITHS:    C.509, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Take the big picture because it
will be a lot easier.    I do not think you have seen
this one. - A. I have no idea.

You may have seen that photograph but you will not have
seen the enlargement.   You do not need to look at the
bottom one. Can you see there two Police Officers on
there? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Are you one of those?     ~ A. Yes, sir,   and PC Halliwell.

What I want you to do now is that once you have found
yourself now turn round and walk up to the screen ^and
show us which one is you and which one is PC Halliwell?
- A. That is me, sir.

The nearest one to us. - A. That I would say is PC
Halliwell.

It is not PC Smith then? Have a look at the big
photograph because it is much easier to see on that
than on the overhead? - A. I would say that that is PC
Halliwell, sir..

That one has got a clock on it, has it not?        Can you
see the clock? - A. Yes.

That says 14.52, does it not? - A. That is right, sir.

Presumably this had to be after you had come back from
your lunch break, that is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

We have got another one which we are going to give a
new C number to.

    MR. JONES:   C.511.
     THE CORONER:     What is the reference at the bottom,
Mr. Griffiths?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:    MP1/17.

      THE CORONER:    We have not got a nice enlargement
 of this one rand so it is a matter of looking but can
                                                              20

                                                D. A. ILLINGWORTH


  you see yourself on this one? - A. I would say, sir,
  that looks like me there.

Q. Have a look at the clock again? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. 14.54, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The one you pointed out was the Officer standing
   opposite pen 6, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think you call it centre north, do you not, but we
   call it pen 6? - A. Yes, near to gate 5.

Q. But between gate 5 and gate 6, is it not? - A. That is
   right, sir.

Q. Let us just put the first one back and let us make sure
   we have got the right identification.  Put C.509 up
   now.  The Officer you have pointed out as yourself is
   the one who is the one immediately outside pen 4, is it
   not? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The further Officer you think is PC Halliwell? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. The more distant one there? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you see any other Police Officers on that
   photograph at that point along the Leppings Lane
   frontage there? - A. No, sir.

Q. Will you please put the new one up, the second one we
   have just had, C.511? As far as I can see on that
   photograph you are standing outside a terrace which is
   pretty empty, would that be right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Now that you have seen it, are you in any position to
   say what you were doing in fact at that particular
   point in time? Does it bring back anything to you at
   all? - A. Yes, sir. As I explained earlier, sir, I was
   concerned about the people who were climbing up from
   the north section of the terrace into the stand.

Q. That photograph was actually taken around the time when
   you were considering that aspect of the matter? - A.
   Yes, sir, I would imagine so.

Q. It was after that that you then started going back
   towards pen 4 again? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The next two or three questions, I am going to ask them
   of you but they may tend to incriminate you and that
                                                                 21

                                                  D. A. ILLINGWORTH


  means you do not    have to answer   these if    you do not
  wish? - A. Thank    you, yes.

Q. I am not saying that they will but there may be a
   tendency. As you may or may not be aware we have heard
   both from PC Acred, or as she is now known PC
   Sosnowski, and also PC Hooson.  Both these Officers
   were part of Sergeant Swift's serial which came down? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Both of them say   that when they arrived outside pen 4
   they noticed that the gate      was shut and,   in fact, it
   was they who opened it. The question I want to ask you
   is this, and this is why you have to think before you
   answer because it may incriminate you this question;
   if they opened the gate how can one reconcile with your
   account that you opened it before they arrived and left
   it open? Have you any explanation for that? - A. I
   cannot explain that specifically, sir. The answer is
   obviously that somebody else shut it but I don't know.
   That is all I can say.   I was not there.

Q. When you were walking up and down as you have mentioned
   to me, say you walked once, took your people, and came
   back.  On your return, let us take just the one
   journey, can you remember whether the gate was still
   open or shut so far as you remember? - A. I never saw
   it shut, sir.

Q. You never saw it shut? - A. Not from the initial
   opening.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

Q. Mr. Illingworth, can I just take you back to the time
   when you used to be stationed on the concourse? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. You told the Coroner that you found during that period
   of your service that fans, you said, would find a
   position on the terrace and if one section was full
   they would come out and go elsewhere? - A. From my
   experience as being a Police Officer and a football
   supporter myself when I have been to a football ground
   and gone to a section of the ground that is full, I
   have found somewhere else to go. That is the point I
   was trying to make.

Q. Yes, quite. As a matter of experience I am asking you,
   when you saw that so;rt of thing happening did the fans
   appear to have any difficulty in being able to do that?
   - A. You meaa moving in the concourse area?
                                                              22

                                                D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. Yes, when they found that one section was full deciding
   to go to another one? - A. No, sir.

Q. One other question which I know it will be pretty
   obvious what the answer is but I need to just ask you
   it; during the all the time that you have served at
   the ground have you ever known, apart from this
   disaster, of any occasion when it has been necessary to
   open the exit concertina gates at the back of the
   concourse in order to relieve crushing outside the
   turnstiles? - A. Not in my recollection, sir, no.

Q. Likewise I know the answer to this is obvious but I
   just need to ask you; have you ever known a case,
   apart from this time, when a large group of people have
   entered the ground in a   body and pushed their way into
   a pen which was already   crowded? - A.   I have never
   experienced that, sir, no.

Q. Just one other question please, something about the
   Operational Order which   you will find in the black
   folder in front of you.    I would like  you to find the
   serial in which you are listed which is at page 19 in
   the Operational Order.  I would be grateful if you
   could just help the Jury about the reason for some
   instruction appearing in there which you have already
   mentioned.  I think the Jury have got a copy of the
   Operational Order.

        THE CORONER:   Yes.

Q. If they are not numbered this appendix b, subsector 1,
   serial 1, perimeter track. Have you got that? - A.
   Yes.

Q. This is your serial and you are No. 4 in the list, Mr.
   Illingworth? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I would be grateful if you could just help the Jury to
   understand why these words are in print in big type and
   underlined partway down the instructions.  Do you see
   the underlined section there? - A. Yes, sir.

Q . It says:

       "NO ONE IS TO BE ALLOWED ACCESS TO THE TRACK
       FROM THE TERRACES WITHOUT CONSENT OF A SENIOR
       OFFICER (EXCEPT TO RECEIVE MEDICAL ATTENTION)"

   I know that this appears in this particular Operational
   Order but from your experience, stationed as you were
   on the perimeter track, was that a usual order? - A. A
   usual instruction, yes, sir.
                                                               23

                                               D. A. ILLINGWORTH



Q. It is the ordinary kind of order which applies to most
   matches? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. As well as to this one and so it is not special   to this
   one? - A. Not at all, no, sir.

Q. Can you just help the Jury; what is the reason for the
   great importance which is being given to this
   instruction that no one is to be   allowed access from
   the track from the terraces? What is the history
   behind it which has caused such emphasis to be put on
   this point? - A. I do not really understand your
   question, sir. Do you mean why is it in capitals and
   underlined?

Q. Yes. - A. I do not know.   You will have to ask the
   person who wrote it.

Q. Let me just put it another way.  I do not know how far
   you will be able to help the Jury.  Obviously the
   people who wrote the order feel it is a particularly
   important thing in the order instructing people? - A.
   It would appear so, yes.

Q. Has this been a problem, do you know, in the past about
   people gaining access to the track from the terraces? -
   A. I think it would be fair to say, sir, that history
   shows that many football grounds have had their pitches
   invaded.   I think that is perhaps why it is written in
   that form.




                               /Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS
                                                           24
                                             D. A. ILLINGWORTH

                 Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS

Q. Mr. Illingworth, just one or two questions if I may.
   You were asked by the Coroner about the gate to the
   tunnel, the blue gates? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You told the Coroner that you had seen the tunnel
   sealed off during the mid eighties? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. But had not seen anybody standing outside them? - A. I
   can't recollect seeing anybody standing outside them,
   no.

Q. You had not actually seen them being closed, actually
   closed? - A. Physically, no.

Q. When you tell us about the    mid eighties, what time are
   you talking about? Do you     really mean *84, '85, '86,
   or only from 1987 when you    started as a Community
   Constable in "F"1 Division?   - A. No, sir, quite a few
   years prior to '87.

Q. So during the properly called mid eighties you were
   working in the concourse area? - A. Probably, sir.  I
   have done many duties.

Q. I wondered what duty it was that you were doing when
   you saw the tunnel closed? - A. My duty I would imagine
   would be searching the fans once they had come through
   the turnstile gates into the concourse.

Q.   But actually on the concourse   area? - A. Yes.

Q.   Could you help us how many occasions, and I know it is
     very difficult so nobody is tying you down to theexact
     number, but roughly, you would have seen the tunnel
     closed? By that I mean are we talking about once or
     twice, five or six times or more than that? - A. I
     would say a maximum of twice.

Q.   A maximum of twice? - A. Yes.

Q. On those occasions were those games small games, by
   that I mean where relatively small crowds were
   expected, or large games where capacity crowds were
   expected, or something just short of capacity? Can you
   help us? - A. I will certainly try and help you, sir.
   There are football matches when the away fans are
   allowed the whole Leppings Lane terrace ....

Q.   So we understand. - A. And nowhere else, and that
     section might be at capacity.   I don't know if it gets
     to capacity, I, don't know, all I know is when I pick up
     tomorrow s paper and see what the crowd is.
                                                          25

                                         D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. I appreciate that*  Now, you told us that the reason
   for sealing off the tunnel that you could think of was
   when the centre pens were full, but of course one of
   the reasons for sealing off the tunnel would also be
   when you don't want to use the centre pens? - A. I
   appreciate that, yes, sir.

Q. Can you help us as to the circumstances on the no more
   than two occasions when you saw the tunnel gates shut,
   or are you just not able to help? - A. I am able to
   help, yes, definitely.  The times I have seen the
   tunnel closed off, I think it was twice, was at big
   matches.

Q. At big matches, thank you very much indeed.  This would
   have been in the mid 1980s? - A. Approximately.

Q. Could you remember, would it be right that Mr. Lock
   would be in control at that time? - A. He may well have
   been, I don't know.

Q. Because we know that he finished in 1984/85. - A. You
   know more than I do then.

Q. So he may well have been the person in control? - A.
   May well have been, yes.

Q. Thank you very much.   The second matter I wanted to ask
   you about was this, you were doing exactly the same
   duty in 1988? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Q. Am I right in assuming that so far as preparation for
   that duty is concerned, in other words the briefings
   that you received, they were exactly the same? I don't
   mean the exact words used but the tenor of the
   briefings were exactly the same? - A. I have been a
   Policeman for 22 years; I can't remember how many
   football briefings I have been to; they all, I would
   say, had the same tenor, as you put it.

Q. But these two games were exactly the same, we know, the
   same teams? - A. Yes.

Q. At the same place? - A. Yes.

Q. Both semi-finals, both with capacity crowds? - A. Yes.

Q. Is your evidence this then, that you cannot now
   recollect any significant difference between the
   briefings you received in 1988 and those you received
   in 1989? - A. I can't recollect any difference but
   there may have been.

Q. You can't recollect it? - A. I can't recall it, no.
                                                         26

                                           D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. Thank you very much.  In the photographs you were shown
   by the Coroner we can see that the time is 2.52 - that
   is C509, and I think Sergeant Griffiths will put it up
   for us. We know that you are the Officer who is
   walking between pens 4 and 5 - that is right, isn't it?
   We can see you there? - A. It certainly appears to be
   me, yes.

Q. And you are walking past pen 4 at that time? - A. I
   would say I had just passed gate 5, heading in that
   general direction.

Q. I am sorry, I didn't hear you? - A. I would say I had
   just passed gate 5 and was heading northerly.

Q. I think you must have just passed gate 4, with respect,
   Mr. Illingworth, if that is you? - A. Sorry, yes.

Q. And you are walking towards gate 5? - A. That is right,
   yes.

Q. But walking across the face of pen 4? - A. Yes.

Q. We then see you,, and there is no need for the Sergeant
   to put up the next photograph that we were shown, at
   2.54, having walked past the face of pen 4, appearing
   to speak to either people within pen 6 or to, as I
   think you were telling us, Officers who would have been
   on the West Stand? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q.   Had you noticed any of the signs that you were later to
     tell us about, in other words people in distress in pen
     4, you would have done something about it at that very
     moment, wouldn't you? - A. I certainly would have, sir,
     yes.   I would say they weren't in distress at that
     stage.

Q. You heard no cries or shouts at that time? - A. I would
   say the general mood of the crowd, they were
   comfortable and they were enjoying themselves.

Q. So you go to the position that you were in at 2.54.   I
   don't expect it is possible for you to tell us how long
   would have elapsed between your position standing close
   to the fence, talking to the people up in the West
   Stand, and the time when you actually did notice
   something wrong in pen 4? Could it be four or five
   minutes, eight or nine minutes, two or three minutes?
   Are you able to help at all? - A. No,   sir.

Q.   Thank you very much.   The final point is this, Mr.
     Illingworth:  you say there came a time when you sought
     to radio to control.  The noise at that time as I
                                                       . 27
                                          D. A. ILLINGWORTH

   understand your evidence was horrendous? - A. Not my
   word.

Q. That is the word I am putting to you because that is
   the impression that you have given. - A. Sorry,
   horrendous is a good enough word.

Q. You said extreme but it all means well enough the same
   thing? - A. Yes.

Q. Not possible, I expect, for you to say whether your
   message ever actually got through? - A. Not possible at
   all, sir.

Q. Certainly you did not receive any reply? - A. I did not
   hear a reply.

Q. Thank you very much indeed.

               Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

Q. Hopefully, Mr. Illingworth, I will only have two
   questions.  The first is this, and I start by again
   noting that you are an Officer of more than 20 years of
   service, and that you have been to lots of briefings
   and done this particular job, and effectively as you
   have said in your own words, "I didn't really need
   telling what I was going to be doing", but you went,
   obviously to the briefings because you were an Officer
   on duty? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Q. You said, "My job is to look after security and safety
   of football fans and nothing more". - A. I think in a
   broad aspect that is what I am employed for.

Q. Did you need any senior Officer to tell you about what
   the word safety meant, in terms of policing, as an
   Officer of more than 20 years' service? - A. I go to
   Hillsborough Football Ground week in and week out doing
   the same job.  I don't need telling every week what is
   expected of me, I know, if that answers your question.

Q. It does indeed, and the second matter is just in simple
   comparison at the time, not now that we know of the
   dreadful events that occurred, but from where you were
   in 1988 doing that job which you knew well, was there
   anything for you in what you had done in 1988 that
   needed changing for 1989, before we knew what the
   events were going to be? - A. It is a pretty
   complicated question.

Q. Had anything happened *wrong or anything not happened
   right in 1988 .that made you, as an experienced Officer
                                                       • . 28
                                          D. A. ILLINGWORTH


   knowing his   job, say to somebody, "That's got to be
   changed for   1989"? - A. No, sir.

Q. Thank you very much.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Mr. Illingworth, you were not aware, I understand, that
   in 1988 the doors to the tunnel had been closed off,
   apparently because the centre pens were full, to divert
   fans to the side wings? You did not know that, that
   happened in '88? - A. I didn't know it at the time. I
   am aware of it now.

Q. That is exactly the sort of exercise which you
   understood would happen at a big match, if the centre
   pens became full? - A. It is an exercise that I have
   witnessed being done, not an exercise I would expect.

Q. Just as your experience of a big match, a big match I
   want to talk about is a big match where the whole of
   the Leppings Lane terrace, the whole of it, is being
   used by a set of fans, all right? - A. Yes.

Q. In your experience, you were talking about the mid
   eighties, if it were being used by the one set of fans,
   it could either be a league game or a semi-final game,
   couldn't it, for example? - A. Or any cup game.

Q. As far as league games go, and it were away fans using
   it, for the whole terrace to be used to capacity you
   would have to have some 10,000 away fans coming at a
   league game, wouldn't you, because it is a 10,000
   terrace? - A. I don't know what it takes, sir.

Q. It takes a lot of people, doesn't it7 - A. It certainly
   takes a lot of people, yes.

Q. In your experience, have you ever known a league game -
   I don't know you may have done - did you know league
   games where as many as 10,000 away fans came for an
   ordinary league game? - A. I don't know what the
   capacity of the Leppings Lane terrace is, so I can't
   help you.

Q. So be it, but certainly a big game when you have
   noticed, and you were identifying the exercise of
   closing the tunnel gates with big matches, the sort of
   big match you are talking about is a big match where
   the whole of the terrace was being used for one set of
   fans? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Just dealing w^th the briefing which you had received
   on the day in 1989, question number one, you yourself,
                                                       29

                                         D. A. ILLINGWORTH

   of course, were not in charge of the overall planning
   of the semi-final in 1989, were you? - A. Far from it.

Q. You merely received instructions and no doubt carried
   out your job according to those instructions? - A. I
   knew my instructions, sir.

Q. As regards planning how fans wouldbe distributed about
   the terrace, that was not a matter of your concern?
   The distribution of fans across the terrace, how it was
   going to be achieved, that was not a matter for you,
   was it? - A. As regards the planning, no.

Q. As regards what scheme might be in operation, you would
   only know as much as you had been told by those who
   were senior to you, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes,
   sir, that is fair.

Q. In 1989 do I understand it that you received no
   specific briefing or instructions to monitor the state
   of the terraces which you were looking into during the
   build up of the fans, and their arrival into the Ground
   before kick off? You had no specific instructions to
   monitor the state of that crowd for overcrowding, did
   you? - A. I think you are making suggestions now.  Mr.
   Duckenfield gave his briefing and certainly mentioned
   crowd safety.

Q. Yes.  Did you receive any specific instructions giving
   you a specific job in the position you were in, which
   was 4, 5, 6, 7, going past those gates, to monitor the
   state of the crowds on the terrace, looking
   specifically for overcrowding? Were you given any
   specific instructions? - A. No, sir.

Q. Were you given any specific instructions as to what to
   do if you noticed a marked difference between the build
   up in one pen and the build up in another? Had you
   been given any specific instructions as to what to do
   in those circumstances? - A. The answer to your
   question is no, but if I can elaborate, as I have said
   I have been doing this job for a long time, I don't
   need specific instructions.




           /Q. I only want to
                       i
                                                       30


                                    D.A. ILLINGWORTH



Q. I only want to identify whether you had any specific
   instructions that you had to communicate with
   anybody, for example you had no specific instructions
   to that effect? - A.No sir.

Q. So you were not given as a specific responsibility
   a job of monitoring the difference in the build-up
   of one pen compared with another? - A. Not my
   responsibility.

Q. Did you regard that as your responsibility? - A. No
   sir.

Q. Now let me deal with some factual matters which you
   can be helpful on.

         You left your position outside the terrace, the
   West Leppings Lane terrace at about 2 o'clock, I think
   you said exactly 2 o'clock? - A. Yes sir.

Q. At that time you had noticed and were surprised how
   few people were in the terracing at that stage? - A.
   Yes sir.

Q. Are you talking now about the whole of the Leppings
   Lane standing area? - A. Yes sir and the Stand.

Q. So do I take it from that that you would from past
   experience have expected - at the semi-final because
   you had been in 1988 hadn't you - you would have
   expected far more fans to have been already there at
   2 o'clock than who were in fact? - A. I would have
   expected more fans to be on the Leppings Lane terrace
   at 12.30 than at 1 o'clock and at 1.30.

Q. So certainly at 2 o'clock it was obvious to you that
   there was an unusual situation as far as the number
   of fans who had already arrived? - A. I was surprised
   that the Notts. Forest fans were outnumbering the
   Liverpool fans.

Q. And it was clear that there were a lot of empty spaces
   on the Leppings Lane terrace in the West Stand which
   you had not expected to be as many as that at 2 o'clock,
   had you? - A. It is very difficult to cast my mind
   back to 2 o'clock but to be truthful the answer is no.

Q. Sorry, what is "no"? - A. I don't know, I have forgotten
   your question now.

Q. Let me go back. You were surprised how few people
   were in the Leppings Lane terrace and the West Stand
   at 2 o'clock? - A. Yes, I was.
                                                         31

                                     D.A. ILLINGWORTH



Q. Let me put it simply from your observation.  From that
   observation if you had been asked at that time:  "Do
   you think a lot more people have yet to come to the
   Liverpool end?" you would have said "Yes", wouldn't
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. I won't take that any further. When you got back to
   that Leppings Lane terrace it was as a result of hearing
   a message over the radio to the effect of "Pandemonium
   in Leppings Lane"? - A. I specifically remember that,
   yes sir.
Q. You were asked by the learned Coroner where that message
   had come from and I think you said you thought it had
   come from Police Control? - A. Well it came over my
   radio and that is what my radio is tuned into, yes.

Q. I just want to see if I can investigate that a bit more.
   What do you mean by "Police control"? Who or what or
   where is Police control as you understood it? Where
   was Police Control situated? - A. It is at the corner
   of the Leppings Lane terrace and the South Stand.

Q. So you are talking about the Police Control Box with
   windows looking over the terraces? - A. Yes.

Q. And was it your impression from the radio message
   that the radio message had actually come from that
   Police Control Box.  Is that what you are saying to
   us? - A. Yes.

Q. You then got back to the Leppings Lane terraces and
   we know you were back there at least by 2.52 because the
   first photograph we have of you, C509, that is right
   isn't it? - A. That is right sir.

Q. And I suspect you may have got there slightly before
   2.52? - A. Possibly.

Q. Could we have a look again at   C509 please. What struck
   you at that time which was no   later than 2.52, was
   your observation that the two   centre sections appeared
   to be full and the side wings   of the terrace appeared
   emptier to a great degree was   your evidence.  That is
   right, isn't it? - A. That is   the truth sir, yes.

Q.    And    in fact one can see that on   C509, can't we.    If
     you look to the right-hand side of the photograph you
     can just see part of Pen 6, can't you? - A. Yes.

Q.   And    we can see wide open spaces   there.Is that right?
     - A. Certainly.
                                                              32


                                         D.A. ILLINGWORTH



Q. Equally if we look to the left under the scoreboard
   area, the Nottingham Forest illuminated sign, if one
   looks downwards one can see again empty spaces in the
   wing terrace which of course is 1 and then 1 into 2,
   can't we? - A. Yes.

Q. Can we look again then at the next photograph.  It
   is only two minutes later isn't it, which is C511 which
   I have not got.

             THE CORONER:   No, it is not in there.

q   .         MR. KING: We can turn round. We get an even
        clearer view don't we of Pen 6? - A. Yes sir.

Q. We can see the very many empty spaces in Pen 6?          A.
   Yes sir.

Q. The difference between Pen 6 and the centre pens, very
   clear to be seen isn't it on that photograph? ~ A. It
   is certainly clear to me.

Q. And if you look to the wing terraces near the Police
   Control Box.  I wonder if Mr. Griffiths can point that
   out. One can see empty spaces there, can't one?

              MR. ISAACS:  I am sorry sir, is he now saying
        that he saw them on the day from his position outside
        this gate or is he now saying from this photograph
        "I can see them". Two quite different things.

              THE CORONER: Yes, I think that is right.   You
        are asking whether he can see it on this photograph?

              MR. KING:   I am doing it in stages sir, yes.

              MR. ISAACS:  In which case, of course, it is not
        a matter for this witness whether he can see them, it
        is a matter for the jury.

               MR. KING:  Could I take it in stages sir and
        if my learned friend will listen to the questions and
        listen to the answers he may be helped, he may not be.

              MR. ISAACS: The question is whether the questions
        are proper questions or not.

              THE CORONER:  Indeed, I appreciate that.  He has
        given evidence that he had noticed spaces on the day
        at Pen 6.
              MR. KING: yWell sir he has gone further than that.
        He said, *yid I made a note, the "side wings" is what
        he said, He used the word plural, "side wings appeared
        emptier to a great degree" because I made a note of
        that sir.
                                                        33


                                     D.A. ILLINGWORTH



        THE CORONER:  You can ask him whether he can see
  spaces on that photograph.

        MR. KING:    I am obliged sir.

        THE CORONER: A photograph is a photograph.   I
  don't object to you asking the question on the photograph.

        MR. KING: Sir, I don't think I am the first person
  who has put a photograph to the witness in order to
  get his observations in line with his evidence as what
  he could see.
         THE CORONER:   Please ask the question.

         MR. KING:   I am obliged sir.

q . Forget about the photograph for a moment and let me go
   back to the beginning.  I am sorry if I am now going to
   be a bit longer than I otherwise would have been.  I
   will come back to it in a moment.

         You were surprised as to the distribution of the
   fans on the terrace which you could see when you got
   back there at the very latest 2.52.  That is right,
   isn't it? - A. Yes sir.

Q. That actually was a matter of concern for you, wasn t
   it? - A. I was surprised that there were still a lot
   of people to come in.

Q. But you were actually concerned, weren't you, because
   you had never seen the fans so badly distributed in
   that way at that time. That is right, isn't it? - A.
   Yes.
Q. And I don't want you to think that I am putting words
   in your mouth, you would agree with the expression
   that you were concerned because you had never seen the
   fans so badly distributed and you would accept the
   expression "so badly distributed", wouldn't you?
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. Don't look at the photograph for the moment because
   then we are not committing any sins. Tell us what
   you regarded was so bad about the distribution of the
   fans across the terrace which you could see when you
   got back to the position you have told us about at
   2 .52? - A. What surprised me and concerned me was why
   so many of the fans had wanted to go into the centre
   section and not the outer section sir.
Q. And it was quite clear to you that the centre pens
   were full,?you have told us that? - A. I would describe
   them as "full" but it is not like a milk bottle, is it?
                                                               34


                                        D.A. ILLINGWORTH




    Q. No, and it was quite clear to you which sections had
       empty spaces. Which are the sections you said had
       empty spaces? - A. The outer wings.
B   Q. You use the expression "wings",'which wings? - A. I
       did not go down to the bottom corner but from a distance
       I could see there was space in the outer sections.

    Q. Which corner are you referring to which you did not
       go down to but which you could see had empty spaces,
       was it to your left or to your right as you are facing
       the terraces? - A. There seemed to be a degree of
       room in the South section.
C
    Q. is that to your left or to your right as you are
       facing the terraces? You are looking at the terraces
       - A. To my left but don't forget it is a distance away.
       I can't say it is 25 squaae yards of free space.

    Q. You are talking about the area which is under and in
       the vicinity of the Police Control Box, aren't you?
       - A. Yes sir.
D
    Q. You of course were not in the Police Control Box,
       you had the disadvantage of being at around Gate 4, 5,
       7? - A. Yes sir.

    Q. But from that position to your left you could see
       empty spaces? - A. I could not say I could see "empty
       spaces". There seemed pro rata more room than in the
       centre section.
£
    Q. Right, we need not take that any further as regards
       that wing itself. The wing you were right in front
       of, Pen 6, and here we can go back to the photograph
       if we may, C511.  I am not suggesting to you to simply
       take your evidence from the photograph.  You see on
       the photograph, this is 2.54, Pen 6 don't you? Have
       a look at it behind you? - A. I have looked at it
       about five times sir, I don't need to look at it
F      again.

    Q. Does  that tie in with what you observed when you told
       us about seeing empty spaces in Pen 6? - A. Yes.

    Q. Does   that tie in with what you told us about was to
       your   observation bad distribution of the fans? -A.
       Yes sir.

G   Q. I want to go now to the stage when you have told us
       that you had been* concerned with people climbing
       up into the terrace and you had returned to outside
       Pen 4. Yoli told us you heard these cries of "Help.
       Get us out. We are getting crushed". All right?
       - A. Yes sir.



H
                                                         35


                                     D.A. ILLINGWORTH    .



Q. As I understand your evidence you had no difficulty
   at all hearing those words, they were very clear
   and obvious to you? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And they were words which was not usual, not something
   which you would have experienced at an ordinary match.
   That is right, isn't it? - A. That is correct sir.

Q. And you were able to see that people were distressed
   at the front of the pens, this is Pen 4, weren't
   you? - A. Towards the centre railings.

Q. Yes.  It was obvious to you, wasn't it, that people
   were being crushed when you heard the shouts of "Help.
   I am hurt.  I am being crushed"?

         THE CORONER:  Just a minute before he answers.
   You can ask the question but you I don't think need
   answer it if you choose not to.

         MR. KING:   Quite right sir.

         THE CORONER:  So consider the question and
   decide whether you wish to answer it and if you don't
   want to answer it you are entitled to say so.

         THE WITNESS:    I don't really understand the
   question.

         THE CORONER: Repeat the question.  This is
   bound to happen, I am afraid. I am sure you will
   understand.
         THE WITNESS: Rather than make a suggestion I
   would rather you ask me a question.

         MR. KING:  I will take it in stages.  Sir,
   not only do I not object, if I may say so it is one
   of your proper functions because it is difficult for
   me to carry out that function as well.  I am grateful
   to you sir.

Q. You told us, Constable Illingworth, that when you
   returned to outside Pen 4 that you could hear cries,
   words to the effect of "Help, get us out we are
   getting crushed". Those are the words you told us
   you heard? - A. That is correct, I did say that, not
   immediately after returning though.

Q. I understand. When you looked you saw people were in
   distress? - A. Yes sir.
                     i

Q. Now this j.s the question I am going to ask you which
   the learned Coroner has said if you don't want to
   answer it you don't have to, you can just say:   "I
   don't wish to answer it".
                                                        36

                                 D.A. ILLINGWORTH   -



      Was it not obvious to you that not only that
people in the position you saw them at the front
going towards the centre radial fence were in
distress, but that it was obvious to you that people
were being crushed? - A. No sir.




                     Q. Is it
                                                              37

                                             D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q.   Is it that you do not want to answer the question, or
     you are prepared to answer it? - A. I am quite
     prepared to answer it, yes.

Q.   In the light of that, and again you do not have to
     continue to answer these questions at all, you must
     remember that, could I just show you page 135 of the
     evidence you gave at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry,
     please, and I do repeat you do not have to answer any
     of the questions which I am putting.

          THE CORONER:  Can I just repeat this to Mr.
     Illingworth.
Q.   What we are going to do, Mr. Illingworth, is show you
     this page of the transcripts. You will remember you
     gave evidence before Lord Justice Taylor? ~ A. Yes.

Q.   Mr. King will tell you which bit he wants you to read.
     When you have read it, it does not matter whether you
     said anything at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or not,
     you are still entitled, when you are asked the next
     question, to say, "I don't want to answer it", even
     though you may or may not have said it at Lord Justice
     Taylor's Inquiry, do you understand? - A. I
     understand.

Q.   It is a bit complicated but that, in fact, is how it
     is. - A. Yes.

             MR. KING:   Absolutely right.

             THE CORONER: At which letters do you want   him to
     read?

          MR. KING:  It is page 135, from just above letter
     D, between C and D.

          THE CORONER: Start from letter C.      Read it to
     yourself.

             MR. KING:   It goes down to just below D, sir.

          THE CORONER: Just read it to yourself and do not
     say anything until you are asked.

Q.        MR. KING:  Mr. Illingworth, I am going to ask you
     a question first of all as to whether or not you
     accept that what you have read were the questions
     which were put to you and the answers you gave to Lord
     Justice Taylor.  Pause before you answer.   That is a
     question you do not have to answer if you do not want
     to. Thfat is the first question.  Do you accept that
     the questions you read on the piece of paper and the
     answers which are recorded are the questions and
                                                        33

                                         D. A. ILLINGWORTH

 answers which were put to you and which you gave to
 the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry? - A. I don't think
 I'll answer any of these questions.

     MR. KING: Very good, that is fine.   Sir, in the
lignt of that I do not think it would be proper for me
to try and get answers a different way.

     THE CORONER: I appreciate that.  I am sure that
is correct because I would have to stop you.

     MR. KING:   Of course. I do not want it suggested
that I have never put things, that is what bothers me.
I do not really want to say anything, but can I just
show you a page?

     THE CORONER: Certainly.      (Handed to the Coroner)


     MR. MANNING:   Can I make an observation, please?

     THE CORONER: Certainly.

      MR. MANNING:  It is simply this.  There have not
been many warnings given to witnesses, not that I
criticise that, but this is the first time a warning
has been given and a witness has decided quite
properly, as the law provides, that he wants to accept
that.   I do not know what my friend is about to do.   I
do not know whether any of my friends know what he is
about to do.   But just in case, would it be safer to
do it without the Jury being here, because I really do
not know what we are about? I do not want statements
being made and somebody then saying, "That was a
statement made behind

     MR. KING:   I quite agree.

     THE CORONER:  Let me read this back and then I
think that may be a good idea.

     THE WITNESS:   If I could assist ----

     THE CORONER: No, no, do not assist us.

     THE WITNESS:  I have refused to answer questions
because I am that confused.

     THE CORONER: What we will do, you leave us for a
few minutes, members of the jury, and Mr. Illingworth
you leave us as well for a few minutes.

   (In the absence of the Jury and the witness)
                                                     39

                                      D. A. ILLINGWORTH

     MR. KING:  The page I put to the witness was page
135 from the Taylor Inquiry, and that was where he had
been asked a specific question, whether it was obvious
to him that people were being crushed and he had given
an answer, and it can be seen what the answer is. He
said he did not want to answer questions about what he
has there said.  If he had been prepared to answer
that question, there were two matters I was going to
explore.  One was as it affected him but one also was
the general obviousness of it as, therefore, one can
get a piece of factual evidence, which may or may not.
fit in with other people's evidence.  But, sir, I
cannot do that and I am not now seeking to do that
because inevitably it is impossible in questions to
divide that up.

     THE CORONER: Indeed.

     MR. KING:   Because although it may have an effect
on other people, it equally has an effect on him even
though my specific question no longer would be
directed to him.

     THE CORONER: Yes, I understand that.

      MR. KING: So I am not going to continue with
that.   The point I have just raised with you - I do
not know if it is proper for me to say exactly what it
is I have put before you - is a passage from Mr.
Spearritt's evidence, one of my clients, who had been
in Pen 4 and one of his (I put it this way)
complaints had been, both in evidence and I understand
he has actually made a complaint against this
particular Officer so that is why it is important, was
that he had screamed for help in that pen and the
Officer concerned, who is identified in a complaint
anyway as this Officer, had ignored him.   In the light
of what he has said, I think it would be imoroper for
me even to raise it with him for him to say, "I won't
answer the question", but I do not want it to be
thought, and this is the difficulty, that because I
have stopped when I stopped, therefore, that is a
matter which has been abandoned.

     THE CORONER: I can see your difficulty because
you have got a problem in the sense that you have got
to be seen to be putting the questions, if I can put
it like that.  On the other hand, very correctly you
have also got a duty to the Court not to misuse that
when you know what the position is, and I can see your
difficulty there.

     MR. KING: What I propose to do is, I think, just
leave it at this stage. I do not think I can take it
                                                    40

                                      D. A. ILLINGWORTH

any further.  You, sir, for example touched on the
obvious possible contradiction - I say "possible" as
an interpretation - between the evidence of PC Hooson
and others and this witness.  For example, I have in
front of me specifically the evidence which PC Ilooson
adopted to us, his passage from Lord Justice Taylor's
Inquiry, in which he said he had to grab the Officer
on the track and ask him for assistance, if you
remember.  That is a matter which I would, in one
sense, want to investigate with this witness but
again, in the light of what he has said, I find it
difficult.

      THE CORONER: It is a very difficult problem
because it may be, as he said, that all he needed was
a break, putting it bluntly.  Perhaps we ought to loo:<
to you, Hiss Addleman.  Have you got any thoughts on
this?

     MISS ADDLE’IAN: Sir, only this.   From what I have
heard my learned friend say specifically about page
135 of the transcript, which has just been shown to
you, I assume from what my learned friend has said
that that page in the transcript now has no relevance
to his cross-examination of this witness.   I wonder
whether, in fact, any observation now need be made
upon it. Certainly my learned friend does not have to
justify himself to us, or indeed anyone other than his
client, as to how he adopts his cross-examination.   I
would like to know how my learned friend Mr. King
wishes to proceed.   When I know what he may be raising
with Mr. Illingworth, perhaps I will be in a position
to reply, but at the moment, from what I have heard,
PC Hooson's evidence is not going to be the subject of
cross-examination by Mr. King, nor is page 135
because, as you have correctly observed, sir, Mr.
Illingworth has quite properly been given a warning
and he has chosen not to answer questions, again quite
properly.  I wonder whether it is right and fair, and
indeed proper, to, as it were, have a second bite at
the cherry and pursue Mr. Illingworth about this and
see if he still relies on his privilege.   He has
spoken of some confusion, sir, at the present time
and, as far as one can ascertain, he wishes to stand
by his privilege.

     THE CORONER:  This is the one bit that concerns
me. Are you, in fact, saying that you would not
object to the question being put a second time, to see
whether, in fact, he does want to answer it or not? I
was not quite sure whether I understood what you were
saying tb me.
                                                      41

                                       D. A. ILLINGWORTH


     MISS ADDLEMAN: One cannot be sure, but Mr.
Illingworth did say he declined to answer any
questions and he then spoke of confusion.  I wonder,
in those circumstances, whether it is right to put the
question again.

     MR. PAYNE:  Sir, would it be convenient for you
to rise for a moment.  I think it might be possible to
resolve this matter by a short discussion between
Counsel.  It will only take a moment.

     THE CORONER:  Mr. King, I will return this to you
via somebody or other.  By all means let us do that,
because I am anxious that we should get whatever
evidence is proper and available without prejudicing .
people improperly and I am sure that is everybody's
attitude.

     MR. ISAACS:  After this matter has been resolved
hopefully in the way that my learned friend Mr. Payne
has suggested, there are certain observations I would
like to make about what has just taken place so that
we do not have to do this again when perhaps some of
the other witnesses come to give evidence, and I would
seek your guidance and your ruling about that at this
stage, or at least your guidance, if not your ruling.

     THE CORONER:  Guidance I would prefer, rather
than ruling.  I will rise.  Perhaps somebody could
communicate with me when you are ready for me to
return, and I take it you would prefer me to return
without the Jury.  You can tell me that as well.

     MR. KING:   I think so initially, sir.

                 (Short Adjournment)




                 *
                                                               42

                                                D. A. ILLINGWORTH


       MR. KING:  In the circumstances, sir, it is
  resolved that no further questions will be asked from
  my lips about the matter.

       THE CORONER:    Shall we get the Jury back then and
  we can proceed?

       MR. ISAACS: Sir, we have discussed this and I
  thought I would deal with my observations after this
  witness has completed his evidence.

                (The Jury returned into Court)

        MR. KING: Constable Illingworth, I have no
   further questions for you.

               C-mgR—Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE

Q. I do not want to deal with any of the events of the
   15th April but I do very briefly want to go back to
   your experience beforehand, the questions you were
   asked by the Coroner as to your duties at Hillsborough
   in the mid eighties.  That is all I am concentrating
   on. Do I understand from what you were saying that you
   had done duties all round the ground in the mid
   eighties stationed at Penistone Road as well as at
   Leppings Lane? - A. I would think, sir, from 1968 there
   is very few duties that I have not done.

Q. When you said that on the occasions when you were
   posted at Leppings Lane you said - the words you used -
   you imagined you were there searching people as they
   came in? - A. That was one of the duties, yes, sir.

Q. Can I just ask you to look very briefly at an
   Operational Order? I understand you would not have
   actually seen the Operational Order or any copies of it
   as a Constable, would you? - A. I saw the section that
   applied to me, sir, that is all.

Q. This is a different Operational Order from the one you
   have already been shown.

        THE CORONER:     Which one is this?

        MR. CATCHPOLE:     This is actually a match of 2nd
   May 1987.

Q. I realise it is outside your time actually on that
   concourse but I want, to use it as an example. We have
   had evidence about the system that was operating at
   that end of the ground. Can you hear me properly? - A.
   Yes, sir.
                                                                  43

                                                D. A. ILLINGWORTH



Q. We have had evidence about the system that was
   operating.  I just want to see how far your experience
   extended and it may be what you were going to say is
   that you had not done certain duties. Would you just
   bear with me for a moment? Have you got a copy of
   this? - A. I have not got a copy, no, sir.

          THE CORONER:   Give the witness a copy.   (handed)

Q.        MR. CATCHPOLE: We can see it is actually a match
     on 2nd May 1987.  It is Sheffield Wednesday against
     Queens Park Rangers and if you turn to the last page of
     the three that have been photocopied you will see there
     is a photocopy of the orders for Serial 7? - A. Yes,
     sir.

Q.   Do you see that? - A. Yes, sir, I     have got it.

Q.    It says "LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES    AND TERRACES" and it
     then goes on to detail under Phase 1:

         "PCs will supervise these turnstiles to prevent
         supporters taking missiles, drink, banners etc
         into the ground."

     Then it details what you do when you take something off
     them. Are those the sort of duties you would have
     carried out? - A». Yes, sir.

Q.    The last sentence deals with home    supporters.I do not
     need to deal with that because at this time we have
     other evidence that there was no home supporters at
     that end of the ground. Just turn back one page and
     there is a part of the Operational Order dealing with
     Serial 6? - A. Yes, sir, I have got it.

Q. It says:

         "Phase 1 (Before Match)

         Maintain order.  Ensure pens are filled in
         accordance with instructions from Control."

     Do I understand your evidence correctly that in all
     your duties at Hillsborough you have never actually
     carried out this particular duty of filling these pens
     in accordance with instructions from Police Control? -
     A. I have done duties on the Leppings Lane terrace and
     never carried out instructions, I don't think, from
     Police Control, no.
                                                               44

                                                D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. So when you were giving your answers to the Coroner
   about your experience in the concourse it was not in
   relation to this type of instruction? - A. No, sir.

Q. It was in relation to the searching at the
   turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

        THE CORONER:    Can we give this a number?

        MR. JONES:     Yes, sir, it will be C.512.

        THE CORONER:  Just so that we do not run into the
   same confusion as we did yesterday, C.512, and can we
   make the first page A, the second page is B, and the
   third page, not surprisingly, will be C.

         MR. ISAACS: Just to help me more than anything
   else I do not know if Mr. Catchpole can tell us whether
   this is a segregation game or it is a whole terrace
   game?

        MR. CATCHPOLE: Mr. Isaacs, I am sure everyone
   will remember.   There were home supporters on the
   terrace from about one match in 1986 and so for 1986,
   1987, 1988 and 1989, no home supporters and so despite
   what is said in the order, in fact, this match was one
   in which the whole of the terrace would have been
   available to away supporters. Whether, in fact, it was
   used I doubt since it is a Category C match and we have
   had evidence from other Officers about the relevant
   Category C.   It was a small match and they were
   expecting small numbers of supporters.

        THE CORONER: Hang on, I think you are wrong.   I
   would have to look it up. Mr. Lock said that but I
   thought Category C was the largest of the group.  Have
   I got it wrong?

        MR. ISAACS:     No, A is the largest or most
   complicated.

        THE CORONER:     In that case Mr. Catchpole is, of
   course, correct.

        MR. ISAACS: This may not be a segregation game
   but we do not know whether it is a whole terrace game
   because it may just be a part of the terrace.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:  I am quite happy to say that I was
   not putting it on the basis of a whole terrace game
   because we have had evidence about the different
   systems emplpyed. What I was asking is whether this
   Officer in the light of the questions asked of him had
                                                              45

                                               D. A. ILLINGWORTH


     had any experience himself of filling those pens in
     accordance with Control because that gives the measure
     of how much help he can be to the Jury.

                 rrfigg-Rvamined bv MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Officer, you were in Serial 1 on the 15th April 1989? -
   A. That is correct, yes.

Q. You were one of 20 Officers that day under Sergeant
   Chapman, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. So compared with the other serials in the Operational
   Order that was a particularly large serial, wasn't
   it? - A. It was, in fact, two serials.

Q. If you would turn to page 19 of the Operational Order
   please. - A. I understand the point you are getting to.
   A serial consists of 10 Officers, doubled up it might
   be called one serial but in actual fact it is two.

Q. Have you got that? Under Serial 1 there are the names
   of 20 Officers and underneath it says Serial 2 and
   there is a list there of 10, isn't there? - A. Yes.

Q. Could we look at photograph C.511 please again?
   (photograph put on screen) I believe you said you were
   on that photograph, Office? - A. Yes.

Q. Would you mind showing me again please where you were
   on it? - A. I think that is me there.

Q. Where is that exactly please?    Is it near a gate? - A.
   It is in front of pen 6.

Q. Before you move away, I believe there are other
   Officers along there and I think you mentioned PC
   Halliwell, didn't you? - A. Not in that picture, no.

Q. Not in that one. Would you know the names of the
   Officers on that photograph there? - A. Well, my eyes
   are not spot on, I can tell you that. That appears to
   be a colleague of mine called Smith.   Other than I
   cannot see anybody else.

          THE CORONER: Did he say he could only see the one
     Officer or did he name him? I did not hear. "A
     colleague of mine".

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:  I thought you said PC Smith? - A.
     PC Smith, I think it is.  I do not know.
                                                                   46

                                                    D. A. ILLINGWORTH


    Q. That area is covering from pen 6 to where we can see at
       the very end.  Is that the end of pen 1 there?   Yes, I
       think I can see the Control Box an it? - A. Yes, you
B      can see the Control Box.

    Q. So it is showing the whole of Leppings Lane really,
       isn't it? - A. It is only showing a small section.

              THE CORONER:   It does not show pen 7 or the north
         west terrace.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:  So in that area we can only see you
         and PC Smith? - A. If that is PC Smith.

    Q. That is almost the whole length of the Leppings Lane
       terrace as we know.  The 20 Officers mentioned in
       Serial 1 was supposed to be spread out in equal
       distances around the whole of the ground, weren't they?
       Do you know how this was to be arranged? - A. They were
       supposed to be spread equidistant, yes.

    Q. How much of a distance would there be between each
       Officer if there were 20 of them? - A. As you can see
       from that photograph Police Constable Smith and myself
       evened ourselves out.  He went left and I went right.
       We did not pace it out exactly.

    Q. The others would be positioned at the south, north,
       east end of the ground, wouldn't they? - A. That is
       correct, yes.

    Q.   Do you know where Sergeant Chapman was when you were
         standing in that area? Have you any idea where he was?
         - A. I do not know for definite where he was but I
         would imagine it would be around the players' tunnel.
         That is his usual station as it was.

    Q.   But you did not see him? - A. I saw him earlier on in
         the day.  I went looking for him at that time.

    Q. What time did you see him if you can remember please? -
       A. The last time I recollect seeing Sergeant Chapman
       was at two o'clock when I went for my meal.

    Q. Could we turn to page 19 of the Operational Order again
       please and would you mind reading under where it says
       "Phases 1 and 2" please, where it starts "20 Police
       Constables"? - A. Yes, I can see it.

    Q. Would you mind reading that please?     Read it out that
       section?




H
                                                              47

                                               D- A. ILLINGWORTH


Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, I do not mind. Are you happy
     to read it out? - A. Well, I can read, sir.

Q. Good, I know you can. - A. It says:

        "Twenty Police Constables - perimeter track
        (Equidistant spread around ground).  The
        Sergeant will remain in the vicinity of the
        players' tunnel throughout this duty and the
        Officers on the track will follow his example
        by standing and facing the crowd at the
        following times:-

         Before kick-off, half-time and full-time and
         also during any stoppage of play or when there
         is any crowd unrest.  This will be indicated
         during the game and shortly before half and
         full-time by the sergeant leaving the players'
         tunnel and standing near the touch line.
         Particular attention should be paid to prevent
         any person climbing the fence to gain access to
         the ground. The gates must remain bolted at
         all times except when in use."




                                 /Q. That is enough.
S'

                                                                   •   . 48
                                                     D. A. ILLINGWORTH


         Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, that is enough.   Thank you.
              Now, you said you saw Sergeant Chapman at 2 o'clock but
              you did not see him just before the game was supposed
              to kick off, did you? - A. I don't recollect seeing
     B        him, no.  I did not look in that direction.   I was
              coming round from the north, the totally opposite side
              of the Ground.

         Q. When you were reading it said you would follow Sergeant
            Chapman's example by facing the crowd before kick-off.
            I was wondering if that had been done?

                   THE CORONER:   That is exactly what he told us.
              Forgive me, Mrs. McBrien, that was almost the first
              thing he said. He said, "I didn't see a single player
              because I was facing the crowd".  That is precisely
              what he said. Are you saying that he should have been
              facing the other way?

         Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   It is confusing me now, because I
              am wondering how you would know when to face the crowd
              if you did not know when the kick-off was going to take
              place.  That is what is confusing me. - A. I understand
              your question, Mrs. McBrien.  If I can explain it,
              prior to kick-off you face the crowd.  Once the game
              starts the crowd settles, you sit down, and then you
              can see such as Sergeant Chapman.

         Q. What I was wondering is did Sergeant Chapman do this
            first? Did he give you the lead to face the crowd?
            Did you see him doing that first and then you followed
            his example? - A. I have just explained I did not see
            him so I don't know which direction he was looking in.
            I was looking at the crowd.

         Q. Did you know when kick-off was going to take place? -
            A. I believe it was 3 o'clock.

         Q. Or were you just facing the crowd and you were not
            aware of what was happening at all on the pitch? - A.
            That is correct, yes.

         Q. So you did not see a footballer at all that day? - A.
            Not a one.

         Q. You said you opened the perimeter gate 4, the perimeter
            gate in the fence.  Now, had you had consent from a
            senior Officer to do that.

                   THE CORONER:    I am sorry, what did you say?       I
              did not hear you.
                                    «
                   MRS. McBRJEN:   I said:




     H
                                                        .   49

                                           D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. Now, you said you opened the perimeter gate 4. Had you
   had consent from a senior Officer to do that? - A. No.

Q. I would like to refer to the Operational Order again,
   please, the same page, and the part that is underlined.
   Would you read that please? - A.

          "No one is to be allowed access to the track from
          the terraces without consent of a senior Officer
          (except to receive medical attention)."

Q. Thank you.  So you decided on your own initiative to
   open the gate without any instructions from anywhere? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Why did you do that, please? - A. To help evacuate
   people.

Q. Was it to take them to another pen? - A. That is right,
   yes.

Q. I think it was pen 6, you said, was it? - A. That is
   where I eventually ended up at, yes.

Q. Did you achieve that? - A. To some degree of success,
   yes.

Q. Do you know what time it was? - A. No, ma'am.

Q. The fan that was injured, I believe one was injured and
   you personally took that fan along to where the
   ambulance was? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   He did not say the ambulance - he
     means the St. John's people on the corner:

Q. That is right, isn't it? - A. That is right, the St.
   John's Ambulance Station, rather than an ambulance.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Did that fan receive medical
     attention? - A. They certainly took charge of him.
     What exactly they did to him I don't know, I just left.

Q. Did you know that fan was injured before you opened the
   gate or did you discover it after you had opened the
   gate? - A. I discovered it after I had opened the gate
   because he was limping badly. That is why I sat him on
   the wall.

Q. The part that you read to me before was:

          "No one is to be ‘allowed access to the track from
          the terrapes without consent of a senior Officer
          (except to receive medical attention."
                                                            • -50
                                              D. A. ILLINGWORTH

     That is why I asked you that question.  You were not
     aware that anybody needed medical attention before you
     opened the gate, that is what you have said? - A. I was
     aware, Mrs. McBrien, if the situation was to develop
     any further that there were going to be injuries.

Q.    Yes. You said you saw the central tunnel closed in the
     mid eighties on a couple of occasions? - A. That is
     right, I did, yes.

Q.   I have made a note that you assumed the Club had
     organised this? - A. That was my impression.

Q. Was this because it was not written into the
   Operational Order, that it was not an order for the
   Police, as you understood? - A. To be honest, I don't
   know what was in the Operational Order in the mid
   eighties.

Q. Were you there in 1988?

            THE CORONER:    Mid eighties, he said - 1985,   '84,
     '86.

            MRS. McBRIEN:    I am sorry:

Q. You weren't there in the eighties? - A. I was on duty
   probably at most matches, yes.

Q. Are you saying you did not see the Operational Orders
   then? - A. I no doubt did see the Operational Orders
   but I can't just recollect the wording.

Q. No. Now, this is a little puzzle for you. Would you
   agree with me that a room or an area is only full when
   the occupants remain there? In other words, that you
   are aware of the numbers who are going into that room
   before you know it is full ....

          THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien.  I don't think
     this is the right witness.  We have had plenty of
     people who have told us about this and I don't think
     that is one for this Officer, sorry.

          MRS. McBRIEN:      Could I take just a little point
     on that, please?

          THE CORONER:   Take your point and I will see
     whether I will allow it.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   If there is another access out of
     that room when doors are closed on them, if the Police
     say this is closed now, but there is access when they
     are in there via the radial gates, it may not be as
                                                        51

                                       D. A. ILLINGWORTH


ful*l as the Police thought it was when they closed the
doors?

     THE CORONER:   No, that is argument.  You are
doing a bit of my summing-up for me, perhaps, but it is
not a question for the witness.  I think I can see what
you are getting at but it is impossible for him to
answer it. He can answer it but it would not be of any
use, I would discount it straightaway.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   To me, it is like filling a basket
with water ....

     THE CORONER:   I know, but he is not the right
person, I am sorry.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   But you would agree that people
would be able to move from the sides via the radial
gates, wouldn't you, Officer? You do know there are
radial gates ...? - A. I know very well, yes.

And that for a capacity match such as the semi-final
those gates are open in the locked position, aren't
they? - A. They are locked open, yes.

So there would be nothing preventing people from moving
from the sides to the centre, would there? - A. If they
are in the area of the gates, no.

Unless, of course, there was Police control at those
gates preventing them going to the centre? Would you
agree with that? - A. You have lost me again.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, we have gone over
this innumerable times with I don't know how many
witnesses, and this Officer, wherever he was, he was
definitely not on the radial gates.  I think we can say
that with safety sodon't pursue it.    Move on.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Do you not wish me to ask further
questions relating to the tunnel doors then?

     THE CORONER:   No, apart from asking him, which we
have already done several times, as to whether he ever
saw them closed and he has told us that so there is no
need to go over it again.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   This was quite an important point
which I had discovered, which I would liketo ....

     THE CORONER:     Well ask it and I will see if I
will stop you.  I don't know what it is.
                                                             52
                                               D. A. ILLINGWORTH

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Ex-Sergeant Higgins told us that
     the tunnel doors were closed for the whole of the match
     in 1988.  That was his evidence.

          THE CORONER:   He didn't say the whole actually,
     he said he thought it could have been up to half time,
     but be that as it may, for a considerable period.

           MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes:

Q. Yet people have given evidence that it was extremely
   uncomfortable in the centre pens that year.   That is
   what is puzzling me.  If it was closed off so early at
   the right time, how is it people were in such
   discomfort that year? - A. I think you have got an
   interesting point but can I just put the question
   slightly differently?

Q. In 1988, think back to 1988, we have heard evidence
   from several supporters who were there, who said that
   the centre pens were actually uncomfortable in 1988.
   From your recollection of 1988, first of all, did it
   appear to you that the centre pens were so full that
   people were uncomfortable as far as you now remember? -
   A. I would say, sir, in my experience that people
   standing on football terracing at capacity football
   matches are in the main, in general, uncomfortable.

Q. And the second question, and this is really the point
   that Mrs. McBrien is driving at, postulating that the
   blue gates at the tunnel were closed, because Sergeant
   Higgins says that they were closed, did you see any
   movement of people into the centre pens from the wings,
   because if the gates are shut that is the only way in?
   Do you remember movement into the centre pen in 1988?

           THE CORONER:     That is what you are asking, isn't
     it?

           MRS. McBRIEN:.    Yes, thank you.

          THE WITNESS:   I will try and explain that as best
     I can, sir. At a capacity match when all the terracing
     is open, or there is access to it, the fans climb in
     and out over the radial fencing.

Q. So they ignore them? - A. Well they don't ignore them
   because it is a very difficult job to do, but they do
   climb over them.

Q. So there would be movement both ways, is what you are
   saying? - A. Yes. You might have somebody who has gone
   down the tunne,l and seen their mate over that side, and
                                      D. A. ILLINGWORTH


say, "I'm going to climb over and see him".   That is
the only way they can get there.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   So instead of using the radial
gates they just get over the radial fence, you are
saying? - A. I would say, ma'am, the majority of people
don't even know there is a gate at the top of the
radial fence.

That is why I was thinking it was so important for that
point to be emphasised, that there was a gate there


     THE CORONER:   No, that is enough on that.   This
is not for this Officer.




               /Q. I don't think
                                                              54

                                          D.A.   ILLINGWORTH




Q.            MRS. McBRIEN: I don't think we have seen anybody
        climbing over the radial fences until they were in
        great distress in 1989 though.  I don't think we have
        got any photographic evidence of that? - A. Well if
        you have not got any photographic evidence there is
        nothing I can do about that.

Q.            THE CORONER:  Did you see people climb over the
        fences in 1989 Mrs. McBrien is asking you? - A. Yes.

Q. Before you opened the gate? — A. No.

Q. Perhaps I ought to say before the gate was opened,
   Gate 4? - A. Not as I recollect sir.

q   .          MRS. McBRIEN: When you left and went for your
        meal that year, is it usual for another Officer to take
        your place before you leave your position? — A. In
        fcbrmal football matches you don't go for a set meal
        you get a sandwich, bag of crisps, an apple, something
        like that, you don't have a specific time to go.

Q. But usually would somebody be there before you would
   leave that spot? - A. I would e x p e c t somebody to be
   directed to the position behind the goal at Leppings
   Lane, yes.
Q. But you didn't see anybody? - A. No.          I saw somebody
   when I came back, Hedley.

Q. You did not know who it was going to be? - A. No.

Q. You said Police Control told you that it was pandemonium
   at the Leppings Lane end but when you got there there
   were no Police Officers there?
              THE CORONER: No, Mrs. McBrien, you have mis­
        understood.  Forgive me. What the witness said was
        whilst he was in the canteen having his lunch he
        heard over the radio:   "Pandemonium at Leppings Lane
        end".  He did not say that it was Leppings Lane
        terraces as Leppings Lane end, but he decided having
        heard   that that he had better go back and see what
        is going on.   That is right, isn't it?

               THE WITNESS:   That   is correct sir,   yes.

               THE CORONER: He took it that the message came
         from Police Control because .•.•

               MR. KING:  Sir, to be helpful to Constable
         Illingworth, he actually said he heard a message over
         the radio*  "It is pandemonium in Leppings Lane".
                                                          55


                                       D.A. ILLINGWORTH     .



           THE CORONER:  Oh thank you.  So nothing to do
     with the terracing, outside, but he decided he had
     better go back to his station for whatever reason.

q.         MRS. McBRIEN: Do you know what time you heard
     the message? - A. Yes, I heard the message ma'am.

Q. Yes, what time was it? - A. I don't really know.

Q. No idea at all? - A. I would estimate shortly after
   quarter—to— 3, something like that.

Q. But it could be any time? - A. Well it weren't
   10 o'clock at night, I know that.

Q. No, I am just trying to relate it to the kind of
   pandemonium. Was it the outside pandemonium or inside.
   What was it relating to is the question?      - A. WellI
   sat down at I think approximately 20-past-2 to have
   my chicken and chips.  I ate that, so it would be
   round about quarter-to-3.

Q. So Control was well aware of ....

           MR. MANNING:  I think there is an important
     point which arises.  I wonder if I might be permitted
     with Mrs. McBrien's and y o u r permission sir to establish
     that the radio ....
           MR. KING:   Well sir could it be done through a
     question?

           THE CORONER:  I will establish it. I know what
     you are driving at and I will do it right at the end.
     You can't ask that question anyway as to what was in
     the mind of Control,not of this witness, whatever that
     might mean "in the mind of Control".

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:  Can I ask:    did you recognise
     the voice? - A. Yes.

Q. And who was that please? - A. I am sure it was
   Sergeant Goddard.

Q. He was in the Control Box, wasn't he? - A. Well he
   must have been.

Q. I think we need to turn to the Operational Order
   again ••••
            THE CORONER:  I think in that case we had better
      have lunch because I thought we might have finished.
               r
                                       D.A. ILLINGWORTH



       I am sorry, Mr. Illingworth.  Have lunch.          Enjoy
it.   Be back here at quarter-past-2.

      MR. KING:  Sir, if we do get to another witness
today is there one you could identify to us?

       THE CORONER:     P.C. Packer.

       MR. KING:   Thank you sir.

      THE CORONER:      I am hoping that we will.    In fact
I intend to.
                      (Luncheon adjournment)


       THE CORONER:     Yes, Mrs. McBrien.

      MRS. MCBRIEN: Mr. Illingworth, would you mind
turning once again to the Operational Order at page 19.

       THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I am not going to
stop you completely but I am going to start cutting you
short.   If the question makes progress that is “
but if it doesn't I am going to stop it. All n g n t .

       MRS. McBRIEN: You read the underlined parts
 this morning to us.  It looks obvious that there was
 special emphasis put on that particular part that is
 why they are underlined. Would you a^ ® e; "
 don't know why it was underlined.  I did not have
 anything to do with it.
 Were you aware of a minor pitch invasion at the end
 of the 1988 semi-final? - A. Yes.
 I was going to ask you did you think that may have
 been the reason that this was underlined m the 1989
 Operational Order? - A. It may have been.  I have not
 got a clue.
 Now on the same page you will see "Emergency Evacuation
 Procedure" at the bottom there? - A. Yes.

, I am not going to ask you to read that but Mr. teamen
  when he gave evidence the other day he told us that
  if the tunnel became blocked for any reason it would
  take about 8 minutes to evacuate the centre pens but
  if the tunnel was left open and the radial gates it
  would take in the region of about 3 minutes ---

        THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, two things.   First
  of all you have got your figures wrong though it
  does not'actually matter for the purposes of the
  question.
                                                             57

                                        D.A. ILLINGWORTH



       Secondly, what is this witness going to tell you
 about what Mr. Seamen said?

       MRS. McBRIEN:  I was just going to ask if
 Mr. Illingworth would disagree with those figures.

       THE CORONER: He was an Officer on the perimeter
 track not an expert in evacuation drills.  You don't
 have to answer that question.  Next one please.

       MRS. McBRIEN: Sir, the reason I brought that
 out is because on the page the Operational Order it
 specifically refers to "Emergency Evacuation Procedure"
 so I thought that did apply to your Serial.  That is
 the reason I brought it out actually.

       THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry.   Perhaps
 I don't understand what is going through your mind
 but I can't understand how this witness can help you
 on that. Can somebody help me as to what Mrs. McBrien
 is trying to elicit?

       MR. CATCHPOLE:  It may be Mrs. McBrien is seeking
 to ascertain what the emergency evacuation procedure
 was and develop it from there. That is the only thing
 I can think of.

           THE CORONER:    Is that what you are trying to
     find out?

           MRS. McBRIEN:   Well I will leave it.

           THE CORONER:    Yes good.   I am grateful.

q.         MRS. McBRIEN: You told Mr. King this morning
     that you noticed that the fans were badly distributed
     on the terrace. Were you aware that it was absolutely
     essential to have Police control at the radial gates
     on the terrace to prevent such a situation like that
     arising?

           THE CORONER: You don't have to answer that
     question either. Next question.

           I have already explained to you several times
     that this Officer has told you he did not have
     anything to do with the planning; he was never on
     the radial gates; he was on the perimeter track doing
     various jobs which he has described, but whether
     or not he tells you it is essential or not what
     difference does it make?

           Supposing he says:    "Yes, it is essential" it
     won't make? any difference.   I can say that, you can
     say it, anybody can say it. Ask all the audience if
                                                           58

                                       D .A. ILLINGWORTH



  you like. They can say it. That is not his field.
  He is here to tell us what he did and what he knows
  from his own experience subject to the rules.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you, Mr. Illingworth.

        THE CORONER:    Mr. Russell.


               Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Q. Officer, you told us that when you returned from you
   lunch break you found that your position had been
   taken by P.C. Helliwell.  Is that correct? - A. Yes,
   P.C. Helliwell was directly behind the goal.

Q. I wonder if you could look at a photograph and I hope
   identify P.C. Helliwell for us. C344? - A. I am
   quite sure that is P.C. Helliwell.

Q. There is no need for you to go to the screen.  You will
   be able to work from a hard copy, a photograph in the
   album in the witness box. - A. C344.

Q. Thank you.  In that photograph we can see P.C. Helliwell
   doing the job that you were doing before you went for
   your lunch break, namely with his back to the pitch
   watching the crowd? - A. Yes.

Q. And we can see his position by reference to the entrance
   to the tunnel which we see in the top left-hand corner
   of the picture? - A. That would appear to be the
   entrance to the tunnel, yes sir.

Q. He is looking into Pen 4, isn't he? - A. It is very
   difficult to see the central radial fence but it appears
   to be Pen 4, yes.

Q. Well the central radial fence would be off to the left
   of the picture, wouldn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. This photograph was taken at 14-minutes-to-3 at 2.46.
   Now when you returned from your lunch break you
   described the state of the pen and the condition of
   the people in Pen 4 as being "comfortable"? - A. Average
   condition for a capacity football crowd, yes.

Q. You used the word "comfortable"? - A. Comfortable,
   yes.

Q. You told us when things did get more difficult, when
   the position changed, the position was worst in the
   vicinity of the gate to Pen 4? - A. Yes.
                                                            59



                                     D.A. ILLINGWORTH   '



Q. I would like you please to turn to C477 which is a
   photograph taken at the same time as this one.
   In that photograph we can see the gate to Pen 4
   can’t we? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Would you agree with me that there appears to be
     great comfort for the fans at the front of Pen 4
     around the gate to Pen 4? - A. Yes sir.

Q. That is a photograph which was taken at the same time,
   14—minutes-to-3. Do you follow? — A. I understand.

Q. At that stage we can see fans are comfortable but
   as I understand your evidence you d o n ’t know precisely
   the time at which you came back from your lunch? ~
   A. No sir.
Q. But when you did come back from your lunch one of the
   things you did was speak to P.C. Helliwell? — A. Yes
   sir.
Q. You have identified yourself in photograph C509 which
   was taken at 8-minutes-to-3 at 14.52? — A. Yes sir.

Q. Can I please be sure about this: you have identified
   yourself.  Have you got that photograph in front of
   you? - A. Probably but where it is.

Q. I apologise for making you chop about.    C509? - A. Yes
   sir.




                       *


                            Q. You are appearing
                                       D. A. ILLINGWO R TH


You are appearing behind the advertisement for Thai
Airways, "Fly Thai"? - A. Yes.

Is the Officer who is standing behind the hoarding for
CIS Insurance PC Helliwell, or PC Smith, or some other
Officer, or can you not say? - A. I would put money on
it that it was PC Helliwell.

So that photograph appears to have been taken at a
time after you had had your conversation with PC
Helliwell and are walking away in the direction of Pen
6? - A. Yes.

On your return from lunch and at the time of your
conversation with PC Ilelliwell you describe the
condition of the fans in Pen 3 as being comfortable? -
A. Yes sir.

We can see, can we not, in the front of Pen 4 at that
time that photograph was taken the situation was
wholly different from the situation that developed
later? - A. Much different, yes.

That then being the position at 8 minutes to 3, with
the aid of these photographs can I ask you to go on
two minutes to C511.

     THE CORONER: That is not in there.    That is one
you have to turn round for.

     MR. RUSSELL:  Perhaps I   could hand up a hard copy
because I think it is easier   to see. (H a n d e d ). At
that stage, Officer, you are   not looking at Pen 4, you
are looking up across Pen 6?   - A. Yes sir, that would
be correct.

You have identified yourself just behind the hoardings
advertising Bic Razor and Shop-a-Check? - A. Yes sir.

As I understand your evidence, that would be at about
the time you were either watching the fans climbing up
into the West Stand, or seeking to attract the
attention of Police Officers up there of that
activity? - A. That was the position I was in when I
was trying to attract the attention of Police Officers
in the West Stand, yes.

At that stage the condition of fans at the front of
Pen 4 is really, not materially different from that
apparent in the photograph taken two minutes earlier?
- A . I dq not think it was, no.

One can see in that photograph, and tell me if this is
what the photograoh shows, that a considerable body of
                                                              61

                                             D. A. ILLINGWORTH


     people in Pens 3 and 4 appear to be clapping with
     their arms above their heads? - A. They certainly
     appeared to be, and they were.  What time was it ta.cen
     this photograph?

Q.   This was taken at 2.54, I am sorry if I did not make
     this clear, at 6 minutes to 3.  A. I think at 6
     minutes to 3 the atmosphere was one of rejoicement.

Q.   One of rejoicement? - A. Perhaps rejoicement is not
      the right word.  The fans were in a happy mood.

Q.   Officer, it was after that, and some time     after that,
      that the position changed? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   And for some time after that, when you had noticed
     that the position had changed, you were a very busy
     man doing the things that you have described to us
     this morning.  I do not think it is necessary to go
     over those again.  But you do not know what others
     were doing that you were not watching? — A. No s i r .

Q.   What you can say is that a small number of minutes
     later you were aware of the arrival of other Police
     Officers? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   We can see from another photograph that those Police
     Officers appear to have arrived at 1 minute to 3, at
     14.59.  Sergeant Griffiths, could you please put up
     C326A.  Officer, if you could try and find that in the
     album, it should be in order. - A. Yes, I have got it.

Q.   In that photograph you see the time on the clock above
     the Police Control Box? - A. Yes, 14.59.

Q.   We can see Gates 3, 4 and 5, which are the gates
     visible in that photograph, are all open? - A. Yes
     sir.

Q.   We can see, can we not, if you look very carefully,
      there are a number of Police Officers between Gates 4
      and 5 on the perimeter track? - A. There appears to
      be, yes sir.

Q.    I have been able to count about 6 or 7.  How many can
      you make out?  It may be I could hand you a better
      quality photograph. — A. It is extremely difficult.   I
      can only make out one, but there might be plenty more.

Q.    Perhaps you would have a look at what I believe is the
      best copy available. (H a n d e d ) - A. I would say there
      are other Police Officers, a few Police Officers.
                                                           62

                                            D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q.   I do not think I need to take it any further than
     that.  I have one raore matter to cover with you,
     Officer.  You have been asked about the specific
     content of the material on which you ware briefed that
     day.  Do I understand this to be your evidence.   At
     the time of this semi-final in April 19-39 you knew
     what your job was when you were doing the perimeter
     track job, is that right? - A. Very much so, sir.

Q.   You regarded, or recognised, that your job included
      monitoring the crowd? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   That monitoring included monitoring the crowd in
      matters of safety? - A. Yes sir, fundamental.

Q.   In so monitoring the crowd for safety, were you
      expected to use your initiative? - A. I think as a
      Police Officer you are always expected to use your
      initiative.

Q.   Would you agree that in taking the action that you
     have told the Jury, opening the gate when you
     recognised that the situation had changed, you were
     doing precisely that, using your initiative? - A. Yes
     si r .

              Cross-Examined by HISS AD DLE MA H:

Q.   You have told us, Mr. Illingworth, that you opened
     Gate 4 in order to evacuate a few hundred oeople? - A.
     I thought an evacuation of a few hundred would resolve
     the problem.

Q.   Am I right in thinking that after you opened Gate 4
     initially and began to ferry people, from then on the
     situation became considerably worse? - A. Certainly.

Q.   When you initially opened Gate 4, have you any idea
     how many people were following?  Did you turn round to
     look, or are you unable to say? - A. It is a very
     difficult question for me to answer because when
     people are behind you, you don't know what direction
     others are going in.  So how many came out at that
     stage I honestly can't say.

Q.   You have told the Court of a serial coming along, it
     impinged on your consciousness about three to four
     minutes after you had opened Gate 4? - A. I would say
     that I had made at least three journeys alone before I
     saw a serial walking along the front of the North
     Stand.
                                                             63

                                              D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q.   What I would liice to ask you about is this. Do you
     remember whether any of those Police Officers passed
     you? — A. Yes.

Q.   You do remember that? - A. Yes.

Q.   When those Police Officers were passing you, can you
      remember now where you were? ~ A. Yes, I can remember
      specifically.  I was in the area of Gate 6.  Some
      joined me and some went round the back.  So I was
      aware of them going in that direction.

Q.   Can you recall now whether you    recognised or knew any
      of those Officers, or did you    just take no notice
      other than the fact that they    were Police Officers? -
      A. I never looked at them;  I    don't know.




                                        /Q.   You have told ....
                                                               64

                                                 D. A. ILLINGWORTH


Q. You have told us about at least three journeys that you
   made from gate 4 to gate 6, as it were? - A. Yes.

Q . Opening gate 5 in between and leaving the gates open
    prior to that serial coming along? - A. Yes.

Q. What I would like to ask you about is that after the
   serial had come along did you continue to ferry people
   from gate 4 to gate 6? - A. I would say at that stage
   there were people on the track that I was trying to
   move into the north pen, if you understand.

Q. The north pen being pen 6? - A. Yes.

Q. A difficult question I know, but can you recall for how
   long you were engaged doing that, taking people
   along? - A. I am sorry, do you mean throughout the day?

Q.   I mean from the time when you saw the serial coming
     along? - A. I would estimate I was on my own for about
     three minutes.

Q. For about three minutes after seeing the serial.  Are
   we talking about the three minutes prior to seeing the
   serial? - A. Three minutes prior to seeing the serial.

Q.   I am sorry if I have not made myself clear.  What I am
     asking about is if you can remember how long you were
     engaged in taking people along from the perimeter track
     and putting them into the north pen after seeing that
     serial, after those three minutes when you have been on
     your own? - A. I understand.   I would think
     approximately another five minutes.

Q. During that time did you do anything with any of the
   gates or did you leave them open? - A. I never touched
   them again.  They were all open.

Q. I would like you to look at a photograph which you will
   find in the black album in front of you and that is
   C.472.  Have you got that Mr. Illingworth? - A. Yes, I
   have got it.

Q. We can see, and can you confirm, two Police Officers in
   the foreground of this photograph? - A. Yes.

Q. First of all, perhaps we should get the timing right.
   It is timed in the right hand corner at 15.04 but we in
   fact know that is 15.03. - A. Yes, I understand.  Yes,
   I can see it.

Q. It was taken at three minutes past.  The Officer
   nearest the left of the picture guiding what appears to
                                                                     65

                                                      D. A. ILLINGWORTH


         be a young man in jeans and leather jacket along the
         track or the pitch rather, do you recognise that
         Officer? - A. He seems familiar. Yes, it is me.
B
    Q. It is you? - A. Yes.

    Q.    Looking at that picture, does it help to fix in your
         mind what stage of the five minutes that you have been
         talking about in fact was? Let me put that another way
         because I have expressed that question very badly.    Now
         looking at the picture does it help to fix in your mind
         any better how long you were engaged in taking people
         along to the north pen, pen 6, after seeing the serial
         coming along? - A. I would guess at three or four
         minutes.

    Q. We can see in this picture, can we not, the gate to the
       north pen near to the right? - A. Yes.

    Q.   The gate is open.   It appears to be unmanned by any
         Police Officer? - A. That is right, yes.

    Q. There are fans standing about? - A. Yes.

    Q. Two fans particularly are quite near to that gate, in
       the gate well, as it were? - A. Yes.

    Q. On that particular journey that you were clearly making
       in this photograph, is that how you had left that gate
       on the preceding journey that you had made to the gate?
       Do you follow me? - A. I follow you, yes.  I left it
       open.

    Q. You left it open? - A. I left 4, 5 and 6 open.

    Q. So far as you could see gate 6 was left open and indeed
       whenever you saw them gates 4 and 5? - A. Yes.

    Q. Tell me, did you leave gates 4 and 5 in this open and
       unmanned condition? - A. Yes.

    Q. As gate 6 is? - A. Yes, I thought the people - and I am
       not trying to be derogatory to anybody - I thought it
       would be logical for the people who were in distress in
       pen 4 would have sufficient time to get out and get
       into 5 or 6. I could not see a problem.

    Q. Am I right in thinking it did not concern you on that
       particular day and in those particular circumstances to
       leave gates open? - A. No, it didn't concern me, no.

    Q. When you heard cries of distress from pen 4 and
       realised that people were in some kind of trouble, what




H
                                                             66

                                              D. A. ILLINGWORTH


  did you do and how long did it take you to do it? - A.
  I initially put a radio message over to the Control
  Room to tell them there was a problem.  I waited a few
  seconds for a reply that either didn't come or I didn't
  hear it and then released the gate giving access to pen
  4 to allow the fans to come out.

Q. Would I be correct in saying that a matter of seconds
   after you recognised that people were crying for help
   you acted and opened gate 4? - A. The only delay was
   waiting for a radio reply which was seconds.

Q. We are talking of seconds? - A. Yes.

Q. Just to clarify - and you have already mentioned this
   point and I am sorry to repeat it - at that stage there
   was nothing to indicate to you how dire in fact the
   situation was to become? - A. I thought the release of
   the fans at an early stage would resolve the problem.
   I didn't realise it was going to get worse, couldn't
   understand why it was getting worse.




                            /Further bv the Coroner...




                       4


               t
                                        D. A. ILLINGWORTH


               Further by THE CORONER

Mr. Illingworth, I have almost finished but I do just
want to go back on something we did this morning when
we interrupted one of Mr. King's questions, and Mr.
King very correctly did not pursue it, but I just want
to pursue it slightly, because I want to sort out in my
mind that you understood what was happening and that
the response you gave was the response you wanted to
give, do you understand? Now, I am going to explain
the situation to you again so you can understand what
your rights are ....

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, I am sorry to interrupt but
I think probably a matter of law has arisen and I would
appreciate ....

     THE CORONER:   Let me explain the legal position
to Mr. Illingworth and when I have done that if
appropriate we will ask the Jury to go out and we can
deal with the issues of law, okay.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I think what Miss Addleman has
in mind is the very thing which you are proposing to
do. That is the reason for her intervention.   You will
remember that an incident took place ....

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I do remember that.

     MR. PAYNE:   As a result of which I think one of
us then suggested that the Jury should retire, which
they did, and I don't anybody will mind me saying that
the whole Court then adjourned for a few moments.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed.

     MR. PAYNE:   And thereafter the case has been
conducted on that basis.  If the matter is to be
reopened I think what Miss Addleman is signalling is
that this may reopen a whole new lot of things.  I am
not complaining about it, I am merely indicating that
is probably what will happen.

     THE CORONER:   Very well.  Leave us for a few
minutes, Mr. Illingworth, and you leave us as well
(addressing the Jury). We will sort it out.

    (In the absence of the Jury and the Witness)

     THE CORONER:    Miss Addleman, before you rise, I
have no complaint about what had happened at the
earlier stage, and indeed I think it was handled
admirably j.n every sense of the word. What concerns me
is that if Mr. Illingworth had merely said, "I do not
                                                     68
                                       D. A. ILLINGWORTH


wish to answer these questions", I would not want to
take the matter an iota further forward. What worries
me a little bit is that he may have totally
misunderstood what was happening, and what I want to
make sure of is that he understood what was happening,
that he understood the warnings which he was given, and
that if he wishes he can repeat what he said, namely,
"I do not wish to answer these questions".  If he says
that I am entirely satisfied.  I am also entirely happy
if he is advised as to what -- it is his privilege and
not the privilege of his legal advisor, but I do quite
understand that it is a matter of ....

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, so far as I am concerned I
am firmly of the view, and I am sure you take my point,
that Mr. Illingworth is entitled to make an informed
decision as to whether to exercise his right.  In that
event he must have the opportunity of seeking advice
and therefore, sir, I would respectfully suggest that
before any question is put to him of any nature by
yourself, that he has an opportunity of speaking to me
and hopefully forming ....

     THE CORONER:    Miss Addleman, I don't object to
that in principle at all. What I think is necessary,
if I may say so, is for me to repeat to him what was
happening, explain to him the legal basis on which he
can refuse to answer the question, and to say that we
will re-put the question, or we will re-put a similar
question to him and at that point adjourn so that you
can advise him.   I don't object to that.  If he then
gives me an unequivocal -- and that is the point, I am
not satisfied in my mind that the reply we got from his
was, as you put it, an informed reply.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   With respect, sir, that is my
point.  How can it be an informed reply if you take my
point that he is entitled to receive legal advice
before he forms that sort of decision?  If you ask him
the question he has no opportunity of seeking my advice
•   • • •



     THE CORONER:    No, I don't agree with that at all,
Miss Addleman, because first of all I have already said
to you, and indeed I am quite happy to preface the
question by saying, "Before you answer this question I
am prepared         particularly in this instance - I am
not saying that one would do it in every instance, but
in this instance where we have got slightly into hot
water, to say, "Before you answer this question, we
will adjourn in order to enable you to take legal
advice as to which way you want to answer that
question", .and I will then accept his answer.  I don't
                                                           69

                                         D. A. ILLINGWORTH


object to that but I do think we need a proper answer
from him, otherwise I don't know where I am with him.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, I can understand and with
respect I see the point you are making, and the anxiety
that you are expressing about the way in which the
matter was left.  Might I enquire of you, sir, that if
you are to ask this preliminary question, then adjourn
and give Mr. Illingworth the opportunity of speaking to
his legal advisors, are you proposing to ask the
question with the Jury present, then adjourning the
matter so that advice can be sought if necessary by Mr.
Illingworth?

       THE CORONER:    I think the answer to that must be
yes.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, with respect I would suggest
to the Court in as strong terms as I possibly can, that
that puts Mr. Illingworth in something of a cleft
stick, as it were, in terms of what impression the Jury
could receive from such an unorthodox procedure.

     THE CORONER:      With great respect, in what sense
is it unorthodox?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:    Sir, one can easily imagine that
one of the alternatives clearly is that Mr. Illingworth
come back and say to the Court, "I decline to answer
these questions".   Now given the way the stage has been
set by yourself, bringing the Jury back, asking the one
question, adjourning again so that Mr. Illingworth can
speak to me, coming back to Court and then giving that
bald reply, I wonder, sir, what is the worse of the two
impressions, either doing it that way or leaving
things, indeed, as they were left this morning and
resolved by all concerned by agreement?

     THE CORONER:    Miss Addleman, I am not concerned,
with the very greatest respect, with making a good or a
bad impression.   I am concerned in ascertaining what
his reply meant, and whether in fact his reply actually
meant, "I do not wish to answer this question , or
whether his reply meant, "I don't know what on earth is
going on".

     MISS ADDLEMAN:    I am sorry, sir, I have also
introduced another point into this argument and that is
one of inferences which the Jury could have from such a
procedure.  That does concern me and I am sure it
concerns all representatives, and indeed the Court.
One does not know wfiat is going on in a Juror's mind.

       THE COfeONER:   Exactly.
                                         D. A. ILLINGWORTH


     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, it could be absolutely
anything.  They may draw an adverse conclusion which
would be totally unjustified, against the Police,
against Mr. Illingworth himself, perhaps against legal
advisors.  One simply does not know, and I would
respectfully suggest that there certainly is no harm
done if you allow Mr. Illingworth the opportunity of
first of all speaking to me before you put your
perfectly proper question.

     THE CORONER:   I was going to suggest that
actually. I can see no reason why -- you know very
well what I want to do?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:    I do, sir, yes.

     THE CORONER:   And I think everybody knows what I
want to do apart from the Jury.     In fact, all I want to
do is ask him whether his reply meant what it appeared
to mean, namely that he wanted to exercise his
privilege under   the Rule. If his response to that is
yes that is the   end of the    matter as far as Iam
concerned.  There is no way I would press him to do
anything other, but if his response is, "No, I didn't
mean that, I do want to answer the question", then so
be it.  So I have now told you exactly what it is that
I am trying to find out.    Why don't we adjourn, subject
to Mr. Payne's comment, because I can see he is wanting
to rise, take the opportunity now before we have the
Jury in, because I do agree that if we have the Jury
in, ask the question, out they go, more discussion,
back they come, it does create the wrong impression, I
agree with that, but I see no reason why it is not
possible for you to advise      him.   It is not for me to
say what advice   you give, and it is up to him to decide
whether he accepts it, isn't it?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Of course it is, and I did say an
informed decision, which obviously must mean the
decision is Mr. Illingworth's, not mind.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, but I think if we do it
that way then I think it will -- as I say, I am not
concerned about what impression we leave in the minds
of the Jury, but assume for --- that is not quite true,
but what I am saying is that just because an adverse
impression is created is not necessarily something
which I should be concerned with, just as I don't have
to be concerned with making good impressions.   My job
is to try and establish the facts, but if one is
talking about impressions, if he sticks by his
response, let us assume that for a moment, in fact, the
impression pay be better than it is at the moment, but
that is not the basis on which I want to proceed, I
                                                         71
                                           D. A. ILLINGWORTH

just want to be clear in my mind that the answer he
gives is what he wanted to say. As I say, if he had
not attempted to qualify it, and in fact he attempted
it twice, because first of all he said, "I am
confused   and then he said something like, "May I
clarify?", and I said, "No, you may not", because we
were discussing the legal points, so he actually had
two gos at adding something and I think it is only
right we should be sure, but I am entirely happy unless
somebody persuades me otherwise for us to do it now, so
that you can discuss it with him, sort it out, explain,
make sure that he understands the principle of the
privilege, shall I say, and so that he knows the reason
why it is put to him.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:     Sir, I do hope that I can be
trusted to do that.

     THE CORONER:     I am sure you can.    Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, my only concern is quite a small
one.  It is with procedure.  Sir, may I just clarify
the position, that when Miss Addleman has given advice
and the case resumes, then do I understand what you
intend to do is to ask the question which you have in
mind, to get the answer and then that is the end of it,
and you are not intending to re-open a whole lot of
questions along Counsels row by that?

        THE CORONER:   No.  I don't know what his response
is going to be, but what I am going to ask him, I won't
even put the question, I am just going to ask him
whether the first part of his reply, namely that he
wanted to exercise his privilege and did not want to
answer the question, was that the part of the reply
that he wanted to stick by? If he says yes, end of
s tor jr. If he says, "No, I don't want to stick by
that      then I think it will be perfectly proper to
actually ask the questions, because after all he wants
to answer them.

     MR. PAYNE:     You intend to ask the questions, sir?

     THE CORONER:     I might as well do it myself, yes.

     MR. PAYNE:   That is all I have got in mind
because otherwise I can foresee that we may be re­
opening, in fact, the whole of his evidence.

     THE CORONER:   We don't want to do that, we want
to bring it to a cdose, and as I say, Mr. King, there
is no criticism of you in this whatsoever.  On the
contrary, i^ I may say so I think that you handled, the
issue, which is a difficult one for you, in the most
                                                    72
                                      D. A. ILLINGWORTH

admirable way.  It is just that I am not happy in my
mind and I want to be satisfied that we have not made a
mistake on establishing the facts.




                  /Q. Sir, may I try and .
                                                         73


                                      D.A. ILLINGWORTH



         MR. ISAACS:    Sir, may I try and assist as best
I can.

         THE CORONER:    Please.

      MR. ISAACS:  I must say that I tend to agree with
my learned friend Miss Addleman in relation to the
role of the jury in all this.

      I appreciate that you don't mind whether you
create a good impression or a bad impression with the
jury.  I am sure that is what you intended to say.
What I think may have come over was that you were not
concerned as to the impression that the refusal to
answer the question had upon the jury, and of course
you would be concerned, you must be concerned that
Mr. Illingworth's refusal or decision not to answer
the question does not have an adverse prejudicial
effect so far as the jury is concerned.

      That obviously is something that will be very
clear in your mind, if I may say so with respect,
because you would not want them to feel by exercising
his right he in some way was admitting some sort of
culpability.  Now that obviously is very clear from
everything that we know about the law.

      May I then suggest sir when we go through this
procedure whereby Miss Addleiaan goes out and gives
such advice as she feels she can and then we come
back in and you ask the question, that that is done
in the first instance out with the jury, and if in
fact he then says:  "No sir, what I said in the first
instance namely I don't wish to answer these questions"
you then are satisfied, the jury does not have to be
troubled by a further disinclination to answer the question
which may have an adverse prejudicial effect and it
can stop there.

      THE CORONER:  I know that sounds attractive in
a way but I think procedurally that is wrong because
what we are doing is we are splitting the evidence
between what I listen to and what the jury hear.

      MR. ISAACS:  Save for this sir:  it is not the
"splitting of evidence" because he would not be giving
evidence at that stage.  He would be merely for your
benefit making clear the stand that he is taking.

      If I recall correctly in the first instance he
said quite clearly to Mr. King:   "I don't want to
answer any more of* these questions" and it was only
some 10, 15 minutes later that there was then this
potential difficulty.
                                                    74


                                 D.A. ILLINGWORTH   .



      THE CORONER:  No, I think you will find that it
was seconds. If it had been a long time later I think
I would go along with you, but my recollection is that
it was within a very very brief period of time that
the first response came. "I am confused". I agree if
it had been 10 or 15 minutes later I don't think there
would be any argument about it, but it came very close.
That is certainly my distinct recollection.

      MR. ISAACS: Very well sir. Anyway I have made
the point I wished to make with a view to trying to
help.
      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, might I support the solution
which has been suggested by my learned friend Mr. Isaacs,
it seems to me that it has much to commend it.

      Sir, I note your concerns that the jury will not
be hearing the evidence which you will hear if
Mr. Illingworth comes into the box without the jury
being present, but sir one then has to ask the question
- other than the point which my learned friend Mr. Isaacs
has made - one then has to ask the question:   "What
is the evidential value for the jury in hearing
Mr. Illingworth say:  'I don't wish to answer the
questions and wish to exercise my rights against self-
incrimination'"? Does it add anything for the jury
and there is potential there for a prejudicial effect
if they should hear such a thing.  Sir, it is a matter
for you.
      THE CORONER:  I will think about it whilst you
are talking to Mr. Illingworth.  I will think about
this point and then when you are ready perhaps . if you
would indicate to me that you have had sufficient
time; we will come back without the jury; I will tell
you what I have decided on that point and then we will
deal with it appropriately.  Shall we rise then for
a few minutes?

                     (Short adjournment)


      THE CORONER: Miss Addleman, what I have decided
to do is to deal with it without the jury being
present.  Depending upon what the answer is we will
proceed from there because I don't know what the
answer is. That I think seems to me to be in the
circumstances the best and fairest way.

      MISS ADDLEJ1AN: So be it sir.  I know not only
myself but also my learned friends agree with that
course.  1, am much obliged. I am also much obliged
for you allowing me the opportunity to speak to
Mr. Illingworth.
                                                       75


                                    D.A. ILLINGWORTH



Q* Mr. Illingworth, all I want to do is to be quite sure
   in my mind that the response we got from you to a
   series of questions which Mr. King was beginning to
   ask you at the point when he showed you a page out of
   the transcript from Lord Justice Taylor is the reply
   you wanted to give.

         You will remember, and I will just remind you,
   that what happened was that I had given you a warning
   under in fact it is Rule 22 of the Coroners' Rules,
   which says that you do not have to answer questions
   which may tend to incriminate you and I tried to
   explain to you that irrespective of whether you had
   answered that question or not before Lord Justice Taylor
   you still had the right and the privilege here to look
   at it and say:  "No, I do not want to answer".

         When the document was put before you you looked
   at it and your reply was:   "I don't think I will answer
   any of these questions".   That was in fact what you
   said. Then there was a short interchange between me
   and various lawyers and then you interjected and
   said:  "If I could assist?" and I said:   "No, no, do
   not assist us ” and then you said:  "I have refused to
   answer questions because I am that confused".

         Now what I want to ask you now - these replies
   have left me confused - what I now want to ask you is
   this: are you saying in respect of the question which
   Mr. King was about to put to you that you wish to
   exercise the privilege and not reply? - A. Yes sir,
   I wish to exercise the privilege.

         THE CORONER: Okay, that is all we need to do.
   Thank you very much indeed.

         We will have the jury back in because I want
   to say goodbye to Mr. Illingworth with the jury present.

                 (The jury return into Court)




                   THE CORONER:   The jury ....
                                        D. A. ILLINGWORTH


     THE CORONER:  The Jury have asked me a question
so, Mr. Illingworth, I will ask you this question as
far as it is appropriate.  The first half is did you
see any fans climbing the perimeter fence, can you
remember that? - A. Yes sir.

Do you know when that was, can you recollect? - A. I
would 3ay it was approximately a minute, or maybe two
minutes, something in that region, from me opening
Gate 4.  It was after I had done my first journey from
Gate 4, to 5, to 6, I turned round and looked back in •
that direction that I saw there were one or two people
starting to climb the perimeter fence.

Did you react to those people when you saw them, as
far as you can remember? - A. I was pleased for them
that they were getting out.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Illingworth, I am most grateful
to you for being here.

     THE WITNESS:    Thank you, it has been a pleasure.

             JAMES’OSCAR PACKER Sworn

                    By THE CORONER:

You are James Oscar Packer, I believe, is that right?
- A. That is correct.

You are PC 2083? - A. Yes, that is right.

Before I ask you any questions, can I say that I know
you must have been the most warned Officer whom we
have had, in and out I do not know how many times, but
quite a few, and I am very, very sorry that that has
happened.  I cannot do much about it, but I am very
conscious that you have been like a yo-yo really for
quite some time, so I hope you will forgive me. tfe
are talking about 15th April 1989. - A. Yes.

I think you were part of Sergeant Swift's serial? - A.
Yes, Serial 16.

We know that that serial was initially stationed at
the Midlands Station and had various functions to
perform there, and when you finished you all got on
buses, or coaches, and were coming back towards
Leppings Lane, t>iat is right, is it not? - A. Yes,
that is correct.
        •

I am justi interested in this. When you carae towards
Leppings Lane, did you drive down Penistone Road North
                                            J. 0. PACKER


and then go round the roundabout by the garages, or
how did you approach the ground, do you remember? - A.
I don't think we came down Renistone Road.  T-Je came
down the back end and then turned right onto Leppings
Lane.

So you had been through the town centre? - A. Yes.

Where all the shops were, and so on? - A. Yes.

You are not a Sheffield Officer, are you? - A. No, I
am from Barnsley.

So you would not know the area that well? - A. Not
particularly, no.

We do not need to go through all the details, but you
finished up in the gymnasium? - A. Yes.

Do you know what time that was when you finished up
there? - A. I don't know exactly.  It was some time
2.50/2.55.

You were going to have a meal.  Some of you managed to
actually get something? - A. No, we did not get
anything.

You did not get anything? - A. No.

Because the   serial was summoned to go onto the tracic,
is that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

I think it was led out by Sergeant Swift, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Do you know  the order in which you went out? - A. I
remember I followed Sergeant Swift out, I think PC2185
Cooper, and then PC Taylor followed him.

So you were immediately behind Sergeant Swift? - A.
Ye s.

Would you agree with him that he told us that, in
fact, you exited from the gymnasium and then went
towards the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, in front of
the North Stand.

Is it right that he stopped on a corner? - A. Yes, we
stopped about the corner and he told us to spread out
across the frrfnt of the Leppings Lane end.

That is, in fact, what you did? - A. Yes.
A
                                                                 73

                                                      J. 0. PACKER


    Q.   Where did you spread out to? - A. Me being the front
         Officer, I went towards the far corner, towards the
B        South Stand.

    Q.   Before you tell me any more on that   score, can you
         recollect what was happening on the   pitch at that
         point? - A. At that point I seam to   remember it was
         about the kick-off time.  I seem to   remember them
         kicking off then.

    Q.   Was that as you were walking down, or when you already
          arrived? - A. It was just after I set off walking
          along the Leppings Lane, or as we were being deputed
          to walk along the Leppings Lane, I just seemed to
          remember the kick-off taking place.

    Q.    You obviously had to walk past Pen 4. -   A. Yes.

    Q.   Do you know the pennings, are you familiar    with them?
         - A. Yes, I am.

    Q.   I think you got towards Pen 3, is that right? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. Did you get any further than Pen 3? - A. Yes, I went
        past Gate 3 towards the end of Pen 3 with the
        perimeter fence, the internal fence.

    Q.    The radial fence? - A. Yes.

    Q.   What did you see? - A. In Pens 3 and 4,  as I walked
         across, you could see that both those areas were full
         and that the other pens either side, Pen 5 to that
         side and Pen 2 to the other side, were very sparselv
         occupied.

    Q.   Apart from noticing that the pens were full, did yon
         notice anything else? - A. Well, the crowd was very
         noisy.  However, there were some fans at tne front, as
         I was walking towards the end of Pen 3, that were
         shouting out they were being squasned and calling out
         to us.

    Q.   Was this in Pen 3 or in Pen 4? - A. This was Pen 3,
         towards near the gate area.

    Q.   Apart from yourself walking along, any other Officers
         in that vicinity at that time? - A. I think there were
         Officers on the gates and then our serial, that was
         all.

    Q.   Did you recognise any of those Officers?  Would you
         know who they were? - A. I don't know them, only from
         since hearing their names.



H
                                                             79

                                                 J. 0. PACKER


Q.   Since, I see.  If I said a name to you now you would
     know it, but it is only because you have learnt it
     since? - A. Yes.

Q.   It is not because you knew them at the time? - A. I
     didn't know any of t;he Officers.

Q.   Are you then saying that you were, in fact, the first
      Officer from your serial who got towards Pen 3? - A.
     Ye s .

Q.   You walked up to the dividing fence, in other words
     you walked past the gate? - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you recollect whether the gates were open or shut
     as you went along? - A. No, the gate was shut.

Q.   What about Gate 4? - A. That was shut as well.

Q.   Gate 5? - A. Shut.

Q.   As far as you can remember,   allof them were shut? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   You turned and faced the crowd, is that right? - A.
     Yes, I did.

Q.   So now tell me in your words what happened? - A. As I
     turned to face the crowd, to look into the crowd, near
     to the centre of Pen 3 I saw a man shouting out that
     there was somebody dead at his feet.

Q.   So what, if anything, did you do? - A. Iimmediately
     turned to my right, to PC Cooper, and shouted  -

Q.   Who had joined you by then? - A. Well, he was some
     yards to my right as I was facing into the crowd. I
     shouted to him to open the gates because you could
     also see at the same time that the people at the front
     were getting more than just squashed, more than
     average capacity sort of crowd.

Q.   What happened then? - A. The gates were opened and a
     number of fans came out onto the track, and I was then
     ushering them down towards Gate 2 and to the other
     pen.   I could see the same was being done at Gate 4 by
     other Officers, I believe Sergeant Swift and PC Hooson
     I can remember seeing.   They were doing the same sort
     of thing, taking people out to put them into the other
     gates.

Q.   When you say the gates were opened, who opened them,
     let us put it that way? - A. Three Officers, I think,
     went to the gate, I think PC Cooper, PC Taylor and it
                                                             80

                                                   J. 0. PACKER


     could be PC Smith or PC Tattersall went to the gate.
     There were three Officers around the gate and it was
     opened.  I can't say who opened it because I was some
     yards away.

Q.    You did not open   it yourself? - A. I didn't open it.

Q.   Because you were    a little bit further   down, were you
     not? - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you recollect the Officer who was on duty at that
     gate? Let me start again.   Did you have a radio? - A.
     Yes, I did have a radio.

Q.   Do you recollect whether any of the other Officers
     around that gatehad a radio?   A. I    can't recollect
     if any of them had a radio as well.

Q.   Does that mean that you did not see the gate Officer,
     I will call him whoever it might be - we know who it
     is, but the gate Officer - did you notice whether he
     was using his radio? - A. I couldn't say.  I couldn't
     say whether other Officers had radios or not.

Q.   As far as you are concerned, how often did the gate
     open and shut? - A. Gate 3.

Q.   That is what I am talking about, Gate 3. - A. I seem
     to recollect it shutting once, but that is all that I
     saw.  I don't know the reason why myself.  I thought
     initially that it was just to relieve the pressure on
     the people who were down at the bottom because it
     would give some relief by shutting it because they
     were getting squashed by people coming over the tops.
     That was just from what I could see.

Q.   Did you see anybody coming out of the gate and being
      put back in? - A. No, I didn't see anybody being put
      back in.

Q.   We have heard from several witnesses who have told us
     that the gate burst open and spilled out, and that
     some of the Officers pushed them back in? - A. I
     didn't see anyone pushing back in.

Q.   You did not see that? - A. Anyone that came through
      and came towards me, if they were struggling for
     breath I took them down either against the wall or by
      the advertising boards, and other people who could
     walk, I was telling them to go down towards Gate 2.

Q.   But you say you think you saw the gate shut once.
     Tell us a little bit about that. - A. Just as I was
     doing my other jobs I saw it from my eye the gate
                                                            81

                                                   J. 0. PACKER

     shut, but it was only for a matter of seconds and then
     it was opened again.  I don't know who opened it.  I
     wasn't there to say why it Was shut, but my impression
     was it was to relieve some of the pressure.

Q.   What would you say the time interval was from the time
     you arrived at the location --- A. At Pen 3?

Q.   Yes, at Pen 3, to you shouting to PC Cooper? What did
     you shout again? You have told us. - A. I shouted him
     to open the gates, to get the gate open. As I stopped
     and turned to the crowd, it was within seconds of my
     arriving at that point.

Q.   You think that kick-off had just taken place as far as
     you can remember? - A. Yes.

Q.   You are quite a young man, but have you policed big
     matches? - A. Yes.

Q.   I do not mean tiddlers. - A. I have been to the last
     two semi-finals - Coventry/Leeds and
     Liverpool/Nottingham Forest the year before.

Q.   So you were there in 1987 and 1988? - A. Yes.

Q.   What job did you do in those years? - A. 1987/88 we
     were outside the ground searching coaches, and then
     1988 we were in the upper West Stand, at the rear of
     the West Stand policing that.




                          /Q.   But you were not
                                                 J. O. PACKER


But you were not anywhere near the perimeter track in
either of those years? - A. No.

So you would not be able to say what they looked like
from that position in either of those years? - A. No.

When the gate was opened, how did the people exit, can
you remember that? - A. Running out and spilling out on
to the track in great numbers.

Are you saying that the initial exit, people were able
actually to get out of there under their own steam, so
to speak? - A. Yes.

Did that change? - A. Yes, but I was only there for a
short period of time.  The Officers who were on the
gate were trying to pull people out and that but there
was also people coming over the fence, coming through
the gates, past the Officers and like I say I was
escorting them down towards gate 2 or sitting them down
to get their breath back before they went back into
gate 2.

When you say you were only there for a short period of
time, is that because you moved away with these duties?
- A. No, as it was continuing I was then taken with
Superintendent Greenwood to go on to the pitch to stop
the game which I understand was about four minutes past
or five past.

Six minutes past actually. No, that is not quite
right, five minutes and some seconds. - A. Yes.

You accompanied him on to the pitch? - A. Yes.

Is that because he signalled to you? - A. Yes, he told
me to.  I believe initially in my statement I said it
was an Inspector but I did not really pay much
attention to his rank at the time.  I just did what I
was told to do.

At what point did you realise - you obviously realised
that something had to be done because otherwise you
would not have... - A. Yes.

At what point did you realise that this was going to be
a tragedy as opposed to just a situation that had to be
relieved? - A. I would not have realised the scale of
the tragedy until after, fully after the events
because, like I say, I eventually got further and
further away from the perimeter track with cordons
e t c ., doing other Police duties.
                                                        J. O. PACKER


Q. In fact, you were engaged with keeping people apart,
   cameramen and various other people? - A. Yes, sir, I
   took a few fans away from cameramen.

Q. I do not think we need to explore that.  You are quite
   satisfied in your mind that as you walked along or down
   Leppings Lane all those gates were shut? - A. Yes.

Q. The kick-off I think you said, had it started or not? -
   A. I seem to remember the kick-off taking place.   I
   could not swear that it had started or it was just
   about to start but I seem to remember it taking place
   as I said.

Q. One final question; when you came to the corner of the
   North Stand and Leppings Lane, is it right that
   Sergeant Swift stood still? - A. Yes, to direct us
   where to go to, to instruct us.

Q. He having been at the beginning of the queue so to
   speak, finished up you do not actually know where but
   behind you? - A. I then saw him later at gate 4, sir,
   some way further down.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

Q. Mr. Packer, will you be very kind please just to help
   the Court to clear up a matter which is not connected
   with the evidence you have given at all but I am just
   taking the opportunity of you giving evidence to sort
   out this point which arose earlier today.  In the black
   folder I hope the last document which you will find in
   there is C.512.  It was a document that has been
   introduced earlier this afternoon.  One or two
   questions have cropped up on it and I would just like
   to clear them up with your help. Have you got C.512? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You have got 512 headed "SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE 'F'
   DIVISION. OPERATION ORDER", do you see that? - A. Yes,
   I do.

Q. One or two questions arose about this. You see that it
   says "MATCH c a t e g o r y 'C'". We can see who the match is
   between and we can see the date of May 1987 and
   underneath that it says "INFORMATION" , do you see that?
   - A. Yes.

Q. 1.1 is "Anticipated Attendance - number 16/18000" and
   so we can gauge it i,s a fairly minor match, right? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Under 1.2 we can see "Away Supporters"? - A. Yes.
                                                              84
                                                    J. O. PACKER



Q. Then the rest of the paragraphs are all subparagraphs
   of 1.2, with 1.2.1, 1.2.2, 1.2.3,. down to 5 and they
   are all about away supporters? - A. Yes.

Q. If you just look down there at 1.2.1 it says "Number -
   Details at briefing".  1.2.2 is "Colours - Blue/White",
   1.2.3 is "Accommodation in ground - South Pen on
   Leppings Lane Terrace and part of West Stand".   So does
   it look that the idea here is that this particular
   match the away supporters were going to be accommodated
   in particular in the South Pen on the Leppings Lane
   terrace and on part of the West Stand? - A. Yes.

                 Prnfifi-Bvamined bv MR. ISAACS

Q. Mr. Packer, just one matter please to try and clear
   something up in my own mind. You have been asked to go
   with Sergeant Swift from the gymnasium to the perimeter
   track along the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Yes, that
   is right.

Q. As I understand it, you walk past Sergeant Swift who is
   in the corner between the North Stand and the West End?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You walked past him and is it right, as I understand
   your evidence that as you walk past what we know to be
   pens 3 and 4 you can see people.  Some of them you can
   hear are saying that they are squashed? - A. Yes.

Q. But initially, despite the fact that you are going past
   them, you are not overly concerned about it? - A. No,
   not at that point, no.

Q. You put that down to the surging that goes on at
   football matches and the fact that unfortunately at
   that time people did tend to get uncomfortable? - A.
   Yes.

Q. It was only when you turned and actually looked into
   the crowd and were perhaps a matter of feet away and
   had the opportunity of looking very carefully that you
   could see exactly what was going on? - A. Yes, that is
   correct.

                  Prnfis-Byamined bv MR. KING

Q. You told us that after you had been asked to leave the
   gymnasium and you started to walk round the ground
   there came a point when you were able to see that as to
   pens 3 and 4 both areas were full and then you said
   some other pens were "very sparsely" and you did not
                                                             85
                                                    J. Q. PACKER


  finish the sentence but I assume you mean very sparsely
  accommodated? - A. Yes.

Q. Which were the pens you could see were very sparsely
   accommodated? - A. The pens beside pens 3 and 4.

Q. You said to us pen 5 and I am not sure you necessarily
   meant that.  It is not a trick question.  I just want
   to clarify your evidence.  Before you answer it may be
   of help to look at C.274.  I hope I have got that
   right. - A. Yes.

Q. That, Constable, is a plan of the ground and you can
   see the West Terraces, the standing terraces, and you
   can see marked on the plan the numbers of the gates.
   You see 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7? - A. I mean area 6. If 5
   is only that small area, a sterile area, then I mean 6.

Q. Where had you got to on your route - it may be very
   early on I do not know - when you realised it and it
   struck you this difference between pens 3 and 4being
   full and the sparseness of the wing pens? - A.When   I
   noticed it was straight away in the pen directly in
   front of me from when I set off which is pen 6 which
   was sparsely populated. When I reached pens 4 and 3
   obviously you could see that those areas were full.

Q. Then you noticed the same about the pens on the other
   side of 3, that is 2 and 1? - A. Yes, when I reached
   obviously that end.

Q. Let me just ask you about something else.  You had to
   pass pen 4 before you reached pen 3 obviously? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Do you know PC Hooson? - A.Yes, I do know PC Hooson.

Q. He was in your serial the same time as you walking out
   from the gymnasium, was he not? - A. Yes.

Q. You would be ahead of him? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you know if he was immediately behind you? - A. He
   was not immediately behind me. Like I said PC Cooper
   and PC Taylor were immediately behind me.

Q. Do you happen to know where PC Hooson was in relation
   to you? - A. I don't know.  It would be some way back.

Q. How many people in the serial roughly? - A. 10 usually.

Q. So he could not have been that far away from you, put
   it that way? - A. No.
                                                    J. 0. PACKER



Q. I only say that because I want to comment, if you will,
   on evidence he gave us to see whether it ties in with
   your recollection.  He told us that as he neared gate
   4, and if you look at C.274 you will see what I am
   referring to, first of all he realised that the people
   in the West Stand were not shouting but were screaming
   and he realised that something was seriously wrong.
   Did you appreciate this fact that people were not
   shouting so much as screaming? - A. Initially when I
   walk past it was more shouting.  Obviously PC Hooson
   stayed by gate 4. Probably by that point I was myself
   turning round and realising that it was more than
   shouting in pen 3.

Q. He also told us that at this time, as he was nearing
   gate 4, he heard people in the crowd screaming, "Let us
   out. Oh God, help us” and then he looked at the
   people.  Did you hear that? - A. I could not hear that,
   no.

Q. The words which you heard being shouted out you clearly
   heard fans shouting out that they were being squashed.
   Obviously they must have sounded as if they were in
   some distress? - A. They were in some discomfort at
   that time.  Initially, if we are talking about
   initially, when I was walking past pen 4 I could hear
   shouting, they were in discomfort at that time.

Q. This is not meant as a criticism of you. Officer.   If
   you were acting under instructions it may explain it
   but why is it when you heard fsms shouting out about
   being squashed that you did not immediately turn to
   look where these shouts were coming from? - A. I was
   looking as I was generally walking. My instructions
   were to carry on walking.  There was other Officers
   behind.  I was looking in general into the crowd as I
   was walking along and like I say I could see and hear
   people saying that they were being squashed.  I could
   see people who were in discomfort but they weren't to
   the degree that it developed into.

Q. When you would be walking past the pens they would be
   on your right hand side, would they not? - A. Yes.

Q. You would be walking and if you kept your head in the
   direction of your feet, you would not be looking into
   the crowd but you would be having the crowd on your
   right to your side, would you not? - A. They were to my
   side.  I was looking into the crowd and looking to the
   right.
                                                   J. O. PACKER


Q. Do you mean you were walking along with your head to
   one side and walking ahead at the same time? - A. I was
   walking ahead and just looking to my right as I was
   walking.

Q. When you heard fans shouting out that they were being
   squashed that obviously entered your head.  You heard
   it? - A. Yes.

Q. It impinged on your consciousness obviously? - A. I
   heard them, y e s .

Q. Did you look to see what it was? - A. I was looking
   down into the crowd and I could see these people who
   were shouting at that particular time.

Q. Being squashed.  Those people who were shouting being
   squashed, from what you could see of them could you
   understand why they were shouting they were being
   squashed? - A. Yes, because there was surging from
   behind.  They were in some discomfort.

Q. I never know what that means "some discomfort".  What
   did they look like, these people who were shouting out
   they were being squashed? - A. They just looked like
   normal fans who were somewhat penned in. From behind
   there was no problem.  Two or three rows back there was
   nobody shouting.  They were just normal ferns.

Q. I am not interested for the moment. Officer, with what
   was happening behind these fsms who were shouting out
   that they were being squashed.  I am interested in
   these fans who were shouting out they were being
   squashed.  You said they looked as if they were penned.
   Was that your expression? - A. Yes.

Q. What do you mean by that? - A. From the pressure from
   behind they were penned into that area.

Q. What was ahead of these fans? - A. The fence and the
   wall.

Q. Were they squashed against the fence? - A. They were
   not squashed against the fence to any serious degree.

Q. Were they squashed against the fence to any degree? -
   A. They were up against the fence, yes.  They were up
   against the fence.

Q. So fans who were shouting out they were being squashed
   were put against the fence? - A. Yes.
                                                J. 0. PACKER


How long after in terms of seconds or minutes was it
after you heard those fans shouting out they Were being
squashed, up against the fence as you put it, that you
turned and heard the man near thie centre and saw the
man near the centre of pen 3 shouting out that there
was a man dead at his feet? - A. Not very long, a
matter of ten seconds probably.




                                    /Q. Ten seconds.
                                                           .89

                                                   J. 0. PACKER

Q. Ten seconds, so ten seconds later you would realise
   that there was a problem at the front, because those
   were the fans who were shouting out that they were
   being squashed? - A. Yes.

Q. And there was a problem in the middle as far as that
   man was concerned? - A. Yes.

Q. You are quite certain that until you arrived on the
   scene with your serial, none of the gates to the pens,
   and in particular pen 3 gate, was open.  That is your
   evidence? - A. Quite certain, yes.

          MR. KING:      I have no further questions.

                Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Q. When you heard the fans saying they were being
   squashed, what time was that, please? - A. Like I say,
   it was round about 3 o'clock.  It was almost that time,
   kick-off time.

Q. And you said that although they were crying out that
   they were being squashed, you did not think it looked
   too bad?- A. No, it was tight.  I have been in football
   crowds myself in a similar sort of position, where for
   moments you are squashed tight but then it tends to
   relieve, you get some relief when the crowd tends to
   find their feet after a few minutes.

Q.   Yet seconds later after you thought they didn't look
     too bad somebody was shouting that somebody was dead in
     there? - A. At their feet, yes. Obviously I then felt
     that somebody had obviously gone to the ground and been
     trampled on.   They said,"Somebody is dead at my feet",
     and that is when I ....

Q. So the situation did appear worse than you thought it
   was? - A. Yes, initially, yes. That was only some ten
   seconds afterwards.

Q.    Did you just continue walking past? - A. No, as soon as
     I heard this man I stopped and shouted back for
     Officers to get gate 3 open, to try and do something
     about it.

Q. You did open the gate yourself, did you? - A. No, I was
   some way past that gate then. Iwas near to the   gate
   between 3 and 2, pens 3 and 2.

Q.        THE CORONER:     The fence, you mean? - A. Yes, the
     radial fence.
                                                        .90
                                                J. 0. PACKER

      * 2     McB? IEN:   So you did not stop at that point?
   ”,   *®s » I did stop.   That is what I am saying.  I had
   already gone past gate 3, I was by the radial fence
   between 2 and 3, when I turned to face the crowd, and
   that is when I heard this man shout.

Q. You said it would give relief by shutting it, those
   were your words? - A. That is what I believed.  It was
   my belief that it might do.

Q. Don't you think the pressure was inside the pen? - A.
   There is a step onto the track.  If the front person
   went from the pressure behind and fell onto that step,
   I felt by relieving that pressure on him, you would
   relieve it by shutting the gate, because he is like
   pinned down onto this chest.  That was my belief, that
   is why they shut the gate, that's all.

Q. That is what you thought.   Thank you.

              Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN

Q. Officer, you arrived at the terraces about 3 o'clock,
   is that correct? - A. Yes.

Q. It was put to you by my learned friend, Mr. King, and I
   think you agreed with his proposition, that none of the
   gates were open until you and your serial arrived on
   the scene? - A. As I say, I was the first Officer on my
   serial and as I walked past I never noticed any of the
   gates were open.

Q. You see, that is my point.  With respect, and it is an
   obvious point, you don't know what was happening until
   you actually arrived? - A. No.

Q. Do you know any of the track Officers who are normally
   at the Leppings Lane end? - A. No.  Obviously I know of
   them now but I did not know them prior to this.

Q. As you were walking along the perimeter track were you
   paying particularly close attention to the pens, what
   you were hearing from them and what was going on in
   those pens? - A. Yes.

Q. Would it be fair of me to suggest to you that is where
   your attention was most drawn and concentrated? - A.
   Yes.

Q« Are you able to say, apart from your serial when you
   arrived at 3 o'cloclj, how many other Officers were
   round and about on that perimeter track? - A. I can't
   say exactly.  I think there were Officers stood near to
   most of the gates along that end of the track.
                                                          . 91
                                                  J. 0. PACKER

Q. You can be no more specific than that in terms of
   numbers and positions? - A. No.

                 Cross-Examined by MR.. RUSSELL

Q. Officer, very shortly after you arrived at the point
   where you stopped outside pen 3, the gate to pen 3 was
   opened? - A. Yes.

Q. That in itself you recall being relatively soon after
   the game had started, after the kick-off? - A. Yes.

Q. Can I show you a photograph that we know as C326A?
   Officer, that is a photograph taken of the Leppings
   Lane terraces and no doubt you can make out on that
   photograph - it is a photograph the Jury have seen many
   times before - gates 3, 4 and 5 are all clearly open? -
   A. Yes.

Q. We can't see gate 6, it is off the bottom of the
   picture.  The position that you have described is some
   way beyond gate 3, as I understand it, between gate 3
   and gate 2? - A. Yes.

Q. We can see at number of Police Officers at, and indeed
   one Police Officer beyond, gate 3, adjacent to pen 3 on
   the far side of gate 3. Are you able from the quality
   of the photograph you are looking to identify yourself?
   - A. Not from this photograph I can't.

Q. But would that photograph taken at that time fit in
   with your recollection, in which we can see the
   Liverpool goalkeeper patrolling the edge of his penalty
   area, the clock saying 14.59, and limiting ourselves to
   gate 3, gate 3 open? - A. Yes.

Q. Officer, as I understand your evidence the opening of
   gate 3 had two effects.  First of all it enabled fans
   who were close to the gate to get out, and second it
   prompted people further back to come over the top of
   people who were near the gate, in an attempt to use the
   gate themselves? - A. Yes.

Q.   Your perception of the problem at that  stage was that
     it was a local one, limited to the front of pen 3, and
     that further back things were more normal? - A. Yes.

Q.    So is this right, that what was needed from your point
     of view was someone or somehow the fans in pen 3 to be
     encouraged either to keep back or to move back, to
     enable the position at the front of the pen, by the
     gate, to be sorted out? - A. Yes.
                                                       •   92
                                                 J. 0. PACKER

Q. Did you ever see anyone seeking to do that? - A. Apart
   from other things, I myself was trying to encourage
   fans to go back.

Q. I would like you to look at a photograph which is two
   beyond the one that you have got open there, C328. Do
   you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. We can see that the Liverpool goalkeeper is now in his
   six yard area, isn't he? - A. Yes.

Q.    And if you follow the top of the perimeter fence from
     the bottom right towards the Police Control Box, can
     you identify on that photograph the approximate point
     where gate 3 was? - A. Yes, the approximate point.

Q.    There is a Policeman standing beside gate 3 with his
     arms raised in the air, as if making some
     gesticulation, isn't there? - A. From this photograph
     it is very difficult but I can just about make it out,
     yes.

Q. We have heard from other witnesses that Policeman is,
   in fact, Superintendent Greenwood.   Do you remember
   Superintendent Greenwood being in that position at
   about that time? This    is before the    game wasstopped,
   do you follow me? - A.   I did not see   him there at that
   time, no. The first time I became aware of him was
   when he asked me to come onto the field with him, and
   at that time I did not pay much attention to his rank,
   and I initially put down that he was an Inspector.

Q. That brings me on to the final point I need to cover
   with you. Officer. You said, and it was very much in
   passing in your evidence, that you, went with
   Superintendent Greenwood, as you now     know him to be,
   onto the pitch to stop   the game, he signalled to you? -
   A. Yes.

Q. What signal did he give? - A. Well, he was stood right
   next to me and said, "Come with me to stop the game .

Q. So he gave a signal to you before setting off onto the
   pitch? - A. Yes.

Q. And I think it is right, looking at C328, to give us a
   perspective of the pitch, he entered the pitch just
   beyond the goal? - A. Yes.

Q. As we look at the goal, and crossed towards the bottom
   left hand corner of the penalty area that we can see in
   this photograph? - A. Yes.
                                                           93

                                                J. 0. PACKER

Q* "And it was about at that point that he encountered the
   referee and stopped the game? - A. Yes.

       THE CORONER:  Mr. Russell, can you help me on
  366A? I can't find the goalkeeper - where did you say
  he was? I hesitate to question anything you say on the
  photographs.

       MR. RUSSELL:      Sir, he is in line with the middle
  of the goal.

        MR. KING:     He is about to commit a foul, sir.

       MR. RUSSELL:   If he were to go one step forward         .
  and handle the ball he would be in a lot of trouble.

       THE CORONER:    On my copy he has totally
  disappeared.  It has been pointed out to me, and I have
  seen him, thank you.   Mr. Packer you have given your
  evidence and hopefully you will not have to come back
  again.  I am most grateful to you for being here and
  thank you for your help.   It is much appreciated.

       Ladies and gentlemen, shall we say 10 o'clock
  tomorrow? Before you go, I know you gave me some
  questions yesterday which I did not deal with.  In
  fact, I won't deal with them now because (a) we are
  late, and (b) I have not brought them with me.  I
  remember them, I think, but I will try and deal with
  them tomorrow.

               (In the absence of the Jury)

       THE CORONER:   Mr. Catchpole, there was another
  error I made yesterday.  I forgot to ask you to thank
  the Club for allowing us to come and visit. Would you
  please forgive me for not doing that and pass on my
  thanks, please?

       MR. CATCHPOLE:     Sir, thank you very much.

       MR, PAYNE:   I think we also committed an error by
  omitting to thank you for arranging the transport for
  all those who were able to go. Thank you very much.

       THE CORONER:   That is a pleasure.  It is Chief
  Superintendent Mole tomorrow and at the end of the day
  we will see who it is on Friday.  I hope it will not be
  Chief Superintendent Mole.

         (The Inquests were adjourned until the
              following morning at 10 a.m.)
