    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions



Owning Organisation:        South Yorkshire Coroner

Title Memo:                 Pre Inquest Review Audio Cassette No. 1

Description:


This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the digitised version
of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement by BR Consult to reduce noise
and improve audibility of the incoming radio transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
    Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                      101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                   Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
        Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
00:00:13
CORONER:              Welcome. Can I say first of all that this isn’t a part of the inquest proper
                      because the inquest proper is actually resuming as you know on
                      19 November. The purpose of this meeting is, as I said in my letter to
                      the legal representatives, for me to have an opportunity to meet the
                      members of the legal profession and representatives in order to sort out
                      procedural matters so that, as far as possible, we can run the inquest
                      when we actually get down to it in a smoothly and as efficient way as
                      possible in the interests of everybody who has an interest in the matter
                      including myself.

                      So, in order to avoid any possible misunderstanding we will not, I repeat,
                      not deal with any questions of evidence this afternoon or questions of
                      fact. We’re dealing with simple procedural matters. I tried to make it
                      clear in the invitation and I hope that was understood but I just wanted to
                      repeat it so there can’t be any doubt about it at all.

                      Secondly, this meeting is — it’s difficult to know what to call it because in
                      Coroner’s proceedings you don’t normally have opportunities for this sort
                      of gathering, but you could maybe, by way of analogy, treat it as if it
                      were a session before the judge in chambers or an interlocutory
                      procedure. The point about it is that although nothing will be said which
                      is likely to cause any problems because we are restricting ourselves to
                      procedure, it should be treated as a business meeting, as a private
                      gathering between myself and the lawyers.

                      I shall also say that I did make it clear in the letter that I wouldn’t raise
                      any objection to interested parties coming and I meant that because I
                      didn’t want anybody to feel that I was meeting with lawyers or anybody
                      else for that matter where the people who had a direct interest were
                      specifically excluded. I recognise one or two faces in the court but I
                      don’t recognise everybody; mainly because I’m so poor at recognition of
                      faces but that’s my problem not yours.

                      Now, would it best if you just introduced yourselves, the lawyers that is
                      and the representatives, so that I know who is here and so that the
                      shorthand writer can take a note? I am taking a proper note of what’s
                      going, at least not I but the good lady is, because I thought it was wise
                      as we knew precisely what was said.

                      If you could start please.

MR KING:              Sir, if it helps (several inaudible words) priorities (several inaudible
                      words). My name is Timothy King of Counsel. I’m instructed on behalf
                      of a number of the deceased (inaudible) representatives. Sir, I cannot
                      today read out a definitive list of everyone that I represent, that is
                      because there was an issue with a preliminary list of about 40 to 42. At
                      the moment it is about 26 definite sets of instructions. It’s likely that will
                      be added to. If it is of help, sir, within a week I’m told I can provide you,
                      sir, with a definitive list of those who are being represented through
                      myself.
00:04:23
                      I am instructed through Mr Frazer, Solicitor, who is one of six solicitors
                      who form the Hillsborough group of solicitors who are known as the
                      steering committee (several inaudible words). They in turn have been

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                   2
                      instructed by a group which have (inaudible) themselves to the families
                      called the Hillsborough Family Support Group. We don’t claim, however,
                      to represent each and every set of personal representatives of each of
                      the deceased, only those which are indicated (several inaudible words)
                      possibly 40 to 42.
00:04:58
CORONER:              Yes. Thank you very much indeed. Well, when Mr Frazer or instructing
                      solicitors are in a position to let me have a definitive list it would be
                      helpful because then I’ll know who you are representing, that’s what I’m
                      really interested in. It’s the ones who are outside your -

MR KING:              Sir, I meant to say that there may well be personal representatives of
                      deceased who are here today who haven’t given instructions to
                      ourselves who would want to be heard today as personal
                      representatives.

CORONER:              Indeed. I think perhaps it’s only fair to say that this invitation wasn’t
                      extended to every single legal representative. It was a limited invitation
                      to people who I thought had most to gain from the meeting. Now, you
                      please.

MR RUSSELL:           Sir, I’m next in line. My name is -

CORONER:              Sorry I missed -

MR RUSSELL:           I’m next in line. My name is Christopher Russell and I’m a barrister. I’m
                      instructed by Barlow, Lyde and Gilbert Solicitors in London to whom you
                      extended such an invitation. We represent the interests of
                      Superintendent Greenwood.

CORONER:              Yes. Thank you very much indeed.

MR CATCHPOLE:         Sir, perhaps I could rise? My name is Stuart Catchpole. I am the
                      barrister instructed by Messrs Davies Arnold Cooper. With me today is
                      Mr Peter Doyle from that firm of solicitors and we appear on behalf of
                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

CORONER:              Yes. I do remember you from the interim hearings, Mr Catchpole. Can I
                      start with you? Yes.

MR HALE:              I’m Vincent Hale. I represent Superintendent Roger Marshall. I’m a
                      solicitor.

CORONER:              Yes. Thank you very much indeed. Yes, sir?

MR MANNING:           My name’s Richard Manning, I’m a solicitor and I represent
                      Superintendent Murray.

CORONER:              Thank you.

MR ISAACS:            Paul Isaacs, sir, Counsel, (several inaudible words) and my instructing
                      solicitor is Hepworth and Chapman and we represent Chief
                      Superintendent Duckenfield.

CORONER:              Yes. Yes? Shall we start with the (inaudible)?
00:07:19

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                   3
MALE SPEAKER:         My name’s Gregory(?), sir, (several inaudible words). I represent the
                      insurers of Sheffield City Council and the council itself. Miss (inaudible)
                      is also (several inaudible words) from the city council who is with me
                      today.
00:07:30
CORONER:              Yes.

MALE SPEAKER:         (several inaudible words) a member of the press.

CORONER:              Ah. I understand that you are a member of the press, is that right?
                      Well, with the greatest respect, I would like you to leave. This, as I
                      explained to you, is not part of the proceedings. It is not a reportable
                      case and I would be grateful if you would leave because I think that’s on
                      the basis upon which I called this meeting.

MALE SPEAKER:         (several inaudible words)

CORONER:              As I explained to you, this is not because there’s anything being said
                      here which is so secret that nobody may hear it but I don’t want - bearing
                      in mind that the matter is going to be dealt with before a jury - 1think it’s
                      only right that we remember that and we are just dealing with procedure.
                      Now we’ve g o t... yes, we’ve got some more lawyers have we? Yes?

FEMALE SPEAKER:       Sir, I am Olivia (inaudible). I’m a solicitor and I represent the Chief
                      Constable of South Yorkshire Police.

CORONER:              Yes. I remember you too from the previous session. Yes?

MR JACKSON:           Sir. Peter Jackson, I’m a partner in (several inaudible words) Campbell
                      and I represent Liverpool Supporters’ Association.

CORONER:              Thank you very much indeed.

MR JACKSON:           Sir, I feel I ought to point out at this stage that I am here in response to
                      your invitation, which I would like to thank you, it is unlikely due to the
                      funding of my client’s organisation that we will be able to appear before
                      you throughout the inquiry.

CORONER:              Yes. Thank you very much indeed. Perhaps I should explain that
                      remark to the rest of the lawyers. I had been in touch with Hill Dickinson
                      in the past and they very properly pointed out to me that they were not
                      representing anybody in particular. It occurred to me when I was
                      thinking about the preparation for this inquest that supporters in general
                      might well feature to a great or lesser extent in the evidence and I
                      thought it right to draw that to the attention of Hill Dickinson in case they
                      wished to take a view on it. Indeed, that’s why you’re here and
                      obviously it’s a matter for you entirely to decide what, if anything, you do
                      with it. I appreciate the difficulty.

MR JACKSON:           Sir, my clients do take a view that there would be a void before you if a
                      representation of supporters weren’t here but we are in difficulties.

CORONER:              Yes.
00:10:18
MR JACKSON:           I will speak, obviously, to the solicitors for other parties. It may be that if
                      I can obtain undertakings about the extent and scope of criticism of

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                     4
                      Liverpool Football Club supporters then a lot of the need for
                      representation before you will go. That will obviously depend on what
                      sort of undertakings I can obtain.
00:10:34
CORONER:              Yes. Okay. Thank you very much indeed. I did let one lay person -
                      have we got all the solicitors now or are there anymore? Lawyers I
                      mean. I did write to Mrs McBrien. Oh yes, there you are, because I
                      knew that she wasn’t represented specifically and I thought it was right
                      to let you come along as well.

MRS McBRIEN:          I am (several inaudible words) McBrien and I represent (inaudible).

CORONER:              Yes. Okay. Well that’s all you can represent: just yourself. Okay. Now,
                      while I’m on names - 1appreciate that some of you may not want to be
                      present throughout the inquest when we resume, some of you will be
                      here all the time, some of you may change - it would be helpful to me if
                      once you know who is going to be coming on a more or less regular
                      basis, if you would let us know, because we are going to try and make
                      little name plates for you so that I can recognise when we sit in court. It
                      makes it a lot easier for me to address you correctly by name. So if you
                      could give your counsel, obviously, your instructing solicitors, or
                      solicitors, if you would let me know and we’ll get that done. That’s an
                      aide for me and, of course, you are free to change for somebody who
                      doesn’t want to be there and anything like that. Yes?

MALE SPEAKER:          (several inaudible words). Sir, in the case of the deceased, I’m here as
                      junior counsel. At the time of the inquiry leading counsel was also
                      instructed. It is the intention I know of those who instructed me that on
                      occasion which leading counsel (several inaudible words) possibly
                       leading counsel on his own (several inaudible words).

CORONER:              No objection at all. Provided somebody has got locus standing, in the
                      sense that they represent an interested party, I’m quite prepared to be
                      as reasonable and as accommodating as I can be. All I’m asking you is
                      that you help me by keeping me informed.

MALE SPEAKER:         I am grateful.

CORONER:              Now can I go through one or two things which I’ve written down which I
                      think you might want to know? Then I’ll will either pause from time to
                      time to give you a chance to chip in or at the end if there’s anything
                      which I haven’t dealt with that you feel I ought to be thinking about then
                      I’ll give you an opportunity to draw it to my attention.

                      The venue of the resuming inquest is going to be council chamber. For
                      those of you who were at Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry it’s exactly the
                      same location. Whether we will stay there the whole time will depend
                      upon the numbers of people who are present. Sir?

MALE SPEAKER:         Good afternoon, it’s Mr (inaudible).

CORONER:              Representing?

MALE SPEAKER:         The Police Federation, sir. My apologies -
00:14:01
CORONER:              Thank you very much.

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                   5
00:14:06
                      Whether we translocate at some point or not I don’t know, it will depend
                      upon numbers of people who attend. It’s obvious looking around this
                      afternoon that we would have a dickens of a job getting in here,
                      assuming that we have this sort of turnout and that was the reason why
                      we chose that venue.

                      We are doing out best to make it as convenient for legal representatives
                      and others as possible but, of course, I am limited with what is provided
                      for me. I have been asked whether there will be space to store papers
                      and we believe there is a room - they call it the safe - and it is actually
                      quite a largish room which we would be able to make available for
                      anybody who wanted to put things in. You would have to be responsible
                      for your own security. I couldn’t possibly take any responsibility for
                      security. The key to the room is in the custody of city council and we
                      would make arrangements for it to be opened and shut at convenient
                      hours, say between 9.00 and 10.00 and 5.00 and 6.00 or something like
                      that in the afternoon so that you could have access, a), to put things in
                      and, b), to get things out. Whether you use it or not is, of course, a
                      matter entirely for you.

                      The times of the sittings; at the moment I have it in mind to sit from
                      10.00 until about 12.45 or thereabouts, obviously the hours have got to
                      be flexible to an extent because of evidence and then maybe from 1.45
                      or 2 o’clock until around 4.00. You may feel that that isn’t very long and
                      that Lord Justice Taylor sat for a lot longer, I know he did but then he
                      didn’t sit with a jury and it isn’t fair, in my view, to expect ordinary people
                      who are not used to legal proceedings even albeit this is just criminal
                      proceedings, to expect them to sit for very much longer than that.

                      If we find that we want to make a few adjustments to these times we will
                      do so as we go along. We will pause probably mid-morning and
                      afternoon for a short break to allow people to stretch their legs and have
                      a cup of coffee if they can find one and so on.

                      I have to tell that present position is that the city council is a no-smoking
                      zone; sorry about that for those of you who are smokers. Apart from the
                      fact that that’s their standard policy we also think that the fire service
                      might not be too happy if we allowed it. So for the time being if you will
                      assume there is no smoking.

                      Is that reasonably clear with regard to venue and time? One final thing;
                      it may be that you may have points of law to put to me from time to time.
                      Obviously if it something that has to be dealt with there and then then we
                      will do so, we will send the jury out. If is something which you feel you
                      want to put and which would have to be put in the absence of the jury, I
                      would suggest that you try and do it around the 4 o’clock mark so that
                      we use the time when the jury have gone home.

                      That’s not an invitation that you address me each and every day with
                      points of law but it is just a convenient way because on principle we
                      should be able to cope with just a little bit longer than the jury. Is that
                      acceptable and satisfactory? As I say, if something occurs during the
                      day that you feel has to be dealt with there and then well, so be it.
00:18:28
                      Now, the next thing I want to talk about is what I call the scope of the

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                    6
                      inquest. It will be collected, we have already dealt at considerable
                      length with the three questions; who, when and where. In fact, we dealt
                      with them rather more extensively than in average inquest which I would
                      normally deal with. For various reasons I felt that was right. What is left
                      of the four things which coroners by and large deal with is the question
                      of how. That is what we’re going to be concentrating on in these
                      resumed inquests.
00:19:16
                      For practical purposes, the how will apply to all the 95 deceased.
                      Technically, as you will I am sure appreciate, I’m not doing one inquest,
                      we’re doing 95 separate and individual inquests which is why we took
                      evidence individually for 95 people in April and May. Because it will be a
                      practical impossibility to recount the generality of the evidence 95 times
                      over, we would take the evidence together in respect of all of them and I,
                      incumbent with most of us, will slip into the fault of calling it the inquest.
                      When I do that you will forgive me and read it as meaning the inquests.
                      We will by and large be dealing with all the evidence for everybody
                      together.

                      I am, of course, aware that there are some differences, just to take a
                      simple example, two enclosures - enclosure three and enclosure four -
                      but I don’t think that that affects the validity of the principle of how I want
                      to deal with the evidence. If evidence is specifically enclosure four then,
                      of course, we will take cognisance of that. If evidence is specific to
                      something else we will take cognisance of that as well. We will be
                      dealing with the evidence in respect of everybody together.

                      I have to remind you that an inquest is not a public inquiry. In another
                      case which I happen to read recently, Mr Justice Walker, as he then
                      was, described an inquest as inquiry in public but not a public inquiry
                      and I thought that that was a rather neat way of putting it.

                      So I do not expect, particularly as there has already been a public
                      inquiry, to repeat everything that Lord Justice Taylor has done. It is I’m
                      afraid, as I see it, inevitable that we will be duplicating a certain amount
                      of the work that he did. This is because it falls within, as I perceive it,
                      the purview of my jurisdiction and also because, of course, as I’m sitting
                      with a jury, and as they have to reach a verdict on the evidence, it’s no
                      use relying upon what was said 15,16 and 18 months ago before
                      somebody else. So regrettably or not - maybe not, depends which point
                      of view you take - there will have to be some replication of evidence of
                      Lord Justice Taylor’s investigation. Indeed, if you look at the terms of
                      reference, and compare those with what the Coroner’s Act says you will
                      see there is quite a remarkable similarity in places.

                      I have to remind that in contrast to the public inquiry, witnesses in a
                      Coroner’s Court have got certain privileges; particularly witnesses whose
                      conduct is likely, or is liable, to be called into question and, in particular,
                      they have the right not to answer incriminating questions. I will be
                      dealing with this again when I open with the jury and explain this to them
                      in detail but I want to take this opportunity now because it’s an important
                      point to understand. If one doesn’t grasp it then one tends, not just in
                      the Hillsborough inquest in all inquests, to walk away disappointed.
00:23:44
                      So two things procedurally: witnesses have got privileges which I will
                      ensure that they are cognisant of and if they wish to exercise their rights

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                    7
                      then they are entitled to do so and, secondly, (inaudible) inquiry has
                      limited objectives. Again, within the best of my ability we will try to stick
                      to those.
00:24:12
                      My present intention is, as far as possible, to take the evidence that we
                      will hear viva voce, in other words I am going to try and get the
                      witnesses to come and give evidence. We know already that that isn’t
                      going to be possible in some cases. At least one witness whom I had
                      thought about, though not necessarily decided on, has died. Clearly we
                      can’t take his evidence viva voce. There may be some others who,
                      through medical or other reasons, are so reluctant to come that I would
                      think it only fair not to call them. We have a huge pool, if I can put that
                      word, of witnesses and I think it will be possible to have the bulk of the
                      evidence viva voce. I think that that is preferable though maybe a little
                      bit more time consuming and certainly more expensive, but at least
                      people will have heard it by word of mouth.

                      Shall I pause for a moment here and ask whether I have made myself
                      clear and whether you have any queries on this aspect? Yes, Mr King?

MR KING:              Sir, I don’t know whether this is the time to raise questions as to the
                      nature of the evidence you are going to call, the (inaudible) of the
                      evidence. If I can make myself clear; on the nature of the evidence I
                      have a number of submissions to make to you as to the use of the
                      Taylor report itself.

CORONER:              I’ll come to that in a moment. So I appreciate that you didn’t know that
                      because I haven’t - yes, yes.

MR KING:              As to the ambit of the evidence, it may be this isn’t for today at all, that is
                      to say the starting point of the events which you intend to investigate
                      and, if I can put it this way, the cutting off point.

CORONER:              Yes. I’m coming to that as well. So perhaps I’d better carry on for a little
                      bit longer and then turn to you because it may be that I may cover some
                      of the points which you had in mind or indeed other people have in mind.

                      In fact, you bring me onto what I call groups. I take the view that the
                      evidence that the, if you like, cut off point for the evidence is - I have
                      selected as a marker the arrival for the first ambulance on the pitch.
                      That doesn’t mean to say that we will necessarily deal with every event
                      up to that point, but it’s a convenient marker beyond which whatever
                      happened has either been dealt with in April/May time or is outside the
                      scope of my inquiry. So, if you like, that’s the end point.

                      Now the beginning is a little bit more difficult to determine because one
                      has to consider the events of the day on the one hand and, to a certain
                      extent, one also has to consider the, possibly to a certain extent,
                      previous accounts because they may have a relevance in evaluating and
                      in assessing the evidence which is put before the jury. Generally in
                      principle, the way I look at it is that we’re going to start from the - as far
                      as the day is concerned -outside and work our way inward. The
                      evidence would become more detailed or, if you like, I’ll be calling more
                      witnesses as we get closer to the event.
00:28:16
                      So, let’s take an example, on a very brief summary of evidence as to

www.merrillcorp.com
                      traffic conditions. I certainly wouldn’t go into any great detail. It’s really,
                      as my colleague in east Kent said when he was dealing with the
                      Zeebrugge inquest it’s like a theatre. You’ve got your staging, you’ve
                      got some subsidiary actors and you’ve got the main plot, but you’ve still
                      got to understand the main plot if you haven’t got the staging. So you
                      need to have a certain amount of information which isn’t necessarily vital
                      but which makes the whole thing more readily understandable. So, as I
                      say, I intend to move from the outside in and as we get nearer to the
                      ground we will be going into more detail.
00:29:16
                      I anticipate calling evidence, of course, from supporters, if I can use that
                      term, and that will include relatives. With regard to relatives, I am going
                      to be -
00:29:32




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                   9
