   HER MAJESTY*S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)




        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Malestv*s Coroner)




                     At

               The Town Hall,
                 Sheffield.

                     On

             11th December, 1990




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




    From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
         Official Shorthand Writers,
     55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                    INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                             Page

E.J. WILSON Recalled

     By the Coroner                            1
     Cross-Examined by M r . Hale              1
     Cross-Examined by M r . Payne             2
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Coughlin            3
     Cross-Examined by M r . King              4
     Cross-Examined by M r s . McBrien         8
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell            14
     Further By The Coroner                   15
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole          16
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King       18

K.P. RAWLINSON Sworn

     By The Coroner                          20
     Cross-Examined    by M r . Payne        28
     Cross-Examined    by M r . Coughlin     31
     Cross-Examined    by M r . Manning      34
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. King           38
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. Catchpole      41
     Cross-Examined    by M r s . McBrien    42
     Further by The    Coroner               44

P. HAND-DAVIS Sworn

     By The Coroner                          44
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale              64
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne,            64
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Coughlin          68
     Cross-Examined by Mr. King              70
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole         79
     Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien          81
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell           86
     Further by The Coroner                  86
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning   88
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King      88
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell   89

S.H. THOMAS Sworn

     By The Coroner                           90
     Cross-Examined    by  Mr. Payne         100
     Cross-Examined    by  Mr. Coughlin      103
     Cross-Examined    by  Mr. Manning       104
     Cross-Examined    by  Mr. King          105
     Cross-Examined    by Mrs. McBrien       110
     Further by The    Coroner               113
               SEVENTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                TUESDAY, 11th DECEMBER 1990

              ELIZABETH JAYNE WILSON Recalled

                      Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You will remember I had more or less finished my
   examination of you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You can remember what you said.  I do not have to
   summarise it for you, do I? - A. No, thank you.

                Cross-Examined bv MR. HALE:

Q. At some point in your evidence, and it also occurred
   in other evidence, that it was surprising how many
   people came down from the Middlewood Road and Catch
   Bar Lane area along Leppings Lane. Was that your
   impression? - A. Yes, that is exactly what I felt.

Q. The Jury have had the opportunity of a trip around
   the area.  You are familiar with the area, are you
   not? - A. That is right.

Q. Do you know where the main public houses and off-
   licences are in that area? - A. I am aware that there
   are quite a few up in what I believe to be the
   Wadsley Lane area.  I am not sure as regards
   Middlewood Road but I do know Wadsley Lane.

Q. Would the people coming from the public houses - and
   there would be people coming from private cars as you
   have mentioned - and off-licences tend to come down
   the Catch Bar Lane way rather than along Leppings
   Lane from Halifax Road? - A. It was the mere fact
   that I was so surprised by the fact that the whole of
   the Leppings Lane bridge area was at one point
   virtually engulfed with people and pedestrians on
   foot to the fact that traffic couldn't get through.
   I didn't particularly go back to the traffic lights
   and see whether that was from the Middlewood Road
   direction or Wadsley Lane.  It could have been equal
   amounts from both.

Q. You misunderstand me.

     THE CORONER:   I do not think, on reflection, that you
can pursue this line of cross-examination because although
it may be so this Officer cannot say. All she can say is
that people were coming down.  She can describe the people
but she cannot say where they were coming from and you
should not put to her where they were coming from.
                                         E. J. WILSON


            Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

Madam, in your nine years of experience in the
mounted section, have you policed many large crowds
at this ground? - A. Yes, certainly at this ground.
I couldn't tell you the actual number of thousands
but certainly very large crowds, yes.

With what sort of regularity have you done this
job? - A. I would say a minimum, during the football
season, of three times per month, perhaps more on
occasions.

Have you patrolled at the Leppings Lane end when you
have done that work? - A. Yes, very regularly.

Have some of these matches you have been patrolling
been big matches? - A. Yes.

Does Liverpool as a football team, apart from this
occasion of the Semi Final, does it play on other
occasions at the football ground? - A. Not being a
particular football follower myself I just turn up
for duty on the day and it does not matter to me who
is playing or why.  I will have been there for that
team in past years, yes.

I want you to compare this event with your experience
over that nine years of the many occasions when you
have been in the mounted section.  First of all, with
regard to the time of arrival of the large crowd in
the period approaching kick-off, how does this
compare with your experience? - A. I have never seen
it before in my life.

In what way is that? - A. I have never seen the
quantity of people arriving so late, I have never
seen a quantity of crowd in possession of drink, and
to the best of my ability that is the two major
facts.

With regard to the demeanour and behaviour of the
crowd in general, and I appreciate this can only be a
general comment, and I am talking about the general
behaviour of the crowd now? - A. Yes.

How does that compare with your other experience? -
A. Certainly the abusive comments that were made, the
facial expressions, the overall demeanour of the
crowd was from a lot of people quite evil.  It did
appear from being a very hot, sunny, brilliant
                                                          3




                                            E. J. WILSON


   atmosphere sort of a day, it did seem to change quite
   suddenly.

Q. I would like you to deal with one other aspect of the
   same topic.  At about two o'clock before the large
   influx of the crowd started to come from both
   directions towards the ground - so at about two
   o'clock - you have told the Court that the situation
   appeared to you to be quite normal and ordinary? - A.
   Yes, very normal.

Q. If someone had said to you then that in forty minutes
   or so there is going to be such a crush outside the
   turnstiles that people are going to be in danger of
   their lives - if somebody had said that to you at two
   o'clock - what would your reaction have been? - A.
   Astounded.

Q. Was there anything to give you any hint that such an
   event was to come? - A. No, none whatsoever.

              Cross-Examined bv MR. COUGHLIN:

Q. PC Wilson, just one or two questions.  Clearly you
   are an experienced mounted Police Officer and you
   have experience with large crowds. Were you in Court
   yesterday to hear the evidence of Sergeant Smith and
   PC Grunhill, the Liverpool mounted Officers? - A.
   Yes, I was.

Q. PC Grunhill made a comment in answer to a question
   that if the crowd will not work with the Police
   Officers it is very difficult, if not impossible, for
   the mounted Police Officers to operate.  Would you
   subscribe to that view? - A. Yes, I do agree.

Q. Secondly, Sergeant Smith, a very experienced
   Liverpool mounted Police Officer, said that he
   considered that this crowd outside Leppings Lane in
   the last thirty minutes or so (and I precis this)
   before kick-off considered the croVd to be more
   unwilling to listen to reason at this match than at
   any other that he had attended or indeed any other
   function.  Would you support that view as well? - A.
   Yes, I do.

Q. Finally, just to clear up a point which may arise in
   evidence later today, Inspector Hand-Davis was the
   mounted Officer in charge on the day, is that
   right? - A. That is correct, yes.
                                                         4




                                              E. J. WILSON


Q. Is it right that it is to Inspector Hand-Davis that
   you would have looked for control and direction as to
   where you should go and what you should be doing
   particularly in say the half hour or so before kick-
   off? - A. Yes.  I was aware that Inspector Davis was
   on the train escort and so, in his absence, it was
   Sergeant Thomas who was in fact my supervisor.
   Sergeant Thomas was the supervisor in charge of my
   contingent of five but certainly upon being joined by
   Inspector Davis on his arrival then he would
   certainly take over that supervision, yes.

Q. You would look to him in those circumstances for some
   direction, if indeed it was necessary? - A. I would
   look to both to them in fact.  I would keep an eye on
   both of them which is in fact what I did.

                Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

Q. When you saw this great mass of people coming from a
   direction which led them to the Leppings Lane bridge,
   and you said to yourself in effect, "That is a lot of
   people arriving.  I was not expecting them", how many
   people would you estimate you were looking at? What
   is the sort of numbers we are talking about? - A. On
   reflection I would have to comment to the fact, as I
   did say earlier in my evidence yesterday, that it was
   people stood for the width of the pavement, the
   entire length of the bridge, who were people hanging
   around as such, non-movement.   So the flow of
   pedestrians to the ground were in actual fact taking
   virtually the whole width of the road> length of the
   road, the whole of that area.   If I had to make a
   rough estimate as regards the number of people,
   including the people standing by there, it may have
   been a thousand or more easily.

Q. What time was this about? - A. Around or shortly
   after 2.30.

Q. Did you yourself communicate with ^anybody the fact
   that you were seeing round about a thousand people
   apparently arriving from that direction, both a
   direction you were not expecting or at a time you
   were not expecting? - A. I communicated with the
   Police Officer that I was riding with at that time.
   The radio traffic on the personal radio I was
   carrying, I have no idea obviously at this time what
   was being said but it was continual messages on the
   radio and I was aware that I had no chance whatsoever
   of getting through on that.  So I just took my own
                                          E. J. WILSON


 initiative of attempting to try and stop people
 running, to stop any outbreaks of fighting, and some
 attempts to get the traffic to continue going
 through.

. Had you, as part of your briefing before you started
  your duties that day, been given any instruction to
  communicate for example with ground control as to
  unusual numbers of people arriving at a given time? -
  A. Not particularly, no.




                               /Q. Would it be fair
                            E. J. WILSON


/ Would it be fair to say really you were not given any
  briefing as regards the monitoring of the numbers
  arriving or the time they were arriving? That was not
  part of the briefing, was it? - A. That question I
  find very difficult to answer.  I can only reply to
  you to the fact that I am aware that people come from
  that direction in their own private motor cars, but
  certainly not expected in the quantity that did
  arrive.

 You see, you were asked a question further along the
 line about your view at 2 o'clock and about no hint at
 2 o'clock of large numbers of people arriving.  That
 is not a criticism of you, but would you agree with me
 that you yourself only had the information which you
 could see with your eyes initially? That is all you
 have got, what you can see? - A. Yes.

 Others, however, have information which they can
 collect from all different sources, can they not?  I
 do not mean this rudely, but not someone in your more
 lowly position, but someone in a higher position can
 collect information, can they not, from different
 sources? - A. Yes and, of course, officers that are
 further along that area that can see the crowd
 approaching before I see the crowd.

 Indeed.  You did not know what the position was as
 regards how many people were coming along Leppings
 Lane? You were not in that position to know that,
 were you? - A.   Not all the time, no.   I did at times
 have Leppings Lane obviously in my view.

 You were not in a position to know what the state of
 the terraces was inside the ground, as to whether they
 were empty, full, lots of people to come, brimming or
 what-have-you; you just did not have information of
 the state of inside the ground? - A.   No, no idea.

 So not being rude to you at all but really you are not
 in the position to know whether there was any
 suggestion or hint to the powers^that be, if I can put
 it that way, of how many people were still to come?
 You were not put in that position, you were not in
 that role, that was not your job, was it? - A. No.

Can I just deal with one or two other points.   How
close did you get to the Land Rover, t.he Land Rover
which you say you could not hear the message from? -
A.   From initially seeing the Land Rover draw up to
the rear of the crowd, I was quite close to it and I
was able to see that Inspector Ellis was the officer
with the Land Rover.  I was fully aware of what he was
going to attempt to do.
                          E. J. WILSON


I understand that.   I wanted to know the distance
between you and the Land Rover? ~ A. A matter of a
couple of yards.   I was quite close to it.

Clearly the information which you were .able to pass on
to a number of people that the gafne was going to be
delayed, that clearly had a marked effect on those
people who heard? - A.   Yes, I virtually lost my
voice that afternoon, but by shouting to people
immediately in front of me, which would have the
effect of perhaps a dozen or 20 people, but only if
they are willing to listen to what is being said.

Oh yes. - A. It did seem to calm a number of people,
but obviously the people behind them could not hear
what information was being said and, as a result, the
usual pushing occurred.

But what seemed to have happened was that      A.
Initially it made a calmness, yes.

Of course, rumours can spread through a crowd very
quickly? - A. That is correct.

But, of course, what happened here was they heard a
roar in the ground, as if to say, "Oh, the kick-off
isn't being delayed", and all your good works were
undone.  That is what happened, is it not? ** A.   Yes.

After everybody had gone through the turnstiles or the
side gates or what~have~you, when the problem outside
the turnstiles was over, you were then telling us very
briefly about your learning of a situation which had
developed inside the ground, and your evidence
yesterday was that you had heard information about a
possible pitch invasion? - A. Yes.

I just want to investigate that with you a little.
Where were you when you heard this information? ~ A.
I was still stood with the other mounted officers
where we had made the cordon of horses.  I had
Inspector Davis to my right and Sergeant Smitn to my
left. Whether that information'came over the radio or
from Inspector Davis, I am not quite sure, but I was
then told by Inspector Davis that something had
occurred.

What I am interested in is the something which you
understood had occurred was a possible pitch invasion?
- A. Yes, that was the message I understood.

Which, putting it with a bit of jargon, was a law and
order situation? - A. Yes.
                          E. J. WILSON


What was Inspector Davis's reaction to that
information? What did he organise or do? - A. He
then chose a number of officers with himself to go to
another area of the ground to gain access to get to
the pitch area.

To deal apparently with this law and order problem? -
A.   Yes, at the other side of the ground.

You yourself did not do that. What were you sent to
do? - A. I had to go with a collection of both
Nottinghamshire mounted officers, some of our own, and
possibly some Merseyside officers, I cannot quite
remember, and we were told to stand by on Penistone
Road quite nearby the main access to the ground.

So you yourself were, as you say, stood by —       A.
Stood down, yes.

And took no further active part in any   sort of
policing? - A.  No, that is correct.

     THE CORONER: Stood down, or stood by?     There is a
difference.

     MR. KING:  I beg your pardon, it is my fault.
There is a very important distinction.  You were stood
by? - A.   Yes.

But, as I understand it, you then did not take any
further part in any active policing? - A. No.

         Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Officer, you said you had to be cautious with your
horse, and that you felt it best to stay at the edge
of the crowd.  So would you say that your horse was
not contributing effectively to controlling the crowd
because he was not to be trusted 100% in a crowd
situation? - A. Any young horse that has not dealt
with being in any football demonstration situation, or
anything like that, is likely to be frightened by
something that he has never seen before.  That
particular horse had not seen the expected crowds that
we were anticipating that day, and it is a case of the
build-up of training of the horse, you graduate by
allowing them to see bigger, noisier crowds as their
period of training goes along.  This horse was quite
new, had not seen it before and it wds my fear that
perhaps either being trapped between traffic or crowds
or people or pedestrians of any type, he may have
taken an adverse reaction against it. However, the
time came that I had to chance his capabilities and
did, in fact, put him in the line of cordon.
                          E. J. WILSON


But would you say generally you were choosing an area
for your horse where your horse could move more
freely, that you were keeping him out of the very
dense crowds? - A. Yes, I, with discussion with ray
Sergeant, chose an area where I felt the horse would
be safe, but he was able to contribute in some form of
crowd control and duty for that day.

Do you not think it would have been better to use your
horse to prevent the forward movement of too many
fans, otherwise the turnstile area could become
congested if it was overcrowded? - A.  It would have
been impossible for me to effect or hope that that
horse would stand in a crowd safely.  It is very
difficult for a horse to stand one or two hours in the
same position and stand to be jostled, pushed,
frightened.  He will do anything to get out of that
situation.

You said that a lot of fans needed assistance with
their tickets.  Do you remember the approximate time
when the fans first started to ask for directions in
relation to their tickets? - A.  It was certainly when
there was no problem outside the ground.  It was
certainly when access was easy to the turnstiles, when
the Reception Area was virtually empty.

Do you remember what time that was, please? -   A.  I
could not give you a time, I am sorry, but it   was a
pertinent thing that happened for some period   during
the afternoon.  It was a regular thing that I   was
being requested to do.

So it was a problem that you spotted when there was
not a great build-up of people? - A. Yes, it was a
regular problem.

Did you convey that problem to any senior officer? -
A. It was a problem that was being dealt with by both
myself, Sergeant Thomas and Sergeant Smith who were
aware of this, but at that time we were coping with
the problem quite adequately.

But when numbers would increase, would not that give a
greater problem?  If there was a small problem with
small numbers, then the problem would get larger as
the numbers increased, would it not? - A.  I suppose
it could, but at that time there were sufficient
police officers there for people to make requests to
be directed to where they wanted to be.

But you did not get in touch with ground control at
all? - A. No, I did not.
                            E. J. WILSON


/ What time did you come down from Middlewood Road,
  please? - A.  It is not the fact that I came down from
  Middlewood Road;  I was regularly moving from the
  Reception Area to the traffic lights cross-roads and
  back down again^ regularly moving up and down.   I did
  not go to that one point and then come back.   It was a
  regular movement until, perhaps, the time of the Land
  Rover and then I did stay at that area.

 I was just checking up on that because you said there
 was a drastic change in the numbers that arrived, and
 quite suddenly you saw very large numbers appearing in
 the area? - A.  There were at least three incidents
 and during that time obviously minutes passed and time
 moved very quickly that afternoon and it was a thing
 that you did not have time to look on your watch and
 associate where you had been for whatever length of
 time.  But there was a fight taking place nearby the
 traffic lights, for which foot officers were waving
 their arms requesting assistance, there was another
 skirmish in the middle of the road on the bridge, and
 then also there was a bus that had got blocked on the
 bridge by pedestrians as well.

      MRS. McBRIEN:  I was just wondering, sir, if
 there is any photographic evidence to show that the
 bus was actually stopped from moving forward by the
 pedestrians.  Is there any evidence of that?

      THE CORONER: I have no idea, but the officer says
 that there was.  On the compilation film you can see
 the bus, you can see that they are either moving very
 slowly or stationary.  We have seen it twice already.
 I have no idea exactly, but this officer says it. You
 can challenge her.  You can say, "I don't believe you
 that the bus stopped".

      MRS. McBRIEN:  I am just querying that.  Did the
 pedestrians stop the traffic, or was the traffic
 stopped by an officer?  That was the question really I
 am trying to get over.




                              /THE CORONER:   Yes, I
                                                           11


                                                   E. J. WILSON



          THE CORONER:    Yes, I understand:

Q. Have you understood the question?    What Mrs. McBrien is
   asking you is: are you saying that the traffic stopped
   because of pedestrians or was the traffic either then or
   at some other point stopped, as far as you know, by other
   officers?   If you don't know the answer to the second
   question you must explain it. - A. The bus certainly
   wasn't stopped by police officers.    The three incidents
   that occurred on the bridge occurred virtually one after
   the other, so as far as ray memory would take me I believe
   the bus was stopped or certainly hesitated because of a
   skirmish on the bridge, until we could clear those people
   out of the way and then we were able to allow freedom of
   traffic again.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Now I see why the bus stopped.    It
     was commonsense for the bus driver to stop.   You said
     you needed to get a message through on your radio but
     your radio wasn't working, is that correct? - A. No, I am
     sorry, I never said that.

          THE CORONER:   She didn't say that.   What she said
     was that there was so much traffic on the radio that she
     realised she wouldn't be able to break into it and get a
     message through:

Q. I think that is what you said? - A. That's correct, sir,
   yes.

          MRS. McBRIEN:    I am sorry, I have made incorrect
     notes.

          THE CORONER:    You may still have a question on that
     if you wish.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:   Although you couldn't get a message
     across for that reason did you think of asking another
     officer for assistance?    Going on your horse to talk to
     some other officer? - A. Again, because of the volume of
     people, it was impossible for me to make contact with
     anybody to request any further orders or anything else.
     That is why for all of my movement across the bridge area
     where I was patrolling every time I returned down I kept
     looking across over to my Inspector and Sergeant who I
     could see had got further problems to what I was involved
     with.    It is an accepted fact that if you can't get a
     radio message or you can see your partne.r or colleagues
     that you would wait for a wave or a hand signal, which in
     fact I did get from the Inspector for the line-up for the
     cordon.
                                                         12


                                                E. J. WILSON


Q. What made you think the kick-off was going to be delayed?
   - ' A , It might have been something verbally or it might
   have been part of a radio message.      I have no idea
   which.

Q. You seem to convey that message to the fans and there was
   a positive reaction to it and they calmed down, you said?
   - A. Yes, I am saying to people who wanted to listen,
   that wanted to be advised, they calmed down but not
   everyone.   Everybody is still in fear of missing part of
   the match or whatever length of time so they will still
   for all directions being given to them make and endeavour
   all their efforts to push through to get to the
   turnstiles as quickly as possible and this is why people
   were trying to push past the horses, interfere with the
   horses.

Q. That wasn't the impression I got when I made my notes
   yesterday.  I felt there was a positive response and that
   people were quite happy to wait?   They were co­
   operative? - A. Yes, but if you can think about the
   volume of noise from the number of people outside and the
   enormous amount of noise coming from inside the ground,
   you are only able by leaning down to perhaps speak or
   shout to perhaps a dozen people around you, but out of
   that dozen people you may only get perhaps half of them
   that will say, "Oh, yes, fair enough,” but the people
   behind them are still very agitated and choose what is
   being said to them want to get through as quickly as
   possible.

Q. You said you almost lost your voice with shouting.
   Wouldn't it have been - it seemed to me essential to get
   the message over to control so that they could make a
   loud announcement, one everybody would be able to hear,
   not just the ones immediately by you.

        THE CORONER:    I don't think this officer can really
   answer that question.    You can ask her whether she knows
   whether an attempt was made, or you can ask her whether
   she attempted to communicate with control for the need to
   broadcast a message.   That, I think, would be a fair
   question to ask.   Can you see what I am saying?

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes:

Q. Did you communicate with control so that a message was
   broadcast? - A. No, for the simple fact I felt myself
   everything was being done that was possible by the
   attempt with the Land Rover and the police officer with
   the megaphone there and also I had no idea how many
   policemen there were on horseback on the line-up, but
   everybody was attempting to calm the crowd and give some
                                                              13


                                                      E, J, WILSON


     sort of reassurance that they would get in the ground
     safely if they would only slow down and wait.

Q. I don't   know if I am able to say this, but I did come
   over on   the 17th of November this year and I stood
   outside   Leppings Lane near the entrance.   I heard a
   message   over the loudspeaker.   It was so clear.   I was
   quite a   way down the road.

          THE CORONER:   I don't know where that is going to
     get us, Mrs. McBrien:

Q.   Were you there on the 17th of November this year at
     Leppings Lane? - A. I don't really know, sir, I couldn't
     tell you that.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   I think I did recognise you on that
     day outside the entrance.    What I was trying to say was
     how effective a loud message is with a loud crowd rather
     than a message to a small crowd just near you. - A. I
     agree with you.    Obviously the football ground tannoy
     system would no doubt make a louder volume of
     instruction, but I should also again point out the fact
     it was continual radio messages and if I was to attempt
     to pass my message on to advise the question you are
     asking, I would have cut off someone else's message.

Q. It just depends how vital the message is that you want to
   get over? - A. Well, it would mean that neither message
   would get through because one is stopping the other.

Q.    I may be jumping from one thine to another.    I am going
     to the very end now. Why didn t you got into the stadium
     when you knew there was something wrong?     Were you
     instructed not to go in, I mean?

Q.        THE CORONER:   You can answer that: were you
     instructed not to go in? - A. I was instructed to stand
     by on Penistone Road again until I heard different to
     that order, until I heard something other to that.




                     MRS. McBRIEN:   I may be going
       '       .      ,




                                                    14.

                                           E. J. WILSON




     MRS. McBRIEN:   I nay be going back a little bit.
My notes are a little muddled today I am afraid.  Could
I just ask a couple of questions more.

You were actually encouraging fans to move forward all
the time you said? When you were standing away from
the crowd, your main purpose was to get them to move
forward? - A. On the initial stages the people I was
requiring to move forward were the people standing
blocking an access area which would be going back to
the shop at the corner of Vere Road and the pedestrian
area at the corner of the bridge. That happens at any
match not just pertinent to this Inquiry, but at every
football match people gather at those points, so it is
a regular movement that we do perform, to encourage
them to go forward into the turnstiles to allow more
free access.

Were you aware of the situation in the turnstile area?
Did you know there was congestion there, or not? - A.
When there was all the congestion and the problems in
the turnstile area it was at that time that I was on
Leppings Lane Bridge up to Catch Bar Lane area.

So you weren*t encouraging people to go forward then? -
A. No.

Thank you, Officer.

           Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

Officer, can I just deal with one matter, that is your
ability or inability to hear what the landrover was
saying. As I understand your evidence, you assisted or
sought to assist the landrover to a better position in
the reception area by forming a "V" with two other
mounted Officers? - A. Yes, I attempted to try and make
a gap at the rear of the crowd to enable the landrover
to get through, but the people were packed so tightly
and heaving forward as such that that was impossible to


Yes, but what I am interested in is the formation that
you took up, and where you were in relation to the
landrover.  J as
            ’    this a "V" formation leading in front
of the landrover that you formed? - A. That I can't
remember.  All I remember was my actions, of the fact
that attempting to make some forsii of a gap to stop
people adding onto the back of the semi-circle of
crowd, to just try and relieve a small area to get in,
so that the announcement could be heard.

Were you in front of the landrover, as far as you can
remember? - A. I was very close to it, whether I would
                                            E. J. WILSOti




be to the front of it or to the side attempting to get
the front of the vehicle forwards, but it was something
I just was not able to do.

You had headgear on that those in the crowd weren't
wearing,  'what sort of headgear was that? - A. Yes, it
is quite a large crash helmet with a visor and
earpieces covering either side of your head.

What is the effect of that headgear on your ability to
hear speech coming from either beside or behind you? -
A. It certainly restricts you being able to hear what
is being said, but if something is in front of you,
obviously that makes it much easier. You have to turn
and face somebody or something to hear it better,
obviously.

That is why I was asking where you were in relation to
the landrover? - A. Yes.

Where there is other general noise around you, and as
you told us, I think, noise in the stadium, did that
make matters worse for hearing the spoken word behind
or beside you? - A. Yes, certainly.

The effect of your evidence, can I summarise it in this
way, is that announcements were being made by the
landrover, but you were unable to hear them clearly
because of the headgear you were wearing? - A.
Certainly the headgear didn't help but the volume of
general crowd noise both around me and also fron inside
the stadium completely swamped it.

Thank you.

               Further by THE CORONER

The long and the short of it with regard to that - I
want to be quite clear - you perceived what you thought
would be the intention of - I will use the word the
landrover, the landrover had no intentions - tae people
who were operating the landrover? - A. Yes.

But you yourself did not receive an intelligent
message? - A. No, but also as the message was being
transmitted from the person in the landrover I was
still concentrating by looking down at the people in
front of me, to get their attention.

I am not criticising you for this at all.  l«7e nave
heard from different people, and we will no doubt hear
from others, as to what they heard.  All I am trying to
establish is that you yourself could not make out what
the message was? - A. I was definitely the nearest
                                                E. J. wILSGN




mounted Officer.  I was virtually in front of the
landrover in the line-up.  I was aware that he was
appealing but I have no idea what the message was.

You mentioned as a throw-away line almost, you said
somebody had a megaphone.  Can you just tell me a
little more about that? - A. It was Inspector Ellis who
was with the landrover that had the megaphone.

It was in the same area? - A. Yes, I don't know if he
was leaning out of the window or tried to get on the
front of the vehicle, but he tried to get in a position


And you could not hear him either? - A. No, I knew who
it was but I could not distinguish a message, no.

          Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

Officer, you were asked by firs. McBrien about whether
you would have reported to Ground Control the fact that
some fans were asking questions about the ticket, and I
just want to make sure I am being fair to you to see
whether this is the sort of thing you would ever want
to report to Ground Control.   Is it fairly common in
any event for Police Officers to be asked by fans who
are attending a strange ground where to go when they
arrive at the turnstile area?- A. Yes, it is a regular
enquiry.  A lot of people instead of looking up to the
letter above the turnstile or the turnstile number, or
even North Stand, South Stand, East, West or whatever,
a lot of people would prefer to come and ask you for
this detail.

If you need to some help you look for a Policeman? - A.
That is right.

Can you just look at this blank ticket ....

     THE CORONER:     Is it one we have got exhibited.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It isn't.  I have gone for a
blank one simply because it will be easier to get the
information.  It is a West Stand ticket but we can use
the one we already have.

     THE CORONER:     Are we going to be using it again,
do you tnink?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     I would not think so:

The Jury have seen the ticket. Now, you will see the
counterfoil on the left hand side, now that clearly has
                                           E. J. HILSOfi



the words "entrance", then underneath it "gangway",
doesn't it? - A. Yes.

You have very fairly said that you don't go to football
matches, you are not a great follower of football, but
if I asked you how you would expect to enter the
football ground, what would you say? - A. You are
obviously going to look for the entrance number.

What would be the physical entrance, as far as you are
concerned? Would it be a large gate? - A. It would be
perhaps a section of turnstiles with a letter above it.

It would be the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Would you expect as a non football person, if you were
coming to a ground, to enter through a gangway? - A.
No.

So the fact that some fans were coming up to you, your
evidence yesterday being that fans were getting
confused between the letter after the entrance and the
letter after the gangway, the fact that people were
coming up having got the wrong letter - they were
looking at the gangway - was that something that you
thought you ought to raise with your superior Officers?
- A. No, not particularly.  It would not be a matter
that I would raise over the radio anyway, it would be a
matter that I would raise with my supervisors who I was
working with at that point.

And you just help them in, don't you? - A. Yes.

It is not a major problem, just someone getting
confused not reading the ticket? - A. But while you are
raising the point over the tickets, what I did feel is
that people were not looking at the counterfoil section
they were looking at the main ticket section where it
does, it fact, say gangway.

That is right.  You see at the bottom of the
counterfoil section, it says "to be given up"? - A.
Yes.

That would be, if you were looking at a ticket, you
would think that is the bit vou hand in, don't you? -
A. Yes.

Once you have gone through an entrance you don't need
to know which entrance you are meant to be going
through? - A. No.

So if you have the bit that is retained, what you would
expect to see on the ticket that you nave retained is
                                                              18

                                                    E. J. WILSOii




   tne information you need to find you way to your seat
   or to your area in the ground, don't you? - A. i'es.

0. So tne fact the word entrance does not appear there
   does not come as any great surprise to you, if you read
   that ticket? - A. iio.

0. Thank you very sauch.

        HR.   KING:    Sir, could I ask a supplementary
   question   to thewitness about ....

        THE CORONER:    Yes, of course you can.  I ara just
   wondering whether we ought to just add it as an
   exhibit.  One of <ny Jury points out there is a blank
   one in the Operational Order, in which case we can save
   ourselves an Exhibit number.   There is, in fact, a
   blank ticket on page 24 of the Operational Order, so we
   will use that and not put another exhibit in.

        HR. KIi'iG:  Sir, I don't know whether in the
   Operational Order it has the reverse of the ticket.
   That is what I was interested in:

              Further Cross-Examined by MR. KIliG

Q. Officer, just reverse the ticket for a noment.  You see
   the design of the Leppings Lane end on the reverse of
   the ticket? - A. Yes.

0. You were asked about expectations - turn the ticket
   over to the   front again - let us assune you were
   looking for   Entrance C, all right? - A. Yes.

Q. And you turned the plan over to look where Entrance C
   was, on the    plan on the back of the ticket would it be
   fair to say that you would expect Entrance C to be to
   tiie right of Entrance B? - A. Yes.

0. You would? - A. Yes.

0. A, 3, C? - A. Yes.

Q. You would agree with ;ne - you raay not know - do you
   know how they were labelled at Leppings Lane turnstiles
   on 15th April, the order? - A. No, I could not comment
   on that.  I assume, fro.j what the ticket says.

0. You assuraed it would be A, 3, C? - A. Yes.

0. Does it corae as a surprise to you to ‘enow it is A, C,
   B? - A. That is a surprise, yes.
                                                            19

                                                  E.    wILSOU




    o. In fact, 3 was tne turnstiles A-G and C, which on the
       plan on the back you would expect to be to the right
       was, in fact, to the left for the Stand.  That comes as
       a surprise to you? - A. Yes.
B
    0. Thank you.




c



D




E




                         /THE CORQNE     Just but 288 up




H
     THE CORONER:   Just put up 288 please? Thank you very
much for coming.  It is much appreciated.  Members of the
Jury^ shall we pause for a cup of coffee? Mr. Rawlinson
has come over from Liverpool and he is a short witness. We
will fit him in and so let us rise for coffee.

                       (short adjournment)

                KENNETH PATRICK RAWLINSON Sworn

                         Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You are Kenneth Patrick Rawlinson? - A. That is
   right.

Q. Of                          Merseyside? - A. Yes.

Q. You are a machine operator, not that it matters very
   much but that is for the purposes of this Inquest.
   You attended a football match on 15th April 1989? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You are a Liverpool supporter,    is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q. So you had gone to the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Did you come by coach, private car or minibus? - A.
   We hired a van with a few of my mates.

Q. What time approximately did you leave Liverpool, can
   you remember? - A. About 10.30.

Q.   What time did     you arrive in Sheffield? - A.About
     12.15 or 12.30.

Q. What time did you present yourself at the entrance to
   the ground approximately? - A. About twenty to three.

Q. We do not need to go into any details but there were
   a lot of people there? - A. Yes.

Q.   Have you been there before? - A. Yes, a couple    of
     times.

Q.   Did you go to the 1988 Semi Final? - A. No.

Q.   You knew you would have to go to the perimeter    gates
     and afterwards the turnstiles? - A. Yes.‘

Q.   Eventually you got into the turnstile area,   is that
     right? - A. Yes.
                                                              21




                                                K. P. RAWLINSON


    Q. In your statement you say at about a quarter to three
       you were in what you describe as a crush outside the
       turnstiles? - A. Yes.
B
    Q. If you can remember, do you know how many rows you
       would have been back from the turnstiles at that
       time? - A. From the actual turnstile itself?

    Q. Yes, in order to get in? - A. I was probably only
       three or four bodies away from it.

    Q. You were actually at that point quite close? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. Was it pretty tight? - A. Very tight, yes.

    Q. In fact your friends and you split up at that
       point? - A. Yes.

    Q. Whilst you were there you were aiming for Turnstile
       G? - A. Yes, the end one.
D
    Q. There is a sort of metal bar there? - A. Yes, that is
       right.

    Q. Was it touching you? - A. Yes.

    Q. So you were right on the outer edge, so to speak? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. What I am interested in, just ahead of you was an
       older man.  We will not call him an elderly gentleman
       because we got into trouble about that once already.
       An older man, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. You could see he was in some difficulties? - A. He
       was calling out that he couldn't breathe.

    Q. Not far away from you there was a Police Officer on
       the other side of this barrier? - A.
                                         ✓ That is right.
    Q. I think you got concerned about the man, is that
       right? - A. About him and also my mate Terry who had
       hurt his ribs oh that barrier.

    Q. So there were two people you were worried about? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. You were still okay.   You had a word with the Officer
       and what did you say to him, can you remember.   I do
       not mean verbatim.   I am not asking you to quote me




H
                                          K. P. RAWLINSON


the exact words but the sense? - A. I told him that
the older fellow and my mate Terry were having
trouble breathing and asked him could he get them
out.

What did he say? - A. He kept pushing us back a bit
to get us off this barrier.  He was probably trying
to help us and after a couple of times of asking he
eventually helped us under the barrier?

So he tried to ease you off the barrier to take the
pressure off you and when he saw it did not work he
took you underneath? - A. Yes.

So you were now out of the queue? - A. That is right.

I will not use the word "queue".   You were out of the
crush? - A. Yes.

You were in an area where there was still a lot of
people but not as many? - A. We were in free space
like.

Then did he give you any advice as to what he should
do? - A. Yes, he pointed us towards the concertina
gate.

If you look at the model, just point to Gate C, and
see whether that is the one we are talking about? -
A. That is it, yes.

We call that Gate C. He pointed you towards that and
what did he tell you? - A. He told us that if we went
there we would get in without having to go back into
the crush.

To save you going back into the crush? - A. Yes.

  MR. RUSSELL:   I did not hear the last answer,   sir.

     THE CORONER:   Could you repeat that last
answer? - A. He told us if we went to that gate we
would get i n .

You, Terry, and presumably this older person went? -
A. There was a few others.  He helped a few others
out.

He helped a few more out? - A. Yes.
                                           K. P. RAWLINSON


You all went off to the concertina gate? - A. That is
right, yes.

When you got there what happened in the first
instance? - A. When we got there, I can't remember
numbers exactly but there were a number of Police
Officers and stewards and we were told when we got
there that we wouldn't be getting in and we had to go
back.

You say there was a steward.   Are you pretty sure
about that? - A. I think so.

What distinguished this person? What made you think
he might be a steward? - A. I think he had an orange
waist jacket on.

So you were disappointed because you did not think
you were going to get in at that stage? - A. Slightly
disappointed, yes.

Did you go back to see the Police Officer? - A. Yes,
I went back to him and I remember saying something
like, "You dragged us out of here and sent us down
there to get in and now we are not going to get back
in because we have got to get back into that crush".

What did he then do? - A. He took us all back down to
Gate C.

He actually took you to the gate? - A. Yes.

Did he speak to somebody to ask them to open it? - A.
Yes, he spoke to somebody.  I can't remember who it
was he spoke to or what he said.

The gate was then opened,   is that right? - A. Yes.

Were you the only group that went through at that
time? - A. I would say that without looking behind me
to see who else was coming I would^say there was
about a dozen of us or so.

This was a deliberate opening in order to let you in?
- A. Yes.

At that point you were quite happy? - A.‘ Yes.

I think you said it was only opened very narrowly at
that point, is that right? - A. It wasn't pushed all
the way back.
                                          K. P. RAWLINSON



Do you know about what time that might have been?
Did you look at your watch? - A. No, I never looked
at my watch.  It was probably ten to, five to.

You can't be absolutely sure.   It was near to kick-
off time anyway? - A. Yes.

Once you got inside you were in a bigger area which
we call the concourse area.  It does not matter what
anybody else calls it.  There was more room in there?
- A. Yes.

You waited for some of your other mates? - A. Yes, me
and Terry went to the entrance to the tunnel and
stopped there and one of us stood either side of the
tunnel looking for them who was coming in.

Whilst you were standing there did you look back to
see what was happening at Gate C? - A. Yes.

What did you see? - A. It wasn't closed and it was
just a steady stream then of people coming in.

Would you say there were a lot coming through so far
as you could tell? - A. Yes.

You remained at the entrance of the tunnel at that
point? - A. Yes.

Eventually did your friend join you? - A. We managed
to find one and he stood with us then while we looked
for the rest.

In the concourse area there were people coming
through the concertina gate? - A. Yes.

A lot of them were going towards the tunnel, is that
right? - A. Virtually all of them.

In due course I think you decided you had better go
down the tunnel as well otherwise you would not see
anything? - A. Yes.

Just describe to me your progress through the tunnel
and what happened? - A. I managed to get about
halfway down the tunnel and we hit a mass of bodies.
It was just like walking into a brick wall.  Nobody
was moving either sideways or forwards.
                                         K. P. RAWLINSON


I am sorry? - A. They couldn't move sideways or
forwards and with being there before I remembered
that you should go to the terrace on the right and so
I forced my way back out and went round to the right
then.

When you were standing behind this crowd of people in
the tunnel, could you see the pitch at all? - A. I
could see the top half of the goal.

Could you see any players on the pitch, that is what
I am trying to find out? - A. I can't remember.

You cannot remember.  You then turned round and came
out of the tunnel with your mates or just you
yourself? - A. No, they had already gone down.  It
was getting close to kick-off and so they left me and
I said I was going to wait for my brother.

They had disappeared and before you knew they were in
this crowd but you did not know? - A. No.




                                 /Q. Had you heard
                             K. P. RAWLINSON


'Had you heard the roar for the kick-off at all? - A. I
 am sorry.

Had you heard a roar which might have indicated to you
the kick-off? - A. I had heard a roar which I thought
was the teams going out.

But you do not remember anything else? - A.    I think
this was still before the kick-off.

So you then came back out and you managed that? - A.
I had to push myself along a wall to get back out.

Because there were a lot of people coming down? - A.
Ye s .

Having come back out, did you look back into the
tunnel to see what was happening? - A. No, I just got
away from there.

You presumably felt that you could not get through
this wall of people as you have described, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Did you think what the other people might be doing
when they hit that wall?  Perhaps you did not? - A.   I
don't remember thinking about it.  I remembered
thinking to myself before I actually went down the
tunnel and this stream of people was coming through, I
remember looking at my watch then and it was about 5-
to 3 and I was thinking to myself, you know, 'It's 5-
to 3 and all these people are coming in and going out
on the same terrace' and there were bound to be
thousands there already.

You came out and you went round towards the right, is
that right? - A. Yes.

You knew where to go because you remembered it from a
previous occasion? - A.  That is right.

It was not that you had seen signs or anything like
that? - A. No.

When you got round to the right,   I think you attempted
to enter the terrace? - A. Yes,    that is right.

What happened then?. - A. When I got round there, there
was sort of a step up onto the terrace and it was the
same sort of thing there.   It was just like a wall of
people at the back.   From the back it looked very
crushed, so I decided to go to the left-hand side.   I
had never been that end before, but I thought I would
give that a go.
                                                             27



                                    K. P. RAWLINSON


Q. ' So you came all the way back? - A.    Yes.

Q.   Past the tunnel? - A.   Yes.

Q.   Did you remember going through a gap in the wall? - A.
      Not a gap in the wall, a gap in the railings.

Q.   I see. - A. There were railings between what is
     normally the away supporters' end and the entrance to
      the stands, I think it is.

Q.   If you put the plan up, then we can all see. I will
     just show you what it actually looks like and see if
     you remember it, and if you do not remember it, it is
     not that important.  It is 274.  If you turn round,
     help the witness and just find him the tunnel.  - A.
     Yes, that is the tunnel.

Q.   Then you had gone round the right, I think, and then
     you had gone back? - A.  I had come back past the
     tunnel.

Q.   Then you can see there is a wall there with a little
     gap in it? - A. I do not remember going through the
     wall, but I can see where the railings are.

Q.   Then you went through behind those railings that you
     can see on that plan, is that right? - A. Yes, from
     here I can see that it is the railings that segregate
     the supporters going to the ground and the stands.

Q.   In fact,   you finished up in the North Stand? - A.
      Ye s .

Q.   That was not where you were aiming for? - A.      No.

Q.   But that is where you finished up? - A.      I had never
     been to that end of the ground before.

Q.   When you   got onto the North Stand, once you got a view
      of the pitch, that is what I am interested in, was the
      match in play at that point? - A< Yas, the match was
      in progress as I passed the back of the tunnel.

Q.   How do you know that? - A.    That is when I heard the
      roar and when I looked through I could see the
      players.

Q.   You   could actually see from the outside? - A.     Yes.

Q.   You   can actually, you are quite right.  So as you were
      coming back on your second attempt, or third attempt
      actually, the match was in progress? - A.   Yas.
                                                             28




                                    K. P. RAWLINSON


Q. / When you exited into the North Stand, can you remember
     whether the match was still in progress or whether it
     had ceased? - A. Yes, it was still in progress.

Q.   When you looked across to where the terrace was which
     you had tried to enter the second time? - A. Yes,
     that is right.

Q.   What did you notice about that? - A.  There were
     people climbing up into the stands and being lifted
     up, and there were people coming over the perimeter
     fence onto the pitch.  At first it just looked like an
     overspill.

Q.   Did you look at the terrace further along, which was
      the second one you wanted to get in? - A. Yes, the
      terrace that I originally went for, the one on the
      right, at the front it was fairly empty.

Q.   But there were people at the back? - A.     There was
      better vantage point at the back.

Q.   Can you remember how long you were there before the
      match finished? - A. A couple of minutes.

Q.   A couple of minutes? - A.    Yes.

Q.   Had you realised by then that something other than an
      overspill had happened? - A. No, not at that point.

Q.   When did you first begin to realise that something was
     wrong? - A. It was when they carried a fellow onto the
     pitch.  He was sort of on the edge of the penalty
     area, on the left of it, in front of us, and they laid
     him down and started giving him the kiss of life.
     That was when it started to look serious.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Q.   Can you show whereabouts you went into tha stand when
      you took up your position?  Can you go and show it on
      the picture? - A. Yes.

             THE CORONER: Actually we will get him to mark the
     plan.     Thank you for reminding me, Mr. Payne.

          THE WITNESS:  I do not remember going through the
     wall, but there are railings here.  I went through the
     railings, round the back and up this walkway and came
     out onto the stands there.

Q*        MR. PAYNE:  Whereabouts was your position when
     you took it up? - A. I didn't actually get to a seat.
                                                              29




                                   K. P. RAWLINSON


     ' As you come onto there, you go through some steps onto
       the stand and I was standing with the steward.

Q.    Right.  You stood just about the place where you
      touched the sheet? - A. Yes, just there, around there
      somewhere.

            THE CORONER: Can you put an acetate up and we
      will get it marked.   Can you put a cross if you would
      be so kind. (Witness marks plan). This is 316.

Q*         MR. KING:   In the bundle of photographs that you
      have there, can you turn to photograph 271? Can you
      see in the photograph the place where you took up your
      position? - A. Yes.

Q.    At the top of that gangway somewhere is it? - A. Can
      you see the two white entrances onto the stand?

          THE CORONER: Can I just stop you one minute, Mr.
     Payne.  Members of the Jury, we have done our usual
     trick and cut it off.   I will let you have a look at
     mine because you do need to see this actually.   The
     Jury are okay, they have got it.   I am sorry about
     that, Mr. Payne, I keep on interrupting you.

          MR. PAYNE:  Not at all.
Q.   The white entrance, do you mean about halfway down the
     stand? - A. Yes, that is it.

Q.   That is   not quite the place where I thought you marked
      the picture.   It is not your fault.

           THE CORONER: We can just see it now.

Q*        MR. PAYNE:  Look at the picture on the screen. -
     A. There, yes, the top one, that is it.

Q.   Is the pointer touching the place where you     stood? -
      A. Yes, just in front of it.

Q.   Just in   front of that entrance?   * A.   Yes,that is
      it, you can see it.

Q.   So from there you could see people climbing upinto
     the stand, whereabouts? - A. The stand    wallat the
     back.

Q.   Toucn the picture, Mr. Griffiths, and then you can
      show us. - A. That is it, right along there and on to
      the left.

Q.   So that is behind what we know ---
                              K. P. RAWLINSON


'      THE CORONER: That looks like pen 2 actually, to
 me.

     THE WITNESS:  They were using these pen dividers
to stand on to help themselves get up on the railings.

       MR. PAYNE: So if you could see them climbing up
there into the stand, could you also see the crowd
that was on the terrace in front of the stand? - A.
Y es .

You have told the Court that you did not realise that
anything had gone wrong until you saw somebody on the
pitch, is that right? - A.  I think so, yas.

Being resuscitated? - A.   Yes.

So the view that you had then looking across into the
crowd in^ the pens behind the goal, it did not appear
to you that there was anything wrong in the crowd? -
A. Well, I have seen crushes before and people
getting out of crushes and that is what it looked
like.  Obviously it was a crush but it didn't seem
anything more serious than that at the time.

It did not seem anything more serious than what you
have seen before? - A.  No.

Thank you.  Do you agree with the description which
other witnesses have given about the sort of crush
which you have seen on other occasions at football
matches, that the crowd when it is in a crush like
that on other occasions is shoulder to shoulder and
front to back? - A. Yes.

That is a fair description, is it? - A.    Yes.

That is what it looks like? - A. Yes.

That is not uncommon at football matches, is it, on
terraces? - A. Without actually being in the Leppings
Lane end, it looked like a crush I had been in before.

I am asking you about your experience about other
football matches. - A. Yes --
I am sorry to interrupt you, my fault, but tell the
Jury what your experience of other football matches
is? - A.  Especially at Wembley on occasions I have
experienced crushes and your feet actually are lifted
off the floor, it is that tight.

So you have been to Wembley? - A.   Yes.
                                                            31




                                       K. P. RAWLINSON


    Q. ' Where else have you been to football matches? - A.
         All over the country.

    Q.   How regularly? - A.    I go to maybe five away games a
B        season.

    Q.   How many home matches? - A.   All of them.

    Q.   At Liverpool? - A.    Yes.




D




                                         /Q.   Right




H
                                             K. P. RAWLINSON



Right.   For how long have you been doing that? - A.
Since I was about 12 or 13 - 18 or 19 years.

So judging by that experience at first it did not seem to
you that anything was out of the ordinary? - A. It didn't
seem as serious as it turned out to be, no.

     THE CORONER:   Can I just say one thing, Mr. Payne?
I interrupted earlier and said that that looked like pen
2.   On reflection I was wrong.   I think the area he was
pointing to was actually pen 3, because that is pen 2 and
that was pen 3:

That's the area you saw people coming of, didn't you? -
A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   It was my fault, I made a mistake.

           Cross-Examined by MR. COUGHLIN:

Obviously you are a regular attender at Anfield and
around the country? - A. Yes.

So your experience is substantial of attending fairly
large capacity football matches? - A. Yes.

If you arrive at a large capacity game close to kick-off
would you expect to get a place behind the goal? - A. Not
actually behind the goal, no.   Maybe on the wings of the
terrace.

Therefore, arriving as you did towards kick-off, quarter
to three, ten to three, or thereabouts, perhaps even
closer to three o'clock, you would expect to get a place
on the wings at the side rather than to get in place
behind the goal? - A. Yes.

     MR. MANNING:    Sir, there is a photograph which I
think could usefully be put now.    The only copy I have
now is that which was in the interim report, but I am
sure there must be another copy.    X am perfectly
prepared to take this one out if ycru want.   Indeed, my
learned friend Mr. King has already done so.

     THE CORONER:   Which one is it?

     MR. MANNING:     It is the West Terrace. It is at
2.59 pm and I think it must be almost the exact spot this
witness was standing at, looking down.

     THE WITNESS:   Yes, it is very close.
                                                        32


                                           K. P. RAWLINSON


     THE CORONER:    We haven't one done on an overhead
yet, have we?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I have been handed a bundle of
photographs which have reference numbers which I suspect
are West Midlands Police numbers.   They include the same
photograph as the one which my friend has referred to,
which of course is shown at 14.59.   That is just before
kick-off or about that.   I am also in possession, and
they are not very good photographs, but clearly are West
Midlands' photographs of the same sequence of further
photographs take at 15.01 and 15.03 from the same spot,
which would be remarkably akin to the time and the
position of this witness and so it would be helpful...

     THE CORONER:    It from the same location, but
different timings?

     MR. KING: The 15.03 might be, one doesn't _know, one
would have to investigate.   All I am saying, sir, it
might be helpful if we got this photograph.

     THE CORONER:   That may be better.   Can I ask this
witness one questions because it might help us:

Do you remember Beardsley hitting the crossbar? - A. I
didn't see it.   I think that was the time I was walking
back again behind the tunnel, because I heard a roar
then.   People were still coming through the gates.

So by the time you got on to the North Stand that event
had past as far as you were concerned? - A. Yes.

So that means certainly not before 15.03, doesn't it?
Have you got 15.04...

     MR. KING:   Sir, could I hand those up?   Clearly
after 15.03 it is not going to be any better, if I can
put it that way.  Sir, so everybody knows I am handing up
four photographs to you.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. Manning, that does seem quite a
reasonable idea.     If you have got a photograph which is
better timewise.

     MR. MANNING:  My learned friend was bolder than me.
I had opened my report and was looking at it when he was
ripping out the same photograph.

     MR. KING:   Sir, the top photograph, the one which
is ripped out, has no reference and is the 14.59.    There
is a reference in the bottom right hand corner, sir.
                                           K. P. RAWLINSON


     THE CORONER:   Yes, AGT.12.A   Where did you find
the time, Mr. King?

     MR. KING:    Sir, you can see it on the electronic
scoreboard.    That may not be exactly right, sir, but it
is very helpful.               '

     THE CORONER:    It seems to me sensible to look at
the 15.03 one because that is as near as we are going to
get with his timing.    Let Mr. Manning have a look at it
because he is questioning at the moment.    Have a look at
15.01 and 15.03.

     MR. MANNING:   I am sure they are going to have to
come, sir, so if your Officer without showing them to me
wants to go...

     THE CORONER:   No, just glance at them.   Are you
happy to use those?

     MR. MANNING:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I am bearing in mind that what we are
trying to establish is what this witness saw, not what
happens to be in the photograph.

     MR. MANNING:   I think, sir, that was already before
us because when I held up this just to indicate to you
what it was I was referring to, the witness said, "Yes,
that is what I was looking at," so clearly we have got a
photograph which is very helpful in my view.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   Would you do a couple of
acetates and let's wait a minute or two.   If we find
better versions of these photographs we may re-do the
acetates and then just substitute them if that's
agreeable because we may have a better quality print to
work from.

     MR. KING:    Sir, while we are waiting, they seem to
be in sequence, these photographs.    The ones which have
just gone out, we know the last one is 15.03.    The next
one unfortunately is so blurred one can't see the time.
The next one underneath looks like 15.05, so we are
building a picture the whole time from the same vantage
point.   Then there is 15.06, which is the same vantage
point again, sir.    They may be very helpful photographs
as a bundle, sir.

     Could I just hand those to you?   Sir, the top one
is so blurred one can't, but it is clearly in sequence
the next one after that to the ones I handed in to you,
but if you turn the page, sir, you can see the next one.
I think it is 15.05 that one can see on that scoreboard.
                                                              K. P. RAWLINSON


If you turn again, sir, I think it is 15.06 because the
game is still in progress.

     THE CORONER:   After that I don't think it matters.
What I think we will do is get these done on acetate.    I
don't think we need them for this witness but I agree
they are helpful.

     MR. MANNING:   I may be able to make                     some progress
whilst Sergeant Griffiths is doing that.                       I really only
have a limited question and almost any of                     the
photographs, including the one I have got                     in my hand
here, will do so far as the answer to the                     question is
concerned.

        THE CORONER:       Let's wait until we get the right
shot.

     MR. KING:   Sir, a suggestion from behind me which
is an intelligent one.   The photographs I have handed up
appear to be some sort of photo colour copy of some sort,
suggesting there must be the original in the possession
of the West Midlands Police which will be a better copy.

      THE CORONER:   That is what I am hoping and we will
look.    I just want to use these now in order that we can
get on with it and don't have to be searching.

Now this is the 15.03 one.   You can't see the 3 on that,
but you may accept... - A. I can just see it.

     THE CORONER:   Right, Mr. Manning, are you happy
with that photograph?   I don't want to upset your line
of questioning in any way.

     MR. MANNING:   Not at all, sir.   I think through a
combination of efforts, and that at the end of the day is
what an Inquest is all about to try and find out, and we
are being very much helped by effectively being able to
be in this witness's mind's eye at that time:
              C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by MR.   MANNING:
Looking at that at 1503, does that seem that there is
more happening, less happening or the same as what your
instantaneous impression was when you got up into the
North Stand? - A. Yes, I would say that is fairly much ,
what was happening.   There were probably more people
climbing on to the stand than you can actually see there.

More people going from the back upwards?' - A. That's
right, yes.

Have you actually been to the Hillsborough ground before?
- A. Yes.
                                                                35


                                                     K. P. RAWLINSON


    Q. Have you seen in the past people actually being able to
       make use of what is a fairly small differential between
       the back of the standing area and the top of the... - A.
       No, I have never seen them doing that before.
B   Q. You have never seen people being lifted up before? - A.
       No. , •

    Q. However, you could see more people than there appear to
       be on that photograph being lifted up? - A. Yes, there
       was also more this end of the photograph.    You can't see
       it now because of the end of the stand.

    Q.   Let's put up the next one and see whether   on the next one
         that is more of what you recognise?

              THE CORONER:   Yes, the first is...

              MR. BEEGHEY:   The first one is 317.

              THE CORONER:   It is 317.   We will try and produce
         a better version of it, but it will be 317.   Now the
         next one will be 318, of course.

              THE WITNESS:   That's earlier, that's 15.01.

              MR. MANNING:   That's 15.01, you are absolutely
         right.   It looks as if there is less to see there and
         you are absolutely right because it is two minutes
         earlier.   Now, Sergeant Griffiths, can we go one on? We
         haven't got one ready yet.

              THE WITNESS:   The first one wasn't far off.

              MR. RUSSELL:   Sir,are you  going to maintain the
         order of exhibit numbers in view of the fact that they
         are in reverse order in terms of time?

              THE CORONER:   Yes, I think that would be wise.
         Can you label this one...

              MR. BEECHEY:   This   isAGJ/4A-

              THE CORONER:    Can you make that 317.   I want the
         earlier one.    Put the earlier one on, Sergeant
         Griffiths.   Can you please label that one as 317? That
         is AJT.1/3A.



G




H
                                                                       36

                                                          X. ?. RAW'LINSON




            M». BEECHEY:             That will be 318.

             THE CORONER:    And we really want the next one.
B      i/e have^ got the blurred one where vra cannot tell what
       tirae it is.   Can you check that this is 15.05, I think
       it was, wasn't it?

            The Jury have asked three questions which are not
       on these pictures, so I will take tne opportunity:

    Q. The Jury have three points they are interested in.             It
       is when you were actually going towards the i'iorth
       Stand, so it is before you got in. - A. Yes.

    Q. The question they are asking, the first one, is when
       you went through the metal railings, as you describe
       theja, were you stopped. Did anybody attempt to stop
       you? - A. No.

    0. Did you see anybody who aright have stopped you? - A.
       Yes, I walked past Police Officers and Stewards.

    0. But nobody stopped you? - A. No.

    Q. The second question is, were you the only one or were
       there loads of people going through the railings? - A.
       No, I was on my own.

    0. You were on your own? - A. Yes.

    Q. So you were a one off? - A. Yes.

    Q. The third thing is can           you by chance remember whether
       you were going through           this area where the railings
       are, whether you saw a           big concertina gate open behind
       you at that position -           not tna one you nave already
       seen. - A. Ho, I could           not say.

    Q. You did not see any other? - A. Ho, I know the one you
            but I did not see if it was open or not

            iiR. GRIFFITHS:            This is 15.05, sir.

            THE CORONER:             Uhat reference is t'iat?

            i   iR• Gilli? FX THS:     AGJ1/6A.

            THE CORONER:             i/aat number will that be

            riR. BEECHEY:            319, sir.
            t   *.; c*
               CORONER:   iir. Manning, if you want
      again with this sequence, I won't object.   I will allow
      the repetition.



H
     HR. MAiliJliiG: Mr. Rawlinson, I get the impression
from what you have said that we nay, in fact, hava
clicked on 125? - A. Yes, we are in between the two.

Yes, there was raore now happening on this one at 15.05?
- A. That is right, yes.

Than you saw when you took up your position in the
Stand? - A. That is right, yes.

So just accepting the learned Coroner's invitation, if
we can just clarify the position, when you came up into
the North Stand you looked across, you saw people being
lifted into the Stand above, you saw people coning over
the fence, and it looked to you like an overspill? - A.
That is right, yes.

Can I take it as an obviously very experienced football
supporter over a lot of years, a lot of snatches, that
you have seen overspills at games in tne past? - A. I
have never actually been at a match and experienced one
but I have seen overspills on television.

That is where that expression overspill comes froa? -
A. Yes.

From that experience? - A. Yes.

Can you look again at the photograpn, and you know
wnere we nave been looking at the timing, 15.01, 15.03,
15.05? - A. Yes.

Just below that is what seems to be a cubicle, a box? -
A. Tnat is right, yes.

That is, we now know, the Police Control ;iox - I don't
know whether you knew at the tine that is what it was?
- A. Yes.

within a fnatter of feet, because it oust have been soae
feet to your right as you stood in »the i'orth Stand, but
pretty much that is facing direct opposite to you,
having a view of the Leppings Lane end frora the other
side? - A. Yes.

:’ut pretty much adjacent, pretty -much identical to fie
view that you had? - A. That is right, ves.

Thanks very much indeed, Mr. Rawlinson.
                                                                38

                                                   P. RAWLINSON




                    Cross-Examined bv MR. KIHG

    0. Mr. Rawlinson, when you were stanaing on what we call
H      the concourse, before you had attempted .to eo'down the
       tunnel. - A. Yes.

    0. You say you were able to see the steady stream of
       people coming through the concertina gate, which we
       know is Gate C? - A. Yes.

    0. Was there anybody in the concourse area by way of
       Police or Stewards when you were watching that? - A. I
       could not say I noticed any.  It was not something I
       was looking for, you know.

    Q. It certainly was not something which struck you? - A.
       No.

    Q. Did you see anybody directing that steady stream of
       people? - A. No.

D   Q« To wnere they should go? - A. No.

    o. You yourself had been there the year before? - A. No,
       not ••••

    Q. I ara sorry, you had been there on another occasion? -
       A. Yes.

    0. So you know how to get to the wings? - A. Yes.

    Q. To that extent you were lucky.  Did you see anything
       which would help anybody coming through A-G turnstiles
       onto the concourse area, the way you came, which would
       help them know the way to the wings? - A. I did not see
       anything, but it was not something I was looking for
       because ....

    0. Ho, you were not looking for it? - A. No.

    Q. If you look at 263 for a moment, please, that is a view
       ot the tunnel which one can see if one has come through
       turnstiles A-G, if we look on the model, and if
       Sergeant Griffiths would point out Gate C, and perhaps
       with the stick point to the route from Gate C to the
       tunnel, that is what you saw, a steady stream of people
       going that way? - A. Yes.

    0. If we go back to 263, you will remember it had the word
       "Standing1* on it, over the top - do you remember that?
       - A. I don't remember seeing that, no.

       You don't remember that   Do you remember seeing the
       letter "a” ? - A. No.




H
You don't remember, so be it. Can you also help frora
your experience of terracing as well, that in terracing
if one enters in the middle one can nonetheless, on
many grounds, filter to the side? - A. That is correct,
yes.

Is it your experience that most terracing is divided up
into self-contained pens? - A. No.

On this terracing, when one went down the tunnel, if
one tried to filter to the side, having gone down to
the front a bit, you would meet the radial fences which
were blocking your way? - A. That is correct, yes.

Did you yourself know of those radial fences? - A. Yes,
from previous games.

Because you had been before? - A. Yes.

Was there anything you saw     by way of sign or otherwise
for somebody entering that     tunnel for the first time,
who had never been before,     to warn theni that there was
no way to the side pens in     that way? - A. No.

You said to yourself, I made a note, what did go
through your raind when you were standing at that tunnel
entrance looking at the streajr, of people coining, was
that it was 5-to-3 and all these people were going onto
the same terrace? - A. Yes.

Could you explain again what that thought process was?
- A. Well, with it being so late obviously there were
already thousands of people who had got there earlier,
who had already took up tneir positions on that
terrace, and you have got, it seemed like auncreds, if
not thousands more arriving at tnat tiine. If you are
adding thousands to thousands, then it is commonsense
you are going to get a crush.

Can I have a look if I may at sosne of the more recent
photographs - 318 - I think that is,/the one we have
decided is almost right.  It is the one we feel is
about right, the middle ones.

     THE CORONER:   It is probably the blurred one
wnich is the one we need.

     h R .   KING:   Sir, it was ever tnus:

Mr. Rawlinson, I think you gave evidence earlier that
it was slightly worse than that, but that is the best
we can do for your vision when you first got .... - A.
That is fairly close, yes.
                                                           40

                                            K. P. RAwLIs^SON




Q. I want to sae if you can confirm this looking at the
   photograph then.  It is obvious, isn't it, that the
   side pen nearest to you, which I think is Pen 6, if
   Detective Sergeant Griffiths would point that out, nas
   a goodly number of erapty spaces on it? - A. Correct,
   yes.

0. It is very different frora, on any view, the compactness
   of the two centre pens? - A. Yes.

Q. We cannot see it on this photograph frora this distance,
   but the Jury will have an opportunity to look at it -
   you may be able to see - if you go further over to the
   far pen, Pen 2, one can see the spaces at the front
   which you were talking about, and being snore compact at
   the back? - A. Yes.

0. You yourself were not in charge of crowd safety, were
   you? - A. No.

Q. You yourself did not have the task of deciding whether
   or not pens had got too full for people's comfort, or
   too full for people's safety? That just was not your
   job? - A. No.

Q. From your experience as a football fan though, do you
   know that crowds have a capacity fixed in advance as to
   how many people can safely be put in? - A. Yes.

0. And is it also your experience that different sections
   of the ground have capacities in which people can be
   safely put? - A. Yes.

Q. If one could simply decide whether a pen was safely
   full or dangerously full by looking, it would be
   difficult to know why one would have fixed capacities -
   do you understand? - A. Yes.

Q. The overspill which we can see there, you can confirs -
   I think I can see it frora here - nobody is actually on
   the pitch itself? - A. Correct.

0. Have you had experience of piten invasions in the past,
   witnessing them perhaps, perhaps on the television? -
   A. Only on TV, yes.

Q. Can you confirm this, that when one has a pitch
   invasion the fans climb over the barriers and actually
   go onto the pitch itself? - A. Yes.   That is why it
   never entered ray head that it was anything else but an
   overspill.

Q. An overspill means too aany people in a pen? - A.
   Correct, yes.
                                                                       41

A                                                   K. P. RAWLIKSOu




    Q.    I ((on' t want to put words into your mouth.   Is that
         what you mean by an overspill? - A. Yes.

    0. So when you were looking at your view was there were
B      too many people in the~saiddle pens? - A . Yes.

    Q.    Can I go back to before you entered the turnstiles?      I
         think you said you got there at about 20-to-3? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. You obviously had to enter the turnstile area - if
       Sergeant Griffiths would just point out what I am
       talking about.  Do you remember entering through the
       perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

    0. Were they open or shut, do you remember? - A. They were
       open.

    Q.   Was anything stopping you going into the area? - A. lio.
         There was a mounted Policeman in the middle of the
         crowd, but tftere was no gates closed or anything like
         that.
D
    Q. Thank you very much.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. CAICHPQLE

    Q. Mr. Rawlinson, in your experience would it be fair to
       say that the area behind the goal on a terrace is a
       favourite viewing position for a lot of fans? - A. Yes.

    0.    Obviously when you went into the concourse area behind
         the turnstiles you had absolutely no idea of what the
         state of the terraces were, but the reason you stood by
         the tunnel, was that because given a free terrace where
         there was no one in there, your favourite viewing
         position would have been behind that goal soraewhere? -
         A. Actually for that match me and my friends had
         decided to go to the terrace on the right, but because
         of the flow of the people all going to the centre, that
         is why I went to the tunnel.    It was just a natural
         flow of people going that way, you see, even though we
         had arranged to meet in the right hand side.




                          /Q. Following on from that ....




H
                                         K. P. RAWLINSON


Following on from that it was getting close to kick-
off by this time and most people presumably at that
time were quite anxious to get down to see the match?
- A. That is right, yes.

Was that your impression of the people coming
through? - A. Yes.

They were all going in one direction and the most
obvious direction was going down the tunnel? - A.
Yes.

Can I just show you C.264, the picture in front of
you? - A. Yes.

You have very fairly said you did not actually see
any signs.  You do not remember seeing any signs.
There is actually a sign there saying "Standing" and
pointing round to the back? - A. Yes.

Did you see people looking round for signs or were
they all just following that way? - A. It just seemed
to be the natural thing for everybody to do, just to
go through that tunnel.

At that particular time you had no fears about going
down but if you had seen a big sign saying, "If you
walk round the sides you can also get on to the
terraces" would you have gone straight down that
tunnel obviously knowing what was there to greet you?
Let me rephrase that.  Do you think when it is about
four minutes to three, the match is due to kick-off,
the obvious route is to go down the tunnel and the
natural flow of people is to go down there because as
you have said they were anxious to get into the
match? - A. Yes.

Do you think the fact that there were other signs
such as this one made any difference to people going
in? - A. I don't think people would have been looking
for signs to be honest.

           Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Rawlinson, when you first took up your position
in the North Stand you said that you did not notice
any serious overcrowding in Pens 3 and 4. That is
correct, is it not? - A. No, no.
                                                               43




                                                 K. P. RAWLINSON


     Q. You did not notice any. When you first went into the
B       North Stand you did not realise there was a serious
        situation in there? - A. I didn't realise it was as
        serious.

     Q. You just thought people were crowding in there? - A.
        Overcrowding, yes.

     Q. Would you agree a visual impression is not a
        satisfactory way of knowing what was happening inside
        those pens for you? You would not know what was
        happening? - A. Not from where I was, no.

     Q. Would you agree that numbers have to be counted in
        when people go into a football ground? - A. Yes.

     Q. Where would you say that is normally done? - A. At
        the turnstiles.

]J   Q. They have to be monitored you say and with coming in
        by a turnstile entry they would also filter as well,
        wouldn't they? They would not just all come in, as
        you saw them coming in, in thousands? - A. Yes.

     Q. These are your words and this is not something I am
        saying.  You said you saw thousands more coming in
        and you said it was common sense that there would a
        crush when you saw the numbers coming in in that way?
        - A. Yes, when you are standing back and looking at
        it then it is common sense there is going to be a
        crush.

     Q. Because of the way it was done.  Really when you were
        in the North Stand you would not be expected to know
        the serious problem in the centre, would you? You
        would normally just see a mass of moving heads there
        I would think? - A. When I first got there it only
        confirmed what I first suspected behind the stand
        that there would be a crush.      y

     Q. You only realised something had gone very wrong when
        you saw somebody lying on the pitch being
        resuscitated? - A. Yes.

     Q. You did not know what the fans were going through
        inside the pens? - A. No.

     Q. Before that incident was clear to you.  Of course,
        then when you did see fans getting over the perimeter




H
                                              K. P. RAWLINSON


fence you said you did think it was an overspill? -
A. Yes.

You said that was clear to you because they were not
invading the pitch? - A. Yes.

                  Further by THE CORONER:

I have just one further point about something you
said.   You said it was common sense looking back? -
A. Yes.

Are you implying there that now we are sitting here
looking at it that it is common sense or are you
saying that you realised that at the time, which is
what I am really interested in? - A. At the time I
did realise it was going to be overcrowded on that
terrace.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Rawlinson,   I am very grateful to
l.    Thank you very much indeed.

                   PAUL HAND-DAVIS Sworn

                      Bv THE CORONER:

You are Paul Hand-Davis? - A. Yes.

A Police Inspector of the mounted branch or
section? - A. Yes, sir.

You obviously are responsible to somebody in the
hierarchy but the mounted section tends to be a unit
on its own? - A. Yes, indeed, sir.

From a practical point of view you run it? - A. Yes.

Just so that we can get this right, it is common
practice, is it, that when you have big matches you
get help from other Forces to supplement the number
of horses? - A. Yes, we call it mutual aid.  Our
section is too small for a match of this size.

Would you sometimes go to other places? Would you do
the reverse and provide mutual aid to other Forces or
are you a receiver rather than a provider in general
terms? - A. No, in general we do both.  We go to
other Forces and we receive help.

On this occasion you got mutual aid both from
Merseyside and from Nottingham? - A. Yes.
                                           P. HAND-DAVIS



To build up your numbers so to speak? - A. Yes.

Who decides, as a matter of interest, how many
Officers you want at a match of this size?   Is the
decision taken by you, the Ground Commander or
what? - A. It will be the Ground Commander's
decision.

He will say, "We had better have 30 horses" or 40 or
50, whatever it might be? - A. Yes.

Once that decision has been taken you then deal with
the allocation, so to speak? - A. Yes.

That would be right? - A. Yes, sir.

Just so that we get the numbers right, in fact, you
used about 35 mounted Officers on that day or at
least you had available to you 35 Officers? - A. Yes,
sir.

Initially   you had six at the station and then the
rest were   at the ground? - A. When you say initially
they were   there for the whole duration and weren't
available   to me.  So in effect I had 29.

This is the Midland Railway Station, is it not? - A.
Yes.

So those were too far away and played no part in
this? - A. Correct, yes.

You had a copy of the Operational Order which makes
some reference to the mounted section but you
modified it as you thought appropriate in the light
of your experience? - A. Yes, it was a very brief
reference and we fleshed it out, if you like, in
terms of our experience.
                                  ✓’
Perhaps I ought to ask you about that.  How much
experience have you got as a mounted Officer? - A. I
have been a Police Officer since 1972 and a mounted
Police Officer since 1978.  I am a former West
Yorkshire Officer and I came here on promotion in
1986 to inspect.

So quite a lot of experience in the mounted division
and about three years or so with South Yorkshire
Police at the time of the incident? - A. Yes, sir.
                                         P. HAND-DAVIS


This involved policing matches not just at Sheffield
Wednesday but at other grounds, of course? - A. I
think I have policed at most of the grounds in the
North of England, sir, certainly Yorkshire anyway.

Do you remember whether you policed the 1988 Semi
Final? - A. I remember it well and the 1987 Semi
Final as well, sir.

You decided to put Nottingham people on the whole
with the Nottingham supporters and Merseyside
Officers with the Liverpool supporters.  Would that
be right? - A. It seemed sensible, yes.

I do not think we need be too concerned about the
Nottingham end. We are not very interested.   It is
not really relevant to us and so we will forget about
that for the time being.  How many horses did you
allocate to the Leppings Lane end? - A. Initially
half a dozen but those were to be supplemented by the
escort from the railway station at a later date, or a
later timetable.

What was the full complement planned to be once that
escort had arrived? - A. Certainly something around
the dozen mark in comparison to say Penistone Road
which was ten horses.

You put slightly more at the Leppings Lane end? - A.
Yes.

Did you know what time the train was expected? - A. I
think I remember 1402 was the timed schedule.

Presumably you thought, "We will take people down",
if the train was on time, of course, at about quarter
past and you took it that that would be satisfactory?
- A. Yes.

In the early part of the day, and We are talking
about 1989, was there a briefing with all the mounted
Officers? - A. Yes, I think about eleven o'clock,
perhaps a bit earlier, I brought everybody together
and gave them an overview of what was going on that
day.

You did? - A. Yes.

Was there another briefing from anybody else,
Superintendent Duckenfield, Superintendent Murray or
anybody else? - A. I think Mr. Duckenfield had his
                                                          47




                                             P. HAND-DAVIS


   own duties that day.  I know he came down just as we
   were mounting up and gave us a short briefing, only a
   short briefing.

Q. You were not at the general briefing at eleven
   o'clock within the stadium then? - A. No, sir.   I had
   attended the one on the Friday.

Q. You I take it were confident that you knew what was
   expected of you? - A. Yes.

Q. You started I think patrolling around along the
   Halifax Road, is that right, at about 11.30 or so? -
   A. Yes, I was working with the Merseyside Inspector
   at that time who had come over with them and giving
   him a brief walk round, showing him the layout of the
   ground and the area.

Q. Anything of any moment that is relevant so far as we
   are concerned? - A. I think we have mentioned it but
   my perception was a warm day, people sat about
   enjoying themselves on the verges, drinking.   I
   remember being right up Halifax Road near the White
   Horse public house.   Lots of people going into the
   pub at that time.   Lots of people queuing at the off-
   licence across the road, but just a pleasant carnival
   atmosphere really.

Q. Nothing for you to worry about? - A. No, we enjoyed
   ourselves then.

Q. That is the important thing really.  We wanted a
   description of what happened and what you perceived
   but you did not consider that worrying at that stage
   anyway? - A. No, sir.

Q. Did you hear an announcement about Claywheels Lane
   being full of coaches at any particular point in
   time? - A. Yes, I think that was round about quarter
   to two.  That was one of the coach^parking areas,
   Claywheels Lane and it had obviously become full and
   they were going to start parking the coaches up
   Halifax Road.

Q. Were you still in Halifax Road at that time, can you
   remember? - A. I think we had moved up to the station
   by then or in that vicinity ready for the trains.
                                P. HAND-DAVIS


Because, in fact, you were going to bring the people
from the train down with your colleagues, so to speak?
~ a ' Yes. Invariably these trains don't keep to time
and they are usually early, so we were up there quite
early waiting for the hopefully early arrival, and as
it happened it was early.

Indeed it was early, as you said, and you I think had
a group on this train, 400 or 500 people of that
order, is that right? - A. Yes, it wasn't quite 500;
there were only about 400 on it.

They were escorted down with you   plus another five
officers, plus others? - A. Yes,   the planned escort
was me and five, plus I think we   picked up a couple
more horses from Penistone Road,   so that made eight in
all.

No problems, I think we can say? - A.  No.  As I said
before, they were a good bunch of lads and everybody
sober and looking forward to a good day, no problems
at all.

You then approached the ground and I think in your
initial statement you said 14.20, but you subsequently
modified that, I think, to a little bit earlier, would
that be right? - A.  I think I was out of 'sync' with
the times and it was a little bit earlier than that,
perhaps more like 5-past/10-past 2.

When you approached them at that time, let us take
that to be the correct time, what was it like? You
were coming down Leppings Lane, were you not, or at
least up Leppings Lane towards the ground from the
roundabout?  Anything that you saw or noticed that
worried you or concerned you at that stage? - A. No, I
think things were as per normal and usually everybody
tries to melt away into the chip shops and the shops
and the people who were already in Leppings Lane were
hanging around and mingling with the train escort, but
gradually with a bit of patience*we moved people along
and got everybody towards the turnstiles and got thsm
in, and certainly at that time, sort of 2.10/2.15,
there was absolutely no pressure on the turnstiles
whatsoever and the train escort went in without any
problems at all.

You picked up a few what I might call stragglers en
route? - A. Hangers about on the way and brought them
along and encouraged them to come along and enter the
ground, yes.  That is standard practice.

As far as you were concerned, you were then going to
stay at the Leppings Lane end, if everything had gone
                               P. HAND-DAVIS


according to plan I mean? - A. No, had everything gone
according to plan, I had responsibilities all around
the ground.  Penistone Road was equally as important
to me because of the numbers going through there but,
as it happens, I never really got to Penistone Road.
Things at Leppings Lane developed and I never left it.

So what did you perceive happen? - A. Certainly at
2.15 there was nothing particularly to worry me, but
certainly from 2.30 onwards there was absolutely no
chance for me to leave Leppings Lane at all.

What happened then at 2.30 as far as you could see? -
A. Well, a phenomenon - an absolute influx of people
in huge numbers.  Certainly nothing like it at 2.15
was seen, but by 2.30 we were really in a crisis in
terms of the sudden appearance of thousands of people.

We know the answer to this, but did you actually see
them come from both ends of Leppings Lane, or did you
just notice them from one end? - A.  They were coming
from both ends.  I think I have said that perhaps for
every two that were coming from Leppings Lane end one
was coming down from the bridge.

So your perception was that there were more coming up
Leppings Lane from the Halifax Road area than coming
down Catch Bar Lane? - A. Yes, certainly huge numbers
from both directions.

But when the crowds first of all came down at, say,
2.30 I think your impression of the crowd was still a
good-natured crowd, would that be right? - A.
Certainly the 2.15 to 2.30 time wasn't anything to
worry about, and they were a good-natured crowd and no
problems.

At this point where were you actually positioned?
Were you within the turnstile area, or were you in the
roadway, or where were you? - A.  I was moving about
on the concourse area, talking to people and
supervising generally, but I did not at that time
enter the turnstile area, no.

When you say the concourse area, so that we can get
this right, are you meaning the paved area outside the
perimeter gates? - A. I think the PW referred to it as
the Reception Area, and we might well best keep to
that.  It is the Reception Area because we receive
coaches there usually.

I used the word "concourse" for the inside.  So that
was where you were? - A. In that general area, yes.
                                                       50




                                     P. HAI'JD-DAVIS


Q.   What were you endeavouring to do at that stage? - A.
      Well, what we usually do - helping people.  There were
      a lot of questions about tickets, we have already
      mentioned that today, and helping people out,
      directing them.  There was a lot of confusion, and
      assisting with that, and just generally helping
      people.

Q.   You may not recollect it, but what sort of questions
      were people asking with regard to the tickets as far
      as you are concerned? - A. Basically they asked one of
      two things, you know, which is the standing area and
      which is the sitting area, and I confined my guidance
      to one or the other group of turnstiles, just to
      simplify matters, but people were very, very confused
     about the place that they should enter the ground in
      terms of the exact place. I think they knew they had
      to be at the Leppings Lane end.  There was no doubt
     about that.

Q.   We have heard from Miss Wilson, I think, your PC, that
     she seemed to recollect that it was the tickets which
     had gangway numbers which seemed to cause the
     confusion.  Did you have that impression, or were they
     just asking, "Is it standing?" "Is it sitting?" and
     you pointed them in the right direction? - A.  I think
     it is very easy when you work a ground regularly to
     not understand the confusion.  People get off a coach,
     walk up a road and suddenly are confronted with a
     battery of turnstiles and it is quite confusing for
     them, and they did not have a clue, a lot of people,
     as to where they were supposed to go in.  So all of us
     were being asked cons tantly.

Q.   I think your policy was not to direct them to specific
     turnstiles;  you said, "Are you standing or sitting?"
     and then if they were standing A to G, if they were
     sitting, 1 to 16? - A. Yes.

Q.   Would that be about right? - A. Yes, because as soon
     as you had dealt with that persoti, someone else was
     asking you and it was a case of speed.

Q.   It was quicker doing it like that? - A.   Yes,
     facilitating it.

Q.   This went on for a little while and then what was your
     next move? - A. I think we get to 2.30 and things get
     really bad and I noticed the A to G turnstile
     particularly was the one that gave me concern because
     it is so confined, and I noticed the two Liverpool
     officers, Stanbridge and Grunhill, were working in
     there with their horses.  Nobody seemed to be joining
     them and I went in to assist them.
                                P. HAND-DAVIS


 So you actually went into the turnstile area, between
 tne perimeter gates and the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

 I do not know if you can remember, but do you
 recollect whether the gate you went through was open
 at the time you entered? - A.  I am fairly sure it
 probably was, yes.

If you cannot remember say so, but do you recollect
which gate you went through? Was it the one on the
l®ft—hand side, tne River Don side, or the centre
gate? - A.  It was the centre gate.

You went through the centre gate? - A.   Yes.

Then I think you tried to communicate with the crowd
tnat you were in, is that right? - A. Yes, I could
see the crushing at the front and certainly that is
obviously what the two Liverpool officers were working
to prevent and I tried to do my bit with them in a
line of three, if you like, a single line of horses,
and it quickly became obvious that the way to do it
was to talk to the people at the back who were joining
at the back.

I am sorry, I could not hear that last bit. - A. It
became obvious that to deal with the problems at the
front it was best to deal with those at the back in
terms of pushing and stopping people joining at the
back and trying to get some sort of semblance of
calmness.

When you first entered this enclosed space between the
^perimeter gates and the turnstile area can you
remember whether it was completely full at the back,
or were you still able to get in at the back? - A. No,
it is a big horse I ride and I was able to get in
without any problem, but it quickly filled up after I
had got in, but I got in all right initially.

Did you notice anything about th£ people at the back,
because I think you have already said there was not
much point talking to the people at the front? - A.   I
could not get to them and PC Grunhi.ll and Stanbridge
were near to them anyway, so obviously my
concentration was on the people at the rear and
constantly talking and shouting and pleading with them
to stop pushing and shoving.

This would be around 2.30/2.35, or what? - A. Yes, I
think probably for five minutes, 2.30 to 2.35 I was
doing this.
                                                             52



                                         P. HAND-DAVIS


 Q.    At that point were the people who you were trying to
       communicate with capable of responding to your
       requests? - A. Yes, I think so.

 Q.    Do you understand what I am saying? - A. Yes, there
       was no problem at all with them stopping pushing if
       they wanted to.

 Q.    It was not that at that point they were already so
       engulfed that they really had no option in the matter7
       - A. No.

 Q.   In that enclosed space there is a metal bar.   I think
      people have referred to it as a funnel bar, but it
      does not stretch all the way up to the perimeter
      gates, is that right? - A. It is about halfway, I
      think.                                         ’

Q.    It is a little bit further than halfway but anyway
       there is a gap at the top end, so to speak.  Were you
       in the area within the funnel bar, or in the area
       outside the funnel bar? You were within the perimeter
       gates.  What I am trying to find out is how near to
       that bar you were? - A. No, I think I was well forward
       from that.

Q.    When you say forward, you mean nearer to the perimeter
      gates? - A.  Towards the gates, yes.

Q.    Was    the gap which existed between that funnel bar ar*d
       the   perimeter gates in the River Don area, which is
       the   roadway which leads down to the south end, blocked
      off    in any way? - A. By?

Q.    Either by    your horse, the railings, police officers,
      anything    else? - A. The Don area, ifyou want to call
      it that,    the spare area, was not taken up, but I think
      that the    --

Q.    If Sergeant Griffiths could just point, what I am
      trying to find out is this.  Canr you indicate on that
      model where that funnel bar ends?   Can you see that? -
      A. Yes sir.

Q.    Now move the pointer    up towards the perimeter gate.
      What I am interested    in is that line which he has now
      drawn, was that open    or shut by anything? - A.  There
      is no barrier there,    sir.

Q.    That is what I am trying to find    out.   Was   there a
      barrier there at that time? - A.    No.

Q.    No, you say? - A. No.
                                P. HAND-DAVIS


 So People who were entering that area could have moved
 on to the wrong side of the funnel bar? - A. Yes.

 Of course, that would have taken them away from the
 turnstile area? - A. Yes.

 And they would then not have got in in normal events?
 “ A • Wo •

 That is right, is it not? - A. They would not have
 been queueing.

 Exactly, but there was nothing physically preventing
 them going? - A. No.

What I am trying to find out, you see, is you appealed
i-o them not to push, or words to that effect. Would
it have been possible for them to step aside if they
had wished? - A. Yes, there was nothing stopping them.

I appreciate that they may not have wanted to because
it was taking them out of the area where they wanted
to be, but there was nothing physically preventin'* it7
- A. No sir.

I think time passed and you got enveloped, I think,
would that be right? - A.   Yes, that pen filled and
tilled until I found myself near the stanchion by the
gate, so I had moved further forward, or further back
if you want, from the turnstile, and the horse was
completely, I think I described it, wrapped up like
cellophane by the people all around, somethin^ I have
never known before.  He could hardly move a leo or a
muscle, lifted off his feet in fact by people wed^ino
up against him.                                  ° °

What did you do then? - A. Well, it was obvious that
we weren't really doing an awful lot in that
turnstile, or that enclosure, other than perhaps
creating a little bit more danger.  If the horse had
reacted, kicked, reared, it would have been incredibly
dangerous, and again it seemed sensible to try and
come and work from the rear to try and stop anybody
else joining the rear of the crowd.

So you came out? - A. Yes.

What did you attempt to do then? - A. The gate seemed
to be a good defensive barrier in terms of trying to
stop any more people coming and we tried to shut°the
gates.  In fact, we succeeded in shutting the gates to
giva some release of pressure behind us at the
turnstiles.
                                P. HAND-DAVIS


Did that appear to have a beneficial effect7 - A
•Veil, there were two or three of us on horseback’
 rying to close the gates and one or two foot men
helping us and it seemed a good tactic and-i't work
 ut it did not last for long, perhaps a minute or
and tne gates were forced again.




                         /Q. Can you recollect ...
                                            P. HAND-DAVIS



Can you recollect by chance which gates were shut?   As I
have said, there were three sets there - River Don side,
centre gates and the right hand side? - A. I seemed to
remember working on the centre gate myself.

If you don't remember I would rather you didn't guess.
Can you remember whether the others were actually shut or
not at that point? - A. I can't remember, sir.

Can you help me with regard to timing at all on this? -
A. I think we probably got towards twenty-five to three,
perhaps even twenty to by then.

You, of course, were fairly high up on your horse.
Which way were you facing at that point, out towards
Leppings Lane, in towards the turnstiles? - A. No, most
of the time I was facing outwards looking up Leppings
Lane.

I take it you could see people still coming from both
directions? - A. That was the frightening thing, the
crowd didn't seem to be diminishing, it seemed to be
increasing constantly.

You have already told me that you shut them but they
didn't hold and the crowd went through, is that right? -
A. Yes, about a minute or two minutes we managed to hold
them.

So what was the next plan? - A. Again we worked in and
around the gates again trying to prevent people and talk
to people and plead with them not to go in and start
pushing but eventually I decided to put a line of horses
across from the sweet shop, right across the reception
area to form a barrier.   I think we ended up with eleven
or twelve horses doing this and it was quite an effective
tactic for a few minutes.   Oif course, we were on the
road side of the gates by this time.

We have heard references from various people about
cordons being put across because tbat is what it sounds
like.   Can you time this cordon which you are talking
about? - A. Yes, it must be quarter to-ish, around that
time.

Did you have any communication with Chief Inspector
Creaser about the cordon at all? - A. He may have been in
the area.   I was aware of him being in the area, but I
had arranged it with a Land Rover driver, visually, with
hand signals.   It was between me and him that we had set
this up.
                                              P. HAND-DAVIS


So when you put this cordon up the Land Rover was already
in situ? - A. Yes.

Can you recollect it arriving?   - A. No, but I remember it
being there and it may already   have been in situ.

Did you manage to hear any announcements emanating from
it? - A. Yes, I could.

How close were you to it? - A. I was very close to     it, a
matter of feet, so I was able to hear.

What did you hear? - A. I could hear the driver shouting,
"Liverpool fans, stop pushing.   Liverpool fans, stop
pushing," quite clearly.

You were   able to hear that clearly? - A. Yes.

Did you hear any other messages come across? -     A. From
the ground?

No, from the Land Rover. - A. I think he was repeating
that more or less constantly.

Did you hear any messages to say, "Mounted Inspector
required," or words to that effect? - A. No, sir.

Did you hear any messages coming over from the ground? -
A. From the radio or the tannoy?

From the   tannoy. - A. I don't recall, sir, no.

You have described that the frightening thing was that
there you were facing out towards Leppings Lane, you had
loads of people in the reception area on the road and
that people were still pouring down, or coming down
anyway, let's not use the word "pouring".    Those people
who were coming down, were they under any pressure as fat
as you can remember, apart from wanting to get in to the
ground? - A. No, it was still an orderly procession along
Leppings Lane in both directions.    There wasn't anybody
running or panicking.   It was jusfc the volume that
struck me.

You put your cordon up.    You said it held for a little
while.  What broke it, if that is the right word? - A.
Well, I was happy with it and when I looked to my right,
because I was facing towards the sweet s.hop, you could
see it having some effect.   When I looked to my left I
could see we had contained perhaps 500 or 600 people
already within a space of a few minutes.    At last we had
a tactic which was doing something and contributing in
some small way.   However, I must admit it must have
added to the frustration on the part of the fans because
                                            P. HAND-DAVIS


they were so near and yet so far and they started to do
some absolutely amazing things in terms of what I have
seen at football matches, such as throwing themselves
under the bellies of the horses.    I have a picture of a
quite middle-aged man literally as if he were diving into
a swimming pool.    Stepping back and diving underneath
one of the horses in front of me.    The danger of that,
the frustration he must have felt to have got to that
sort of pitch.    People were fighting with the horses'
heads and the reins and forcing their way through as best
they could.    Trying to break through the line and, of
course, eventually succeeding.

These people whom you describe in this way, the way you
describe it it sounds as if this was a voluntary action,
but you have already told me there were loads of people
coining behind them. Was it that they had no choice, that
they were between the devil and the deep blue sea, they
either went below the horses or they were squashed
against them because of the people behind or was it a
voluntary endeavour as far as you could judge? - A. No,
the danger was to my right at the turnstiles.    There
wasn't any danger with these people.  This was a sheer
act of desperation to get to the turnstiles.   They were
being frustrated by us in our attempts to bring some
sense of order to it and they weren t having it.    Nobody
was pushing them on to the horses.   They were acting on
their own free will.

Presumably what you are saying is that once they got
below or through the line they could join on to the
crowds already in the turnstile area, which by this time
presumably - had it spilled outside the perimeter gates
by this time? - A. No.   As I say, something was
happening.   It was getting better and it was working and
I think they had not got to that stage or had improved.
The turnstiles were still working efficiently.

I think a supporter spoke to you and said that somebody
was hurt within the perimeter gate area, near Gate A? -
A. Yes.   While we were trying out this tactic somebody
reported there was a lady injured near to Gate A.    At
first I could not see here and I was quite confident I
couldn't get to her and obviously I was engaged in this
tactic.   I mentally made a note I was going to try and
do something as soon as I could, but very quickly the
Gate A opened and everything seemed to evaporate from
that area in terms of people and I just never saw an
injured person when I went over there afterwards.

Apart from Gate A opening did you see any of the other
gates open? - A. No, again I was facing the sweet shop
and A was in my vision.   I could not particularly see B
or C at that time so A was my focus of vision.
                                                         58


                                                P. HAND-DAVIS


Q. Sp that is the one you saw open? - A. Yes.

Q. You were saying you were looking at the sweet shop but
   were you in the line, if I can put it that way, were you
   in 1:he area of the A to G turnstiles or in the area of
   the 1 to 16 turnstiles? - A. We were using a building
   line from the corner of the sweet shop right across.    I
   think you can perhaps see it. The edge of the brown
   building.    We used that line to set the line of horses.

Q. Straight across?   I mean, as near as you can get a line
   of horses straight across? - A. Yes.   I was quite close
   to the sweet shop.

Q. So you had lost your position by the A to G turnstile
   area? - A. Yes, I had long left that behind and come out
   of the perimeter to organise this line-up.

Q. The area then cleared, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. What happened after that as far as you were concerned? -
   A. I had seen a fairly large influx through Gate A, which
   worried me.   I didn't understand it. ' I then sort of
   came out of the line-up and realised that Gate C had also
   been opened.   I was concerned as to where all these
   people were going.   Again, I was more worried about Gate
   A because I knew that led to seated area and I wondered
   where all these people were going to get seats if they
   didn't have tickets perhaps.   I dismounted and ran into
   the control box.

Q. Did you run into the control box or on to the steps of
   the control box? - A. Sorry, towards the control box and
   up the steps.

Q. Tell me why you did that.   What was your intention when
   you ran up towards the control box? - A. I had seen the
   Gate A influx and I didn't know where they were all going
   to go in that stand.   I mean, we are talking thousands
   of people and I wanted to know where they had all gone
   and what they were all going to be doing and if I could
   be of any assistance.   As soon as^I went up the steps I
   could see across the Leppings Lane, and I could already
   see people starting to climb over the outer barrier.
   Forgive me, but I thought it was a pitch invasion.   My
   first perception was that it was some sort of pitch
   invasion.

Q. I forgive you.   What I want   is what you thought at the
   time. - A. Yes, that is what   I thought.

Q. Whether you were right or wrong is neither here nor
   there. - A. Yes, sir.
                                               P. HAND-DAVIS


I ,will come back to that in a moment. Can you remember
what was happening on the field when you looked across,
or at least when you got up the steps of the control
room? - A. I can't, sir, no.

You have no idea whether the players    were onthe field      or
not? - A. I can't recall that.

In an initial stage   when people are coming over a fence,
at the first moment   in time when somebody is coming over,
there is nothing to   distinguish a pitch invasion from an
overspill? - A. Not   really, no.

It is only when you observe what   the people do, once they
are over, that you can draw conclusions? - A. Yes.

If you think back for a moment when you were up there,
can you recollect how many people were already on the
pitch side of the fencing?   Can you remember that, or
not? - A. It certainly wasn't one or two because I
immediately became concerned and thought, "We have got a
pitch invasion developing here," so we are probably
talking perhaps 50/60 starting already.  Certainly a lot.

Your recollection is they h a d n ’t actually got on to the
pitch?   By the pitch I mean the area between the goal
lines? - A. No, they weren't on the pitch as far as I
could gather.

I don't mean the walkway or the green, I mean the white
lines. - A. Yes.




             Q. Did you glance at the
                                                           60

                                               P. HAND-DAVIS




Q. Did you glance at the terraces at all? - A. Not really.
   I had seen what I wanted to see in terms of what my
   next move was and I knew that hanging about was not
   going to assist, and that if there was going to be a
   pitch invasion mounted might well be needed, so I did
   not stop and wait there for much longer.

0. In fact, you went straight out again? - A. Yes, sir, I
   did.

0. I d o n ’t think we need to go into it in any detail, but
   you organised some of your Officers to go to, is it
   Gate 0, I can't remember, the main entrance anyway? -
   A. Yes.     I have never been on tne pitch at Sheffield
   Wednesday but I have at Leeds United. There is only
   one access at Sheffield Wednesday and t.iat was
   completely round the other side of the ground on
   Penistone Road, so it was going to take us time anyway
   to get round there, so I organised to leave some behind
   in Leppings Lane and took a teaia of horses round to
   Gate 0 on Penistone Road.

0. So if you were needed you could be called, because I
   don't think you actually told anybody that you would do
   that, did you? - A. No, sir, I was fairly confident
   that Control knew that - I mean, we had been sent there
   in the past on previous snatches, in anticipation of
   pitch invasions, whicn had not subsequently occurred,
   so I was going to be in the right position and I was
   sure Control would know that.

Q. I want to just go back outside again for a moment.     You
   have told ae you had about 1 2 - 1 will say tnen, and
   that is not derogatory to ladies - perhaps I had better
   say horses then nobody can complain - you had 12 horses
   at Leppings Lane.    Did you summons any reinforcement
   during all this between 2.30 and 3 o'clock or
   thereabouts? - A. Yes, it is difficult, cosrcunications
   were practically impossible, and that is added to for a
   mounted man for the fact that (1) he has got a horsa to
   control, (2) he has got a helmet on-" which means you
   can't hear very well, but at 2Q-to-3 I had asked for
   sorae assistance, both horse and mounted, and I also
   rene;nber seeing ray Sergeant on nis radio asking for
   assistance, who was close to sne, so that I knew the
   message was getting passed through.    I had also seen
   Mr. Marshall on his radio at sometime in-that period.

Q. The line of communication would be to Control and then
   Control back out, but could you corrununicate directly
   with your mounted divisions, if that is the right word,
   in Penistone Road? - A. Mo, all communications would be
   through Control, but even communications with one
   another were difficult because people were shouting to
                                                                 61

                                                      HAiiD-DAVIS




        tne, m y own men, and I could not hear them perhaps from
        five yards away.

JJ   0. Is that the helmets or the general noise? - A. Well the
        helmets certainly do not help at all and the general
        noise and confusion on the day was intense of course.

     Q. I just want to spend two or three nainutes on policing,
        mounted techniques, for crowd control and so on, so
        that I can understand this a little bit better.   You
        were trying to form either a barrier or a line outside
        the perimeter gates, in order to split the crowd at
        that point, is that right? - A. Yes, to bring some
        relief of pressure.

     Q. Is that a standard technique for when you have a crowd,
        that one splits thes segmentally at some point that one
        chooses, or does one start at the front and walk the
        horses forward to scatter them, or does one start right
        at the back and peel thera off one at a time or ten at a
        tijae or twenty at a time, or wnat are the techniques
        that are used to control crowds? - A. I think that the
        difficulty here is the topography at Leppings Lane.    It
        was extremely difficult to work horses.   The bar that
        you talked about in the A-G pen for instance was a damn
        nuisance in terms of policing that crowd, and all you
        could really do was stand alongside it and talk to
        people.   I think that is what the Liverpool men were
        doing.   But, as you say, you would segraentalise the
        crowd by shoving the horse in, and just trying to chop
        them off all the way along, but you just could not get
        in to do that on this occasion, they were so tightly
        packed.

     Q. Are we talking about the area between the perimeter
        gate and the turnstiles at tnis stage? - A. Ho, sir, I
        aa talking about the A-G pen for instance.

     Q. Yes, that is what I meant. - A. It is particularly
        difficult to work in terras of chopping the crowd up
        into sizable proportions, and of cotirse the compaction,
        they were so tightly compacted that it was dangerous to
        be in tnere with a horse in the end, but we had been in
        there with thera, in amongst taesa talking to then, and
        been trying to bring sorne semblance of order.   So in
        terms of usual tactics I can't really use tfiat as an
        example because of the layout.

     Q. But you had policed Leppings Lane before? - A. i'iany
        times.  In fact, I always usually work at that end.

     Q. What techniques - let's take 1988 - in what way did
        1938 - I a m talking about the semi-final in 1988 - in
        what way did that differ from 193*3, because the




H
                                            P. HA3D-DAVIS



  /

geography is the same, isn't it? - A. Yes, I think that
people came much earlier.   There was no pressure upon
the turnstiles.   There was no real need for us to get
into the enclosure, the A-G for instance, in 1988 or in
1987.   People were in a lot earlier and a lot more
calmly.   Those are not good areas for horses to work in
particularly anyway because of the confinement.

Can you remember whether the periaeter gates were shut
in 1988? - A. I seem to recall that certainly the one
on the River Don side was shut and I think perhaps the
centre one was shut.

And the centre one? - A. I think the centre one was
perhaps shut.

You had nothing to do with the decision as to whether
those gates would be open or shut, would that be right?
- A. That was nothing to do with me, sir, no.

That would have been a difference between '88 and '89
as far as the gates are concerned, would that be right,
as far as you reKieiaber? - A. Yes.

If you think back to'88 again, can    you recollect, you
know this area which   I nave already discussed with you
between the end of the funnel bar and the perimeter
gate, do you recollect whether that was either
barriered off, or whether it had Police Officers in it
in order to prevent people coming over into the roadway
which leads down? - A. I don't recall, sir.

You don't recollect? - A. I don't recall whether there
was anybody there.

     THE COROWER:    I tnink we will have lunch and we
will carry on after.    I have aore or less finished - I
might think of one or two things, and then we will
allow everybody else to ask questions.

     Can I just say one thing to do^with the split
screen video?    Do you remember we had a look at tiiat
and it was not   terribly good.    Ue have had another
three attempts   to try and produce a version and we have
looked at those as well, and they are still no good. I
have decided to give up on the split screen videos, but
what we are at the aaonient trying to do is to produce
two short sequences of fila, one froiti 1988 and one from
1989, wnere we have taken - do you reraanber, what was
happening was that the cameras ware panning - we are
trying to cut out the bits that we want, namely waat
was happening outside the turnstiles, or if you like we
are trying to eliminate all the stuff we don't want,
because to do it for the whole of the period would be
prohibitively time consuming, apart froa expensive, so
what we have done is we are going to try and take it
from between 2 and 3, about every 10 nsinutes, a short,
little sequence and so we will be able to see 1988 and
1989, but it won't be a split screen.

     That is what we are endeavouring but I cannot even
promise that that will be satisfactory.   I think it
might be njore helpful.  It is not quite ready yet but
as soon as it is ready we will let you have a look at
it, and soraebody raised the point about the gates, I
think it was you, Mr. King.   I think you will be able
to see on this version that we have done, the '88 one
we have done and it is not perfect but it is better
than the split screen, and I think you can see the
gates for most of the time, and as far as we can tell
certainly two of them appear to be shut.   I say this
now because it might be easier, I am anticipating a
little bit of evidence, but it ;nay help with the
questioning.

     MR. KING:    That confirms what the Officer said.

     THE CORONER:   what the Officer basically said.
The third one along, the one that is actually in line,
that one appears to be open as far as one can tell froa
the video.

    All right, ladies and gentlemen, lunch - 5-past.

                 (Luncheon Adjournment)
M   '

                                                                      64




                                                          P. HAND-DAVIS


                            Cross-Examined bv MR. HALE:

            Q. Early on in your evidence you said you were not
        B      concerned about the Nottingham Forest end, is that
               right? - A. Initially, of course, my responsibility
               would include the Nottingham Forest end but it
               quickly became apparent that things were okay down
               there, yes.

            Q. I merely want to put one point to you and that is it
               has from time to time been suggested that if you had
               had forewarning that there was going to be a very
               large crowd coming down Leppings Lane you might have
               been able to do something different.  All I want to
               put to you is this; that in that forewarning, that
               clairvoyance, would it also have had to tell you what
               was happening at the Nottingham Forest end before you
               could make a final decision how much of your
               resources to put into Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, 29,000
               were going through at that end and obviously that
               also was a very big problem and so I would have
        D      needed to know what was happening there, sir, yes.

            Q. It would not be sufficient just to say to you, "There
               will be a big crowd in Leppings Lane.  Throw all your
               men in there" but you would also have to know what
               was happening at the Nottingham Forest end? - A. Yes.

                           Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

            Q. Can you give some more information please about your
               responsibilities at the 1987 and the 1988 Semi Finals
               at this particular ground? - A. Yes, more or less
               identical in terms of being in charge of the mounted
               policing.  1987, of course, was the Leeds/Coventry, a
               twelve o'clock kick-off and 1988 was a three o'clock
               with the same two teams, Liverpool/Coventry.  Yes,
               exactly the same in terms of my responsibilities both
               years.

            Q. So those responsibilities, as Mr. Hale has just
               outlined, were not just for the Leppings Lane end but
               for the mounted operation all the way around the
               ground? - A. And including the Midland Road Railway
               Station as well, yes.

            Q. Both of those operations, as the Court knows, were
               completely successful in 1987 and 1988 and there was
               no significant problem? - A. No, sir.




        H
                                                            65




                                               P. HAND-DAVIS


Q. You can confirm that, can you? - A. Yes, that is
   true.

Q. If anybody had thought there' was anything wrong with
   the operation and the execution of the Police
   function - and I am sorry to use that jargon -
   anything wrong with what you did in 1987 or 1988,
   that is the mounted section, to whom would the
   criticism have come? - A. I think it would certainly
   have come to me and I would have known about it.

Q. Did any such criticism come after either of those
   matches? - A. No, we were completely happy with both
   operations both years.

Q. I would like just to run round the people who, if
   there had been anything with your operation, might
   have said something about it.  They are the clubs who
   were involved in the two matches, nothing from
   them? - A. No.

Q.    The supporters’ clubs of each of the teams atthose
     two matches, nothing from them? - A. No, sir.

Q. Sheffield Wednesday Football Club itself? - A. No,
   sir.

Q.   The Football Association? - A. No, sir.

Q.   Who were quite happy to choose the ground again   in
     1989? - A. Yes.

Q. No complaints from them? - A. Not as far as I am
   aware.

Q. Apparently now criticism is made of your operation in
   1989.  I would like to ask a question about this.
   When you were planning the 1989 operation, did you
   draw on your previous experience of the other
   matches? - A. Yes, it seemed the right thing to do,
   to build on two successful operations.

Q. And also on your policing at other League matches at
   the ground? - A. Yes, I mean I was still a relative
   newcomer in terms of years in this County and I drew
   upon my Sergeants’ experience as well as my own.  We
   got an Operational Order for the mounted that suited
   all three of us.

Q. Were your plans for the 1989 operation along the
   lines of what had been successful previously? - A.
                                                          66




                                            P. HAND-DAVIS

   Yes, our only real concern was the South Stand car
   park which we felt hadn't been catered for.  A lot of
   crushing problems can occur down there sometimes with
   queuing and we built in a small contingency for that
   in 1989 as opposed to 1988.

Q. That was as a result of an experience in one of the
   previous years, was it? - A. Yes, not a complaint,
   just an awareness that we had not catered for it and
   it needed to be built into 1989's operations.

Q. Had anything happened previously to prepare you for
   what was to come in 1989? - A. No, all of my mounted
   experience in some way helped but I couldn't pull the
   answer out of the hat.  There wasn't an answer so far
   as I was concerned to pull out of the hat.

Q. From your experience please - a lot of other
   witnesses have done this but I think the Jury would
   like to hear from you as being in charge of the
   mounted section - can you compare the events of 1989
   with your previous experience, particularly of those
   two previous finals? I think three things are
   particularly interesting, one is the numbers of the
   people, two is the time at which they arrived and I
   think the third one is the behaviour of the people.
   First of all, in terms of numbers in the period
   shortly before the kick-off? - A. I think the easiest
   and most graphic way of describing this is that our
   operation was planned to start finishing at quarter
   to three, certainly in terms of Penistone Road.  In
   all three Semi Finals I prepared for the mutual aid
   horses to stand down at quarter to three and go back
   for a meal.  Certainly in terms of what happened on
   Penistone Road in all three years we were able to do
   that.  By quarter to three on Penistone Road all the
   fans were in at that end.  Certainly in terms of 1987
   and 1988 most of it was all over by quarter to three
   on Leppings Lane.  1989 is different in respect that
   we were still very much involved at one end of the
   ground in 1989 with huge amounts of people and that
   was the most amazing thing to me in terms of the
   three years.

Q. Can you make a comparison please in terms of the
   behaviour of the crowd? - A. Yes, I think that
   behaviour, I can't say it was an aggressive thing on
   the part of the Liverpool people, I think more of a
   complacency.  They knew the ground.  I worked it out
   that they had been there four times that year.   I
   felt that they were as confident in the ground as I
                                                               67




                                                  P. HAND-DAVIS


       was in their ability to get in and I think they just
       made a miscalculation and came too late.  It is as
JJ     simple as that.

     Q. The Jury might be interested in that.   Just take it a
        bit further.   "They" being who? - A. The Liverpool
        fans.

     Q. Four times that year? How do you arrive at that? -
        A. I think I am including the previous year's Semi
        Final.   Certainly at least one League game and
        perhaps another game but four times a year sticks in
        my mind.

     Q. As far as your understanding is concerned, apart from
        the previous year's Semi Final this team had also
        visited the ground to play in a League match? - A.
        Y e s , undoubtedly.

     Q. You would expect the same substantially, that a
D       number of the supporters who came to the Semi Final
        would also have been supporters on the other
        occasions? - A. Yes, I think that the Liverpool fans
        knew the Hillsborough ground quite well.   I am fairly
        certain of that.

     Q. Do what one or two of the witnesses have done please
        and put yourself in the position you were at by two
        o'clock and your state of mind at that time? Was
        there anything about the situation at that time which
        gave you any clue that in about 40 or 45 minutes time
        there was going to be such a crush at the turnstiles
        that people were going to be in danger of their
        lives? - A. No, it was a happy family Saturday
        afternoon football match as far as I was concerned.
        There was nothing to give me that indication at all.

     Q. You have told the Court that you saw that Gate A was
        opened and you said something about ticketless fans.
        Just amplify what you were saying about that? - A. I
        had a perception that ticketless fans were there.   It
        is extremely difficult to make any sort of estimation
        of numbers.  Just basically because people were
        hanging about and weren't progressing towards the
        ground and I am perhaps thinking of 200 or 300,
        perhaps 400, lads stood about on Leppings Lane.   When
        Gate A opened I wondered how many of those had
        tickets.

     Q. That is the bell that rang, is it, in your mind? - A.
        Yes, it was.




H
                                                               68




                                                 P. HAND-DAVIS



     Q. Do you know where Gate A led to? - A. I am fairly
|J      certain it_led up into the stand.

     Q. The stand meaning the seated area? - A. Yes.

     Q. What were you concerned about? - A. Again, as I said,
        there were only so many seats available and were all
        these people going to be able to get one.  What was
        going to happen to them if they couldn't find a seat?

     Q. Was that the reason you went round to the control
        box? - A. Yes, I wanted to see if there was anything
        we could do to assist with this influx of people that
        had gone into the ground.

     Q. As you got round to the control box you saw what you
        thought was a pitch invasion, or thought at that time
        was a pitch invasion? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. I am only asking about your impression at the time.
        Everybody knows, of course, what the true situation
        was. What you saw and thought at the time is
        important.  Having thought that there was a pitch
        invasion you immediately then set off to rally your
        troop to get round the ground to be able to go in at
        another entrance? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. You did not hesitate really before doing that? - A.
        No, it was an instantaneous decision really.

     Q. So does it follow from that, Inspector, that it did
        not cross your mind at that time that people in those
        pens were in fact being crushed? - A. It didn't
        sadly.  I couldn't see that and I didn't discern
        that. My perception was of a pitch invasion, my
        whole perception.

     Q. Of course, if that had entered your mind then your
        actions would have been quite different? - A. Yes.
        Yes, indeed.

                   Cross-Examined bv MR. COUGHLIN:

     Q. We have heard obviously that you have considerable
        experience of previous Semi Finals and League matches
        at Hillsborough and I do not propose to ask you to go
        through the catalogue again.  You also said I think
        earlier that you had knowledge of the trouble spots
        as you perceived them obviously from previous
        games? - A. Yes, sir.




H
                                                          69




                                            P. HAND-DAVIS



Q. Indeed I think you made certain modifications to the
   plan, the Operational Order for the day, to balance
   your forces as you thought fit. Would that be
   fair? - A. Yes, it was important for our men not to
   regard their positioning as too static.  They had to
   be flexible enough to move to any part of the ground
   if they needed to and so those were guidelines
   really, the Operational Order, but the South Stand
   was the one I catered for particularly.

Q. The command and control of the mounted force was
   yours and was delegated to you, is that fair to
   say? - A. I think it is fair to say that positioning
   on the day up to say two o'clock was up to me but we
   came under the control of the radio, under ground
   command of radio control, and could be moved about at
   will.  So they had our positions and deployment and
   knew where we were.

Q. The specific instructions you would expect to be
   relayed to you as in charge of the mounted section? -
   A. No, for instance, if anything had happened on
   Penistone Road I would not want or need to know about
   if I wasn't there and I would expect the Ground
   Commander to deploy the horses as he thought fit from
   there.

Q. Would it be fair to say, as I understand you to have
   said in evidence, that you formally requested
   assistance at round about 2.40? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Up to that time you dealt with the situation as best
   you could on the ground? - A. I am very much "a hands
   on" situation.  There wasn't a lot of time to be on
   the radio but as soon as there came a moment to do it
   I radioed up, yes.

Q. Really just to emphasise the situation that faced
   you, the point has been made, but it was the
   suddenness of the build-up and perhaps the behaviour
   of the fans which you found untypical? - A. Yes, I
   think we were overwhelmed with the large numbers very
   quickly.  I think behaviour implies some sort of
   criticism of Liverpool football fans and I don't
   think that is fair.

Q. No, that is not implied. - A. A frustration, a desire
   to get in quickly and the worse it got the more
   frustrated they got.
                                               P. HAND-DAVIS


In terms of crowd behaviour, I meant the evidence you
have heard before I think of fans not listening to
reason? - A. Yes, sir.

That is the impression which has been given in
evidence. - A. Yes, people wouldn't acknowledge your
requests and were deaf to them.

So it is not simply a case of numbers if requests
which were made had perhaps been adhered to? - A. No,
sir, no.

             Cross-Examined bv MR. K I N G :

Inspector, when you saw large numbers of people going
through Gate A you immediately said to yourself,
"Where are they all going to go?".  That is a
question which was obvious to you? - A. Yes, sir.

Indeed you said that yourself in giving evidence in
relation to Gate C. You did not actually see Gate C
opened, did you? - A. No, sir.

Nonetheless if you had seen thousands of people going
through Gate C that is the same question you would
have asked yourself on that occasion? - A. I assume
so, yes.

When you went up to the control box, did you actually
go into the control box? - A. No, sir.

You were able to see over, I am sure, to the centre
pens which were on the Leppings Lane terrace? You
could see that, could you? - A. Yes, I had a good
view of that, sir.

Were you in Court today when photographs were put up
of the situation at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes,
sir.




                                 /Q. Did any of those.
                                                          71




                                    P. HAND-DAVIS


    Q.   Did any of those photographs ring a bell with you, or
         was it not as bad as that when you were there? - A.   I
         think they did in terms of the last photo we reached,
J        where people had spilled over the perimeter fence, and
         I made a mental note that maybe that was about the
         stage I saw it at when I started to-make my decision.

    Q.   You would, therefore, be able to note how the centre
         pens were clearly full and the far side pen, for
         example, had a lot of spaces in it? - A. No, my view
         was taken by the fencing really and the people coming
         over it.

         I see. Would you agree with me this much, that if
         you, not in the panic of seeing people at that stage,
         but earlier on, that is shall we say before kick-off,
         knew that 2,000 people were going to enter the ground
         and you had a view of the terraces at that stage, you
         would be able to ask yourself the same question,
         "Where are all these people going to go?" by looking
         at the terraces, would you not? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You would be able to make a judgment as, for example,
         which pens they should go into? - A. Quite possibly.

    Q.   That is not difficult and that is a fairly obvious
         chain of thought, is it not? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Can I just go back now to events outside the
         turnstiles.  You say you felt that the Liverpool fans
         may have become complacent because they had had no
         trouble in previous years in getting in and,
         therefore, they were complacent about their time of
         arrival, would that be fair? - A.  I, think that is
         fair, yes.

         It is equally fair, is it not, on the same line of
         reasoning, that those planning the Police operation
         had had, they say, no problems in the past, that is
         right is it not? - A.  I said that, sir, yes.

         The planning was, therefore, based on the fact that
         there had been no problems in the past ~ yes? - k .
         Yes.

         There was no provision in the planning to deal with
         the contingency of large numbers arriving at or about
         2.30 or thereafter, was there? - A. No sir.

         There was no contingency planning for dealing with the
         situation where large numbers had gathered at an
         entrance which was too narrow to deal with the numbers
         who were there?  There was nothing planned for that




H
                               P. HAND-DAVIS


You would confirm with me that the only provision
dealing with the Mounted Section, as I understand it -
I may be wrong - is simply Appendix H in the Order?
You had better see it.  - A. I have just been looking
at it actually before.  It is very brief.

      THE CORONER: Which page, is it?        Can you help me?

     MR. KING:  Sir, I am awfully sorry because mine
is not paginated.

      THE CORONER: It is Appendix H?

      MR. KING:     It is Appendix H, yes.

      THE CORONER: I should manage that.        Page 59 it
is.

     MR. KING:  That is the only page I have been able
to find dealing with the deployment and the duties of
the Mounted Section, is that about right? - A. Yes
sir.

I am not trying to be rude about it, but all it does
is lists numbers and areas, does it not? - A.  It
does.

There is no specific duty laid down as to what any
individual section has to do at any particular end? -
A . No.

There is no provision as to the deployment of mounted
officers, for example, outside the perimeter gates or
what exactly their duties are, there is nothing in
writing about that? - A. No sir.

Can I go back     to your observations which you gave us
earlier as to     the topography, the layout, of the
Leppings Lane     end, the turnstile area I am talking
about.  It is     very different from the Penistone Road
end? - A. Yes     sir.

The Leppings Lane end has this narrow funnel
bottleneck at the end, does it not? - A. Yes sir.

Whereas the Penistone end, which the Nottingham Forest
fans were using, has the long straight wall with the
turnstiles in it for fans to enter? - A. Yes sir.

You have also very helpfully described how, with the
narrow restricted area between the perimeter gates and
turnstiles A to G, which I am sure Detective Sergeant
Griffiths will point out to us again, and the radial
barrier going along it, that is an area where horses
                                                            74



                                      P. HAND-DAVIS


          'really are not designed to work in, is it not? - A.
           Yes sir.

    Q.    It is obvious just looking at it that it would be
B         crucial for the purposes of getting people through
          efficiently and safely that that area between the
          perimeter gates and the turnstiles area just should
          not get too congested? - A. No sir.

    Q.    I am right, am I not, that in the Operational Order
           there is no provision dealing with the prevention of
          congestion at turnstiles?   I could not find anything.
          - A. No.

    <}.   That is right, there is no provision? - A. You are
          right.

    Q.    When you arrived, if I could just take you to the time
          I want to, when you had got back to the Leppings Lane
          end when the train had arrived, if I could take you to
          that time in your evidence, at that stage were there
          any queues at the turnstiles? - A. No, I think it was
          fairly empty.

    Q.    Then there came a time, which obviously was not long
           afterwards, when you said to yourself, "There is a
           problem in the turnstile area"? - A. Yes.

    Q.    You tell us again what time that was? - A. It must be
          around the 2.30 mark.

    Q.    Really from 2.30 onwards events just got out of hand
           from that time? - A. In terms of numbers, yes sir.

    Q.    Also in terms of the ability of yourself and your
           brother officers to control the numbers getting into
           the turnstile area by the sound of it? - A. In terms
           of the ability of the turnstiles to cope with it as
           well, sir.

    Q.    But in terms of your controlling the numbers getting
           into the turnstile area, from 2.30 onwards everything
           got out of hand? - A. Yes.

    Q.    You noticed at 2.30-ish when you went in that there
           was the problem at the turnstiles.  Tell us again what
           the problem was when you went in at 2.30-ish? - A. I
           could see that there was some concern -about crushing
           at the front, and I could see the Liverpool officers
           working up there to try and alleviate that, and I
           joined in to help.

    Q.     How long after that, when you went in, was it when you
           became totally enveloped with people? - A. I think




H
                                                             75




                                     P. HAND-DAVIS


         'that within 5 or 10 minutes of that we were wrapped up
          with people completely.

    Q.   Those people who were being crushed at the front of
B        the turnstiles when you went in at 2.30-iwsh, excuse
          me for an obvious question but they had to have got
          into the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

    Q.   And they had to have got in through the perimeter
          gates? - A. Yes.

    Q.   The people who were behind them, right the way back
          until we came to where you were, they had all come
          through the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

    Q.   The perimeter gates when you went in at 2.30-ish were
          completely open? - A. Yes.

    Q.    While you were still in there doing your best to deal
          with the situation, and then becoming more and more
          enveloped with people, the perimeter gates were still
          open? - A. Yes.

    Q.    The decision to seek to close the perimeter gates came
          at a time really when it was totally out of hand in
          the turnstile area, was it not? - A. Yes.

    Q.   But you would agree with me from my earlier questions
         that it was very important, looking at that turnstile
         area, to control the numbers ever getting in there in
         the first place, you would agree with me? - A. Yes.

    Q.    What system was there being employed before 2.30 to
          actually control the numbers going into the turnstile
          area? - A. None as far as I could see.

    Q.   One ofthe things we have noted from 1988, and you
         have agreed with this from your recollection now, is
          that in 1988 the perimeter gates were closed much
         earlier than apparently in 1989, that seems to be
         clear? - A. Yes sir.

    Q.    Can I now deal, if I may, with just a little about
          crowd behaviour because you have given us a lot of
          information, but you would not say to this Inquest,
          would you officer, that everybody who was pushed up
          against your horse was themselves acting totally
          voluntarily as opposed to themselves acting
          involuntarily because of things going on behind them?
          You could not say everybody was in the category of a
          voluntary pusher towards you, could you? - A. No, that
          wouldn't be fair at all.
                            P. HAND-DAVIS


/Indeed, you gave a description to this Inquest about
 becoming enveloped by people, such that you decided to
 get out of the situation.  I think on another occasion
 you have actually gone further and described how your
 horse was actually lifted up almost off the ground
 because of it? - A. Yes sir.

I think on that earlier occasion you were asked, your
attention was (firected to whether or not you felt that
the people around you, who apparently were causing
that situation, were acting voluntarily or
involuntarily, and your answer was involuntarily, and
you would agree with that? - A. Yes.

Because one of the problems we have here, is it not,
is that the people around are in a crowd being
pressured from behind? - A. Yes.

And the more people who arrive from behind, the more
difficult it is for those in the front, or whatever
section you are going to make the front, whether you
sectionalise it off or not, to do what you want them
to do? - A. Yes.

Because it is nigh impossible to move back if you are
at the front of a section if you have got tremendous
pressure from behind you, is it not? - A. Yes.

I appreciate that there was a time - and it seemed to
be a very small time in this particular saga - when
there was a gap at the back of the crowd in the
turnstile area and the perimeter gates, because you
have told us about that, but that gap did not last for
very long, did it? - A. No.

How long did that gap last for? - A. Probably five
minutes.

Meanwhile people were still pouring in through the
perimeter gates? - A. We weren't exactly inactive all
the time.  We were waving our arms, gesticulating,
shouting to people.

Of course, but people were still pouring down Leppings
lane, were they not? - A. Yes.

Until you very sensibly put that cordon up very late
on, no steps were being taken to prevent the flow of
people down Leppings Lane, were there? - A. We had
tried prior to that the gate tactic of shutting the
gates.

When you were using the gate tactic, people were still
flowing down Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.
                                                              77


A
                                     P. HAND-DAVIS


    Q.   /1 ought to deal with that because you were closing the
          gates and I do not blame you in that situation at that
          time, but you were closing the gates onto the people
          who were already pressing against the gates? - A. No,
g        not really.

    Q.   There ware people coming down Leppings Lane, you have
         already told us, in great numbers? - A. The pressing
         was on the other side at the turnstile side.    They
         were not pressing up against the gates per s e . We
         were able to shut the gates so that there could not
         have been that much pressure on them.

    Q.   But then, after you had closed the gates, peoplewere
         flowing down Leppings Lane, were they not? - A. They
         were flowing until 3 o'clock.

    Q.   We have heard from Inspector Creaser that there came a
         time, probably round the time you are talking about,
         when there was about 5,000 people around that
         turnstile area in and outside the area? - A. Yes sir.

    Q.   Would you agree with that estimate? - A. Yes,    I would.

    Q.   You would agree with me that   the more people who come
         down Leppings Lane, the more    they add onto the
         concourse area which is the    pavement area between the
         perimeter gates and Leppings   Lane? - A. Yes.




                                 /Q. Tell me




G
                                                         78


                                                 P. HAND-DAVIS



    Tell me, in the planning was any provision made for
    corhmunication to you outside the ground from, shall we
    say, Control inside the ground, as to the numbers who
    were already arrived and therefore the numbers who were
    to be expected?    Was there any sort of planning
B   arrangement for that information to come to you? - A.
    Nothing specific, sir, no.

    Did you at any time receive any information during this
    mayhem from inside the ground as to how many people were
    likely still to come? - A. If a message was passed I
    never received it.   We had a lot of down time on the
    radios as you are perhaps aware.

    In planning you would agree with rae that if you can
    anticipate the arrival of a large number of people, that
    obviously helps as opposed to when it takes you by
    surprise? - A. Yes.   I don't quite know what I would
    have done about it, but...

    Well, anticipation is everything, isn't it? - A. Yes, but
    there would still have been the same number of turnstiles
    there.

    There would.   Are you saying, therefore, that if the
    majority of fans, shall we say for the Leppings Lane
    terrace which takes 10,000, the majority of fans came at
    2.30 onwards, that this was going to be an unpoliceable
    situation?   Is that your view? - A. I think you have to
    come to that conclusion.   A previous witness mentioned
    coming at twenty to three.   That seems crazy to me on a
    day like this.

    Are saying from your experience that it would be part of
    the planning that if large numbers came after half past
    two the situation would just simply get out of hand?    It
    couldn't be controlled? - A. I think there must be a
    point where a ground and turnstiles reach breaking point
    and when you are talking of a crowd of this nature that
    is very quickly reached if you are going to look at half
    past two onwards.

    What you are saying is if I, as a f&n, arrive at 2.30 or
    onwards, then the situation is the police can't cope with
    me if everybody else does the same? - A. Not just the
    police.   I think the ground can only take so much.   The
    turnstiles can only cope with so much.

    It was absolutely crucial with this ground and this end
    that the bulk of people arrived by 2.30? -A. I think it
    was crucial that they all came at two o'clock.




H
                                                           79


                                                   P. HAND-DAVIS


Q. If everybody hadn't arrived by two o'clock, if one was
   inside the ground shall we say in the control box and
   could see at two o'clock that the bulk of people hadn't
   arrived, you would know from then onwards, at that time,
   you were in for a problem? - A. Indeed.

Q.    Tell me, did you ever receive notification that you were
     in for a problem? - A. I think I have said so that I
     hadn't.

                Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE?

Q. Inspector, can I follow on from there?   We have heard a
   lot from many police witnesses who have said they can
   only police crowds with the reasonable co-operation of
   that crowd? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   If a large crowd had arrived at 2.30 onwards on this day
     that had been co-operative and had heeded the advice
     given by the police officers, do you think that situation
     would have been unpoliceable? - A. No.

Q. Can you explain what the difference between events of
   that day, 2.30 to 3.00, is from my example of the crowd
   that wants to help the police, that is co-operating with
   them and listening to reasonable advice? What was the
   difference in the crowd on that day? - A. As compared to
   previous years?

Q. Well, just generally, or compared to previous years? - A«
   I think it was again this word "frustration."   There
   were such huge numbers with such little time to get in
   through so few turnstiles that this air of
   unreasonableness descended upon people.

Q. You had an air of unreasonableness.   Is-that what made
   it in the end an unpoliceable situation? - A. People
   pushed and shoved and got more and more panicky and the
   turnstiles became - it became almost impossible to pass
   through a turnstile.

Q. It is obvious that the more you pressurise a turnstile,
   the more it is jammed up, the less'"quickly it will
   actually work? - A. I think that is what happened, sir.

Q. Your evidence, in tandem with many other officers who
   have given evidence, has been that the events of the 15th
   of April were wholly exceptional.   Is that fair? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You can no doubt confirm that since your time in the
   South Yorkshire Police from 1986, that the layout at that
   end of the ground has remained the same? - A. It has,
   yes.
                                                          80


                                                 P. HAND-DAVIS


Q. You haven't experienced any problems in policing that
   area up until this semi-final, is that fair? - A. Before
   or since.

Q.   You have also - going to a normal match, getting away
     from the 15th of April - it would also be fair to say
     that when you have visiting fans as both teams were on
     this occasion, when you have visiting fans you expect
     them to come up to police officers and ask them questions
     like, "Where am I going?"   "What am I doing?" - A. Yes,
     sir.

Q. That is a normal part of policing a match, isn't it? - A.
   It is, yes.

Q. An impression you have given in your evidence about the
   confusion of the fans on the 15th of April is that the
   confusion on that day was without any previous precedent?
   Is that fair? - A. Yes, I would think so.

Q.   You have also said that this is a crowd probably
     experienced in coming to Sheffield Wednesday?    A large
     number you would have expected to have been there before
     may be two or three times, possibly four, in the last
     year? - A. Yes.

Q. Was there any factor that you may be able to point to
   that could explain how a crowd that is apparently
   confused, in a situation where you have never experienced
   it before, where the layout of the ground has remained
   the same, and many of those fans would have been
   experienced.   Was there anything that could have
   contributed to confusion? - A. I just think the late
   arrival.   I think people started panicking.   They had
   been the previous year and hadn't had any problems at
   all.

Q. You are an experienced man dealing with large crowds.
   Would it be fair to say from your general experience as a
   police officer that when you have a layman approaching a
   large crowd that in itself can be disorientating? - A.
   Yes, indeed.

Q. It can be a frightening experience? - A. yes.

Q. When you are faced with an enormous crowd, all pushing,
   with a lot of noise, a lot of chanting, that increases
   that disorientation? - A. Yes.

Q. Part of the job of the police is to try and help people
   in that circumstance because they get worried about what
   they are going to do, so they really don't know what to
   do? - A. Yes, try and bring some sort of calmness to the
   situation.
                                                           81


                                                  P. HAND-DAVIS


                Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Inspector, many supporters and police officers, including
   yourself, said there was a rapid build-up of supporters
   approaching the main perimeter gates after 2.30.   Did
   you wonder why there was this sudden build-up at that
   particular time? - A. Yes, I did.   I couldn t understand
   it.

Q. What did you think might have caused it? - A. One's
   experience tends to think about delays on the motorway or
   bad weather conditions, but I quickly discounted that
   knowing it hadn't been the case so I didn't know where
   they were coming from and what the problem had been.
   All I knew is that we were deluged with people.

Q.   Did you know that the road was closed at 2.30? - A. I
     think it was earlier than that, madam.   Was it 2.15?      I
     am sure it was closed at 2.30, perhaps even 2.15.

Q.   You don't think the two things seem to tie up? - A. I
     think you will find the closure of the road is a
     customary thing on Leppings Lane basically because as the
     crowd starts to build up we think about road safety and
     we stop the traffic for that reason.

Q. You said people were there in huge numbers, that there
   were thousands of people there all at once.  Something
   must have happened.   It wasn't the behaviour of the
   people, it was just these numbers just seem to come from
   nowhere? - A. Again, the previous witness was here at
   12.30 he told us and yet he turned up at the ground at
   twenty to three.  Where had they been?

Q. I think the witnesses I have been listening to, they
   arrived at all times for various reasons...

          THE CORONER:    You may be right, but you have got to
     ask the questions.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   In fact one did go down at five to
     three thinking he would be able to go right in because he
     had a ticket.   If you have a ticket for a match it is a
     far more simple process of entering a ground than when
     you have to pay money and you have to receive change. -
     A. Can I tell you, madam, that is not the case.   I shall
     be working at a football match tonight and it is no
     simple thing having a ticket.   In fact it complicates it
     sometimes.

Q. With having a ticket? - A. Yes.
                                                           82


                                                  P. HAND-DAVIS


Q. Why do you say that? - A. I don't pretend to understand
   it but it is sometimes quicker to have the money in your
   hand then to have a ticket.

Q. I can't understand that one.   I would have thought it
   was easier to show a ticket. - A. It is not always as
   simple as that at football grounds.   It may well be, for
   instance, that they don't allow sufficient numbers of
   turnstiles for ticket holders and yet they do for cash
   people.

Q. Do you think that things weren't flowing as they should
   have done because people who hadn't got tickets were
   amongst the ones with tickets? - A. Yes. Again this is
   the great imponderable.    Nobody knows how many non­
   ticket holders there were.    I would like to say at least
   500, perhaps, but we have no way of know that.

Q. So you would think that was slowing up the process? - A.
   I am told by people at the turnstiles it was slowing up
   the process.

Q. Why hadn't officers filtered these ticketless fans out
   before the turnstiles? - A. I don't know.

Q. It seems that mounted officers then seemed to move out of
   an area once it becomes crowded for reason like the horse
   may kick somebody - different reasons - but it doesn't
   look a very constructive thing to do from where I am
   looking at it, if you are going to move away from the
   place where you are supposed to be organising things? -
   A. I think that is fair comment, but one must always
   remember the he is only an animal and there is only so
   much pressure an animal can be put under.   Now we are
   talking about a very exceptional amount of pressure,
   something that men of long-standing have not seen before,
   and that was the reason why we had to come out.   People
   like PC Grunhill from yesterday, men of vast experience
   at Liverpool and Everton, had to come out of the
   turnstile area.  We are talking about an unprecedented
   situation.

Q.   Really it seems to me that horses Were not very effective
     that day in that sort of situation? - A. I think that on
     the contrary we were able to do as much as we possibly
     could.   I think the tactics with the gate shutting and
     then the cordon were quite effective and something that
     we could at least say we tried and succeeded with.
     Certainly in the pens it became untenable, the situation.

Q.   You don't think a cordon of police officers on foot would
     have prevented the fans moving forward much more
     effectively?   Fans could not get underneath the animal...
                                                           83


                                                 P. HAND-DAVIS


     You know, you would be there as a more formidable barrier
     I'would have thought? - A. What, a line of policemen?

Q. Yes. - A. Well, I would sing the praises of the horses
   and say there is nothing like them for controlling crowds
   and that we pose the most impressive barrier and I think
   a crowd of this nature would have swept a line of
   policemen aside.

Q. Surely they would be arrested if they did that, wouldn't
   they? - A. It takes an awful lot of people to arrest a
   crowd of 5,000.

Q. Or the game would be abandoned surely?     You would have a
   riot...

          THE CORONER:   I don't think we can pursue that.
     You have asked him quite rightly would foot officers have
     been better.   He has said, I think, no:

Q. I think that is right, putting it in a nutshell? - A.
   Yes.

          THE CORONER:   You then asked surely they would be
     arrested.   I will allow that.   He said, "We would need
     a lot of officers."   I don't think we can move any
     further than that on that score.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   I just thought that people would not
     be afraid to smack a horse, for instance, whereas they
     would be afraid to smack a police officer.   That is how
     I see it.




                - A. Again, in public order
                                                                    84

                                                    P. HAriB-DAVIS



       /

- A. Again, in public order situations, and this became
one, a public order situation, the Police horse is most
effective because of his size and presence, and I would
back trieia any day against a line of Policemen.

0. 3ut has he the intelligence of a man, I wonder?

0.        THE CORONER:   I think what you are saying,
     Officer, is that you are not putting a Police horse in
     on its own, you are putting a Police horse in with a
     rider on top, is tnat right? You are not suggesting
     that you sent the horses in riderless, are you, so that
     we can get it straight once and for all? - A. iio, sir.

Q.        i a<S. HcBRIEii: You knew thousands of people had
     entered through a gate into the stadiura, and you gave
     me the impression that you were concerned about where
     all these thousands of people were going to go, so
     later on, when you went inside the ground, why did you
     think there had been a pitch invasion, before tae ;iatcn
     was about to begin? - A. I apologise for it, I cannot
     do other than tnat, but it was ray perception and as I
     ran up the steps and looked across that is what I saw,
     or saould I say it is what I thought I was looking at,
     so I acted upon that.   I can't help being wrong.

Q. Is it because you think football fans are generally a
   bad lot? - A. Hell, I an a football nyself, nadaia, a
   Tottenham Hotspur supporters, so I an sorry I don't
   have a down on football supporters at all.

Q.   I was just wondering why you would  think     it was a pitch
     invasion rather than a safety - tnat the      people were in
     danger? Uhy you thought on those lines?       - A. Yes,
     regrettably I did not see it on a safety      angle, I
     looked at it as a pitch invasion.

0.   What I would like tosay is do youreally think           tnat
     fans would invade a pitch before a Kiatch ....

          Itl£ CORONER:    Mrs• i-icBrien, I,have given you a
     lot of liberty.    Tnis witness has told us four times,
     at least, at least four tiaes, that he thought it was a
     pitch invasion. Three tines at least he has said tnat
     he nas sorry in himself now that he perceived it,
     because he knows wnat happened.      I a:.: not going to
     allow you to ask this question.      He nas answered it and
     tnat is it.   It is not fair on the witness and I a® not
     naving it. iiove on to the next question, please.

           liRS. Mc3RIEi-i:    I an sorry about tnat, sir.

           THE C0R0UER:       That is all right.
                                                                    85

                                                       P. HAND-DAVIS




Q.        .iRS. McBRIEN:    You said you just went straight
     back out when you saw problems, when fans were getting
     over the perimeter fence in the front you just left the
     area? - A. Yes,     I knew or thought I was going to be
     needed with the     horses at Gate 0, to go onto the pitch,
     and I assumed that that might be tne next area of
     deployaent.

0. You did not investigate at all near Pens 3 and 4? - A.
   Well you oust remember that everything tnat I do at a
   football raatch, I have a horse with me, and I base my
   judgaents upon that, and I knew or thought that I could
   possibly be going onto the pitch. As I explained, I
   knew that I was    in the wrong area of the ground if that
   was going to be the case, and I was a good 10 or 15
   minutes away from being able to get onto the pitch.

0. You said you were not able to go for a meal at 2.45 as
   planned?

          THE CORONER:   He didn't say that.   What he said
     was - forgive me, I will make sure I nave got this
     right - ha said that in a normal situation the Officers
     who cane from other forces would be sent off at
     quarter-to-3 for their meal.  He did not say that he
     would go for a meal, and in fact he said tiat happened
     at Leppings Lane in '87 and '38, it happened at
     Penistone Road in '87, '88 and '39:

Q.   Is that correct?       Is that what you said? -   A. Yes, it
     is, sir.

           THE CORONER:  So it isn't him, that was the
     normal routine, is what he was saying, with regard to
     visiting Officers like the Merseyside people and tne
     Hottinghaia people.

          MRS. JlcBRIEfJ:     I am wondering if I may ask this
     question:

0.    Do you know if Officers did go off duty  at 2.45 that
     day? - A. I only know of one, which was an Officer on a
     very young horse we had only just purchased about a
     month earlier, who went back to the stables from an
     outer position at about 2.50, but he certainly had not
     been involved   in either Penistone Road or Leppings Lane
     that day.   As  an indication, some of tne.Penistone Road
     caae round to   us at quarter-to-3, which gives yau some
     idea of what was happening down there.

0. You said that the fans were responding very well to all
   requests made by Police Officers, up to 2.30, tnat you
   had no problems at all, but after 2.30 they behaved
   differently, yet they were the same fans who were there
                                                                86

                                                    P. HAND-DAVIS




        just before 2.30? - A. Yes, I think that again, this
        word frustration or desperation was creeping into their
        thinking.  People had a ticket, they had paid for it,
        they were looking forward to a good afternoon out, and
l|      they were not getting through the turnstiles, and they
        were becoming more and more frustrated.  I can
        understand that.  If you are making progress towards a
        turnstile everything is right with the world, but if
        you have got a ticket and you are not getting through
        you are not pleased and tempers start to rise. That
        does not surprise rae.

     Q. What is puzzling me is the fact that all this happened
        just after 2.30? - A. Well it puzzled me.

     Q. It is like a streak of lightening.    I just don't know -
        it is puzzling rue all the tirae. - A. I think that is a
        very graphic way of putting it, and I think tne word
        deluge I used earlier, again we were deluged by people
        very, very quickly.   Nobody can quite know even to this
        day how it happened.

     Q. Now you have mentioned you were surprised when fans
D       were arriving late - you called 2.40 late.  If there
        were so many people arriving late did you expect tfie
        game to be delayed? - A. I didn't but it would nave
        been an option, I agree.

     0. Thank you, Officer.

                    Cross-Examined by &R. RUSSELL

     Q. Inspector, in the course of your evidence you used the
        phrase Ground Comraander on one or two occasions.  Can I
        just clarify tnis? By Ground Commander did you mean,
        or do you mean the Ground Control in the Police Control
        Box? - A. By Ground Commander I mean the person in
        overall command, Hr. Duckenfield.

                       Further by THE C0R0IIER

     Q. Can I just ask you a couple of questions that the Jury
        have passed up to me at some point? * The question
        relates to when you asked for assistance.   Do you
        remember, you said at some point you requested
        assistance? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. And the question is when you did request assistance did
        you get any? - A. Yes, I think that somebody must have
        heeded the call, because again I have just mentioned
        that the Penistone Road norses came up to assist us.   I
        think they arrive at Gate C on the video.  I was never
        particularly aware of thea arriving because by this




H
                                                                 87

                                                   P. HAND-DAVIS




       tiipe I as at the sweet shop on the corner, but yes, the
       assistance came.

    0. It did come.  Can I ask you one other question: when
       you get Officers in from other forces as you did in
B      this case, or indeed when you go to give mutual support
       to another force, is the standard of training and
       techniques of mounted Officers such that they can just
       slot in and work, or do they have to be retrained, if
       you like, by the receiving force? Have you understood
       wnat I am trying to ask? - A. Yes, and I can answer it
       in this way.  We had a question about the scarcity of
       briefing notes for the mounted Policemen.   iiounted men
       are very experienced Officers. The Ground Comraander
       knows that and he expects them to work on their own
       initiative.  I expect m y men to work on their own
       initiative. They are vastly experienced in the control
       of football crowds, so once you have given them the
       deployment, it does not matter whether they are a
       Liverpool Officer or West Yorkshire Officer, or South
       Yorkshire Officer, you can be fairly confident taat
       tney are going to act in good faith and properly with
       the minimum of supervision and briefing, and that
D      certainly is reflected in tnat briefing note there.
       The Ground Commander would have had full confidence in
       his mounted Officers, and I had full confidence in both
       Liverpool at the Liverpool end and ....

    o. I am not suggesting that they were not competent, I was
       just wondering whether there was a - I am not saying a
       national training - but whether there was a standard of
       mounted Officers throughout the country, maybe by means
       of cross-fertilisation because of mutual support, which
       tended to equalise out, and the techniques were
       similar? - A. Yes. The Saturday afterwards we went to
       Derbyshire and worked Derby County, with no orders at
       all. We just slotted in and worked the ground.   It is
       a general technique that you can use at any football
       ground.

    0. l.ian.< you.

            !irt. KAI.^IrtG: There is a matter arising from that
       very point, sir, and also fron something nay learned
       friend iir. King put to the Officer, and it is in the
       Operational Order at 3.9.1, headed "iiounted Section".
       Hr. King put to the Inspector that the only mention in
       the Operational Order was at Appendix ii, but in fact,
       sir, 3.9.1 reads, and I will put it to the witness wno
       can follow it through:

             "Members of the iiounted Section will be employed
             outside tne ground to maintain order, segregate




H
                                                                88

                                                  P. HAND-DAVIS




        supporters and escort them froa and to their
        transport."

        THE CORONER:      You have got to   read 3.9.2 as well.

        MR. ;iA»»KII\G:   392, sir, says:

        "Duties of the Mounted Section      personnel are set
        out at Appendix 'H'."

   As a matter of coiiimonsense I would say that that is not
   the duty at all, of course, what it is, is the
   deploynent.

        THE CORONER:      Yes, true, but I wanted you to read
   the whole section.

        HR. riAi’NIrtG: Because of   course Appendix H does
   not say anything about duty at    all, it just says who is
   going to be where.

           Further Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

Q. Inspector, would it be right to say that in view of the
   fact that you are saying that mounted Officers are
   experienced, and therefore that you need the rriininusa of
   supervision and briefing, that that, albeit very short,
   minute as to your duties was really all you needed? -
   A. Yes, I think that reflects the confidence that was
   ueld in us, and obviously on top of that was siy own
   briefing on the day, yes.

0. Tnank you very much.

        HR. KING:   Sir, there was one matter whicn I have
   been asked to put which in fact follows on frora
   questions I asked.

        THE CORONER:      Yes, please go ahead, Hr. King.

            Further Cross-Examined by HR. KING

0. Officer, I asked you about coaraunications which you raay
   or taay not have received yourself from inside the
   ground, and you fairly told rae that you nad not
   received anything from inside the ground. The question
   I want to put to you is the converse of that: apart
   from asking for assistance - I had better ask you, when
   you asked for assistance, what did you ask for? - A. I
   just said any Officers or men that is spare can we nave
   them at Leppings Lane, please.
                                                                89

                                                   P. HAHD-DAVIS




     Q. Ant| the result of that was horses? - A. As far as I ara
        aware, yes. They may well have sent foot as well, but
        I was not aware of tnat.

H    0. All you got in response to that was horses? - A. As far
0       as I know.

     0. How nany horses was that? - A. I think that anybody
        that was spare on Penistone Road appeared, and again I
        was not party to them coming up.  I know they arrived
        at Gate C and started to get involved - probably half a
        dozen extra.

     Q. When you say Gate C, you mean presumably on the river
        side of the radial barrier? - A. Yes, you see them
        appearing there on the video.

     Q. Yes, not actually within the crowd because at that time
        the crowd was too jamiaed to get into? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. Apart fros tnat request for assistance did you yourself
        communicate to anyone inside the ground, this is you in
        now, as opposed to tnera out, about the fact tnat things
JD      were out of control at tne turnstiles and there were
        still lots of people corning down Leppings Lane? - A.
        Ho, I think I did say that cay one message, I knew my
        Sergeant was on the radio and I knew Hr. Marshall was
        on the radio, and I was fairly confident that the
        cameras could see what we were being confronted with,
        so radio communication was so difficult I confined it
        to that one message.

     Q. Thank you very much.

             MR. BUSSELL:   Sir, arising out of your re­
        examination, one brief natter.

               Further Cross-Exansined by     KUSSELL

     0. Officer you referred to the reliance upon initiative.
        You yourself were of course the Officer in command of
        the mounted section, and would this be right, that you
        did not expect to be contacted or radioed or any
        message sent to you by your horseaen in other places
        away from you, such as at the Penistone Road end, or at
        the Midland Railway Station, unless they were unable to
        do the task which had been set them? - A. Correct, sir.




                          /Q. Is that a familiar ....




H
                                                  P. HAND-DAVIS


Q. Is that a familiar pattern or system applicable in
   Police practice as a whole? - A. Yes, if all is well
   you would expect people to get on with the job.

Q. If the job is being done the supervisor responsible
   for the people doing the job does not expect to hear
   personally from them? - A. I can only speak for
   myself and my unique type of duty at a football
   ground and I certainly was happy through not
   receiving communication that Penistone Road was okay.
   It usually is and it was on this particular day.

Q. That is within your own limited experience at the
   football ground but does it also apply as a matter of
   general application as Police practice in your
   experience? - A. Yes, if people aren't on the radio
   asking for assistance and guidance then you know
   things are going well.

Q. If they are not, one can assume that they are? - A.
   Ye s.

Q.        THE CORONER:        I did not hear the reply? - A. I
     said yes.

Q.          MR. CATCHPOLE:    You nodded and said yes? - A.
     Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Hand-Davis, thank you very much
indeed for being here and for waiting.

                    STEPHEN HAROLD THOMAS Sworn

                             Bv THE CORONER:

Q. I think you are Stephen Thomas, is that right? - A.
   No, sir, Stephen Harold Thomas.

Q. Police Sergeant 1764? - A. That is correct.

Q. I think you are another member of the mounted
   squad? - A. Yes, sir, from South Yorkshire Police.

Q. We will see what you can tell us about this incident.
   You were deputed.  I think there was a meeting at the
   stables, Niagara Club? - A. A briefing, sir, yes.

Q. About 11.30 or thereabouts? - A. No, we deployed from
   Niagara Stables at 11.30.

Q. That was before then? - A. That is right.
                                               S. H. THOMAS


What was your job in brief? - A. I was briefed to
work at the Leppings Lane end along with PC Wilson
and another three Officers from the Merseyside Police
and that was just to regulate the fans on arrival at
the ground.

What was your initial task? - A. When we arrived at
the ground I briefed the Merseyside Officers because
I wanted to familiarise them with the surrounding
area.  So we had a walk round the ground.  I
familiarised them with the static points etc.   I also
told them that we would get large quantities of
people perhaps with tickets, without tickets,
congregating on the concourse, the reception area, of
Leppings Lane and it was our duty to try and keep
that clear so that when people arrived at the ground
they would have free access towards the turnstiles.

Did you say you were anticipating large groups of
people congregating? - A. No, sir.  Perhaps what I
meant to say is that in an all-ticket match you
usually get ticket touts assembling in that area
along with people without tickets.  So to enable the
flow of the fans towards the turnstiles we decided to
keep that area clear.

Did you endeavour to do that? - A. Initially, sir,
yes.

How do you do it, very briefly? I do not want you to
give me a blow by blow account but what do you do?
Do you walk up to somebody and say, "Where is your
ticket?" or do you walk up to them and ask them
whether they have tickets? What do you do? - A. We
just walk up to people standing there.  Perhaps they
might have a legitimate reason to be there, for
instance, waiting for friends etc. or just taking in
the atmosphere which a lot of people try to do. By
going up to the people and requesting them either to
move towards the turnstiles if they have tickets or
if they have not got tickets then please keep the
area clear so that people who are arriving at the
ground can have free access towards the turnstiles.

Let us imagine we have got a ticketless person, if he
has travelled from say London or Merseyside, is he
going to move away? - A. Some do, sir.  In fact, they
are very responsive.  They will move away because
they don't want to draw attention to themselves.
They will move away from the area even if it is a
matter of just ten yards away but they will move.
                                                S. H. THOMAS


They will move away from the area even if it is a
matter of just ten yards away but they will move.

They are not   likely to pack up sticks and go home? -
A. No, sir.    They will not move half a mile away from
the ground.    They will move perhaps ten yards away or
twenty yards   away or even cross the road.

Then you have to do it again? - A. Yes, that is
right, they keep on trying.

I know this is an impossible question for you to
answer but how many people are we talking about? It
sounds to me as if you were moving them from one
location to another? - A. No, no. We were just
initially deployed at the reception area just outside
the perimeter gates on the turnstiles. Apart from PC
Wilson the other four Officers just stayed in that
location trying to help the ground inspectors who on
occasion, on a couple of occasions, made requests to
me to get the pavements clear.

How many people are we talking about? - A. It depends
about what time you are trying to say, sir.

Up to say one o'clock? -  A. From oneo'clock there
were no build-up of fans at all.

Sorry? - A. There were no build-up of fans at all,
that is right.

So there was no problem there? - A. In fact, I wasn't
there at one o'clock because I took Sergeant Smith a
walk round the area and we walked towards Wadsley
Lane.

What time were you there then when you were doing
this sweeping? - A. We arrived back at the ground
just after one o'clock and we were virtually free
from supporters and all the turnstiles were open and
people were just flowing through the turnstiles.  I
would say, if you want me to put a figureon, perhaps
20 to 30, even up to 50, people.

We are not talking about vast numbers? - A. No, no.

Groups but manageable groups? - A. You tend to get
the people who arrive without tickets perhaps in
fives and sixes, no more than that.
                                                              93




                                                     S. H. THOMAS


    Q. This was after one o'clock because, as you say, up to
       one o'clock it was so quiet that you were actually
       touring the area with your Merseyside colleague? - A.
       That is right, sir, yes.
B
    Q. There were supporters about but distant from the
       ground? - A. Yes, sir. Me and Sergeant Smith walked
       along Leppings Lane towards Middlewood Road and then
       up Wadsley Lane. We walked past the Park public
       house where there were supporters congregating round
       the public houses there.  Then we continued walking
       along Wadsley Lane.

    Q. Nothing for you to be concerned about? - A. No, sir.
       I noticed that there were supporters walking away
       from the ground rather than towards the ground at
       that stage.

    Q. This was before one o'clock? - A. That is right, sir.

    Q. After one you were back at what we call the reception
       area, is that right? - A. That is right, sir, yes.
D
    Q. So where did you place yourself when you returned
       just before one o'clock? - A. Just in front of the
       perimeter gates, so perhaps right in the middle,
       perhaps just outside the main gates which separate
       the two pens.

    Q. You continued these duties which you have described
       until after the arrival of the contingent from the
       train? - A. At approximately two o'clock I heard over
       the radio that a special train had arrived and then I
       had a request from an Inspector who was working the
       area on foot trying to clear the footpath just
       outside the shop of fans just loitering about there
       which myself and PC Wilson did.

    Q. That was in order that the people who had come off
       the train would have easy access to the ground? - A.
       That is right.

    Q. It was not that they were doing anything but that
       they wanted to have a clear pavement? - A. Again just
       to encourage the people with tickets to go towards
       the ground.

    Q. And you did that? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. The contingent came and Mr. Hand-Davis turned up with
       other Officers, did he? You may not have spoken to




H
                                               S. H. THOMAS


him but did you see him? - A. Yes, I believe he
turned up with eight horses.

Did you have people approach you with regard to
tickets as well? - A. Yes, it is common knowledge
when people go to a strange ground that they will go
to a Police Officer, usually towards the Officers on
horseback, to be directed towards turnstiles.   For
about ten to fifteen minutes I was just engaged in
that process.

What was, so far as you remember, the main cause of
confusion so far as the people you were concerned
with whom you saw? - A. I think basically they were
just lost and wanted to know which turnstiles to head
towards.  Like, for instance, they would come up and
say, "Where is the North Stand?" and you would just
point to that direction or, "Where is the Leppings
Lane terracing for standing?" and so you would point
to those turnstiles.

When did you first start noticing any change? - A.
Like I say I was engaged in the enquiries for about
ten to fifteen minutes and I noticed when the special
train arrived I purposely looked at the turnstiles
for the standing area.  I noticed the foot lads were
forming queues anyway and the people were just going
through the turnstiles as normal at that stage.  Then
having been distracted from being asked on various
enquiries where various parts of the ground was I
looked up again towards the turnstiles and I saw a
build-up of fans inside the pen area.  I actually saw
that PCs Grunhill and Stanbridge had gone in to try
and ease the passage there.

Did you join them or stay outside? - A. Yes, because
I was noticing the people going into that area, the
football fans, there were no queues at all at that
stage and there was no queues.   The people who were
joining the throng of people just didn't seem to want
to form any queues and they seemed to be, not pushing
but trying to make their way to the" turnstiles, and I
also noted alongside the blue barrier gate there were
people coming up past the riverside from the
direction of Penistone Road, seeing the throng of
people in front of the turnstiles, and actually
crawling under the barrier.  So I then went from the
reception area and I positioned my horse.   So I was
patrolling in effect up and down the blue barrier.
                                                          95




                                                  S. H. THOMAS


Q. That is what we call the funnel bar. Can you just
   show it on the model? Is that it? - A. That is
   right, sir.

Q. You were this side, between the River Don and that
   barrier patrolling up and down to stop people
   crawling underneath it? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. In effect jumping...? - A. Jumping the queue
   basically.

Q. I think you said that you noticed these people coming
   up from the Penistone Road end but are you sure about
   that? Did they come down there? - A. The vast
   majority of the Liverpool supporters arrived along
   Leppings Lane and down from the Middlewood Road area.
   We have got to remember there are some fans which did
   actually arrive past the back of the South Stand and
   up to Leppings Lane end that way.

Q. But not vast numbers? - A. No, sir, no.  I couldn't
   really put a figure on the amount of people arriving
   that way.




                              /Q. What happened then
r •
                                                                            96



                                                 S .   H .   T H O iM A S




          Q. ^ What happened then, as far as you were concerned? - A.
               I could see that PCs Stanbridge and Grunhill were
               trying to organise the queues and, in fact, actually
               did that at one stage and relieved the pressure at the
               front, and then there seemed to be a massive influx of
      B        people that actually came through the perimeter gates
               and joined the people in the pen which caused a lot
               more pressure on the turnstile and people just near
               the turnstiles.  So then I thought about taking my
               horse to the end of that blue barrier so that I could
               try and get the horse into the crowd, into the
               supporters, and then join PCs Stanbridge and Grunhill
               there, so that in effect we could block the pen area
               off at that stage and, therefore, allow the fans to go
               through the turnstiles and therefore relieve the
               pressure at the front.

          Q.   So what you are saying then is that you wanted to
                erect, if I can use that terra, a barrier between the
                perimeter gate and the end of the funnel bar? - A.
               That is right, sir.

          Q.   Did you manage to get your horse into that area or
      D        not? - A. No sir, I did not, because the people were
               so dense, and even though they had a little bit of
               room to move back, they would not move back from them,
                they just kept on ignoring them.  I requested them to
               move so that I could get in and, therefore, form the
               barrier so that they could form up on my left-hand
               side and just release the pressure on the right.   But
               because I couldn't get in I was just wasting my time.

          Q.   Was that because the people at that point had already
               filled up the whole of that gap right up to the
               perimeter gates and beyond, or was there still space
               for them to move back? That is a very important
               question. - A. There was a little bit of space for
               them to move back, yes.

          Q.   They could have moved back? - A. They could have moved
               back, yes.  In fact, when PC Grunhill moved towards
               me, obviously the movement of a horse walking out
               actually created the fans to coma back.

          Q.   As a matter of interest, did you by chance see
               Inspector Hand-Davis in that area? - A. Not at that
               stage because I was more concerned with what was
               happening at the front of the turnstiles and I was
               trying to get the attention of PCs Grunhill and
               Stanbridge so that we could form the cordon to relieve
               the pressure.

          Q.   So you did not succeed and there were PCs Grunhill and
               Stanbridge still inside, so what did you do next?




      H
|r-
                                                                     9 7




                                                    S. II. THOMAS


                „ What time was this, do you know, and if you do not
                  know, please do not guess? - A. I couldn't tell you bv
                  that stage, sir.                                     }




      B    Q.    What happened then? - A. I realised that we had to try
                 and relieve^ the pressure by stopping the people coming
                 into that tnrough the perimeter gates, so I then went
                 back to the perimeter gates where the riverside gate
                 is and then tried to organise our lads into a cordon
                 across the gates, but the gates were open at that
                 stage.

           Q.    The gates were open at that point? - A. Yes.

          Q.     Did you succeed, in the sense of getting somebody to
                 close that gate? - A. I can't remember who exactly
                 closed the gates, but we just formed a cordon with the
                 gates open.

          Q.     On this side of the gate, or the far side of the gate?
                 - A. On the road side of the gate.

          Q.     When you say cordon, is this the cordon which
      D          stretched from the sweet shop right up to the bridge?
                 - A. No sir.                                      °

          Q.     So how many horses was this cordon made up of? - A. I
                 couldn't rightly say, sir.  I would say about 6, 6 or
                 /•

          Q.    So you were    trying to form a cordon on the outside of
                 the perimeter gates in order to enable them to be
                 shut? - A. Not to be shut, no sir, just to regulate
                 the flow ofthe supporters through into that pen area.

          Q.    Did you see the gate, or any of those gates, shut at
                 any time, you yourself? - A. I remember a foot
                 sergeant actually close the gates on me and I ended up
                on the road side of it and I was actually holdin® the
                gates.                                           °

          Q.    You were holding the gates? - A. Yes sir.

          Q.    You were actually holding them shut at that point, is
                that right? - A. That is right.  I had the reins in my
                left hand and I was just holding the gates closed with
                my right hand.

          Q.    What was happening then at that point on your right,
                in other wordstowards the turnstiles? - A. I could
                see that there   wasan inspector stood on the blue
                barrier actually lifting people from directly where
                the turnstile wall started.




      H
                                   S. H. THOMAS


' Did a gap form, as far as you could recollect, between
  the back of the crowd who were advancing towards the
  turnstile and the perimeter gates which you were
  holding shut? - A. Yes sir, it did.

 How big a gap would you estimate it? - A. Perhaps
 three or four yards.

 How long did it last? - A. I remember that there was
 pressure from my left and again requesting the people
 not to push, but again, as has already been mentioned,
 the people who you are directly in contact with will
 never admit to pushing.  It is always the people from
 behind.  So then being concerned with holding the
 gates and requesting the people not to push,°I could
 not give a figure on that at all, a length of time at
 all.

 Never mind what the people would admit, did you feel
 that all the people who were pushing against you from
 the left, from the outside, were propelled forward, or
 did some of them at least have a choice as to what
 they were doing? - A. I think at that stage, sir, the
 crowd was so dense that these that were directly in
 contact with me did not have any choice at all.

 So people further back might have had a choice, but
 the ones right next to you were, in your estimation,
 genuinely being pushed? - A. That is right, sir.

 That presumably means that if you were talking to them
 and asking them not to push, which I assume you did,
 it would not have made any difference, because they
 could not do anything about it? - A. That is right.
 In fact, that is what they said to me, they could not
 do anything about it.

 And that was your perception as well? - A. That is
 right, sir.

I think you noticed several people had fallen over, is
that right? - A. No sir. What happened was there was
a surge from my left, which causerd me and the horse to
be pushed towards the gate, which in turn catapulted
the gate open.  The horse stumbled and, in turn,
people just fell down in front of me. The horse
scrambled to its feet and myself and PC Scott actually
bridged the gap until the gates were closed again.

How much does your horse weigh - about? - A. About 650
kilos.

I think around this time you decided that you wanted
to send a radio message, is that right? - A. That is
                                                              99




                                          S. H. THOMAS


          right, I tried to get hold of a radio message because
          I knew, looking towards the turnstiles, there were
          people still trying to get underneath the blue
          barrier.  We could not get into that area because if
         ^we had opened the gate then there would have been a
B        mass of people just flooding into that area.    So I
          tried to get onto the radio - I don't know, it must
         have been about 20-to 3 - asking for assistance.     I
          just could not get through and I was shouting,
          "Emergency" over the radio, which usually, if control
         hears the word "Emergency" they will block off all the
         others, try to stop anybody making any other incoming
         calls and concentrate on that one.   But then again I
         must have been trying for about five minutes until I
         finally got through to request the horses.

         In fact, you did get that message through, as far as
         you know? - A. Yes sir.  I requested the horses from
         the rear of the South Stand to go up towards Leppings
         Lane round the back of the South Stand.

    Q.   Did they arrive, in fact, as far as you know? - A.
         Yes, I saw them arrive.

    Q.   Do you know what time they came, about? - A. I
         couldn't tell you, sir, no.

    Q.   Did you see Gate C open, because you might well have
         done? - A. No sir, I didn't actually see the gate
         open, but I saw people being ushered towards Gate C
         from the pen area.

    Q.   Did you see it open, I am sorry? - A. No sir.

    Q.   You never saw it open? - A. No sir.

    Q.   You just saw that people were going there? - A. Yes
         sir.

         Can you relate the arrival of the horsemen to that at
         all or not? - A. I would imagine that they arrived at
         the same time.
                                         ✓
         Did you see Gate B open? - A. Yes sir, I definitely
         saw that open.  That was just shortly after I saw the
         fans being ushered round to Gate C.

    Q.   That was shortly after that? - A. Yes.

         _ am sorry, I misheard you. You saw the fans being
         ushered round to Gate C, then you saw Gate B open? ■
         A. Yes, that is right.




H
r~   X
         :
                                                                            100



                                                        S. H. THOMAS


                 Q.x Can you remember how long that Gate 3 stayed open,
                     what was your impression of its length? - A. Perhaps
                     five minutes, sir.

                 Q.   That, of course, was the ideal gate for relieving the
             B        pressure within that turnstile area? - A. That is
                      right, sir.  In fact, as a result of that gate
                      opening, all the pressure on the turnstiles actually
                      went away and, in fact, it virtually cleared the area.

                 Q.   Was there anything about this match which was
                      different to what you had experienced at other
                      matches? - A. I had worked four semi-finals at
                      Hillsborough, one as a foot officer and three as a
                      mounted officer.  The only thing that I feel different
                      about it is I have never recollected any trouble on an
                      all-ticket match before.  I know on the previous semi­
                      finals, when there is a big football match, whether it
                      be a semi-final, a quarter-final, the all-ticket
                      matches usually flow along without any trouble at all.

                                 Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

                 Q.   Four semi-finals, once on foot: how long, please,
                      have you been a mounted police officer? - A. At the
                      time, sir, I was a mounted officer for eight years.

                 Q.   For how much during that time have your duties
                      included policing football crowds? - A. Every other
                      weekend, sir, because there is usually a big match at
                      Hillsborough.

                 Q.   So on those previous occasions have you been on duty
                      at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes sir.

                 Q.   Now as far as preparation for the event is concerned,
                      from your point of view was your preparation along the
                      same lines as the previous year - 1988? - A. Virtually
                      exactly the same, sir.

                 Q.   Had 1988 been a perfectly successful event? - A. Yes
                       sir.
                                                       ✓
                 Q.   No cause for concern at all? - A. None at all, sir.

                 Q.   After that had you heard any criticism from any
                       quarter about the Police planning or operation in
                       1988? - A. No sir.

                 Q.   Had you heard any criticism of the operation at the
                       earlier match, 1987? - A. No sir.

                 Q.   Apparently now people are criticising after the 1989
                       event, but I am trying to put the matter in the




             H
                                                              101



                                               S. H. THOMAS


         perspective of what was known at the time.  Did it
         seem to you that making the plans for the 1989 event,
         that is this event, it was reasonable to follow what
         nad worked well before? - A. Very much so, sir,
         because if two successful operations work, then you
B        would think it would work a third time.

    Q. Do you think that there was anything more that your
        section, the Mounted Section, could reasonably have
        done to prepare for the 1989 event? - A. No sir.

    Q.   You say that now. In the light of everything that
          happened, do you think you could have done anything
          more to prepare for it, reasonably that is? - A. You
          can only prepare on your pre-experience.

    Q.   Quite.   The pressure that built up here outside the
          turnstiles was exceptional, was it not, the pressure
          of the crowd? - A. Very much so, yes.

    Q.   Have you ever known anything like it in all your
          experience? - A. I have, sir, but not on an all-ticket
         match.

    Q.   Where and when have you come across that before? - A.
         At Barnsley football ground.;

    Q.   Barnsley?   - A. Yes.

    Q.   So as far as a big match like this isconcerned,   what
          sort of gates do they have at Barnsley? - A. On that
          particular occasion Barnsley was playing Newcastle
         United and the fans arrived late, and I thinkthere
         were only four turnstiles open atthat stage.




                                  /Q.   Yes.    Are you,




H
                                                  S. H. THOMAS



Q. Y&s.   Are you only just referring to one event there? -
   A. That's right, sir.

Q. Looking over the landscape of your experience you can
   think of one other occasion when a similar situation has
   cropped up? - A. Well, where we have got pressure on the
   turnstiles, just one, sir.

Q. Have you ever known such huge numbers as occurred here to
   arrive shortly before the kick-off? - A. Only on that one
   occasion when as I say I think the special train was late
   for some mechanical failure.   We got the bulk of the
   fans just trying to get into the match, not wanting to
   miss any of the match.

Q. On this occasion,   this 1989 event, did you hear appeals
   being made to the   crowd to ease back, to stop the
   crushing that was   taking place at the front? - A. Not
   from where I was,   sir.

Q. Did you make appeals yourself to the crowd to move back?
   - A. Yes.   Most of the mounted lads in the cordon were
   just trying to talk to the people directly near us to
   stop pushing but obviously they were being pushed on to
   us and they were appealing to us that they couldn't do
   anything about it.

Q. Did it appear to you that the people at the back of the
   crowd were doing anything to co-operate to stop the crush
   building up? - A. From where I was, sir, I was
   concentrating with what was happening at the turnstiles.
   I didn't see what was happening at the Leppings Lane side
   of it.

Q. If the crowd had been co-operative with the police when
   this problem was developing, do you think the situation
   could have been controlled outside the turnstiles? - A.
   Of course, sir, you can only queue people who want to be
   queued.

Q. Can you take as an example of that the arrival of the
   people from the railway train? - A. Well, when the people
   arrived then they were virtually in a queue themselves
   anyway because they were in a column being led by the
   mounted officers and just being ushered towards the
   turnstiles.   In effect they formed their own queue.

Q. Did they remain in that queue as they all went through
   the turnstiles? - A. Yes.   Some split up to go where the
   North Stand tickets were and the others just followed
   straight on wards the terracing tickets.
                                                                 103



                                                       S. H. THOMAS


    Q. As the front of the queue reached the turnstiles, did the
       rest of the back of the queue suddenly bunch up into a
       large crush? - A. At that stage, sir, no, I would not say
         so   .
B   Q. What did they do? - A. I think there are six turnstiles
       there?

    Q.   No, eight I think. - A. They just formed into queues.

    Q.    From your point of view - I am going to ask you the same
         question that I have asked some other officers - from
         your point of view at two o'clock if somebody had said to
         you, A terrible emergency is going to arise within the
         next three-quarters of an hour so that people are going
         to be in danger of being seriously crushed outside the
         turnstiles," what would your response have been at two
         o'clock? - A. I wouldn't have believed them, sir,
         actually.

    Q.    Was there anything about the event which gave you a clue
         that that was going to happen? - A. At two o'clock, no,
         because people were moving into the turnstiles or they
         were moving through the turnstiles quite freely.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. COUGHLIN:

    Q. Officer, really just to ask you to comment.   You heard
       the evidence of Inspector Hand-Davis? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Had you every confidence in him as the Officer in charge
       of the mounted section on the day? - A. Yes, sir, because
       we had had two operations prior to that and they had both
       gone without any trouble at all.

    Q. The team of officers he had working for him were very
       experienced, in terms of crowd control? - A. That's
       right, yes, sir.

    Q. As I think we have heard, obviously the skills of the
       mounted officers are very specialist skills in which you
       are all fully trained? - A. That's right, sit.   It is
       just a matter of experience by going to football matches
       week in, week out, that you gain the experience.

    Q. With that experience and with those skills the Ground
       Commander on the day was fully entitled to place
       confidence in your abilities to handle matters on the
       ground? - A. Yes, sir.




H
                                                            104


                                                    S. H. THOMAS



        '          Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING;

    Q. Sergeant, we have talked about the response of people
       towards the back, but there is an occasion I would like
B      to ask you to address your mind to when you had created a
       gap by the closing of the perimeter gates and two or
       three yards then opened up between those perimeter gates
       and the people going towards the turnstiles.   At that
       time you were exhorting those people at the back, a
       matter of feet away from you, themselves to move back
       into a space that was available to them, no doubt about
       that? - A. Well, from where I was I was virtually on the
       river side fencing so I didn't have the contact of the
       people directly in front of those perimeter gates.

    Q. You could see the gap, however, that had opened up? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. Could you see brother officers motioning in a way
       physically with their arms to the crowd? - A. Along the
       cordon, yes, sir.

    Q. Which leads me to the second instance when the perimeter
       gates have been secured by you and other officers
       actually forming a cordon and then the gates are closed,
       if you like, locking you out.   Now your horse is
       something over 17 hands high? - A. 16.2, sir.

    Q. You sit obviously above the maximum height of the horse
       as well? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. With a helmet on? -A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You have said that you were gesticulating to the crowd,
       that you were talking to the crowd, that you were
       exhorting the crowd.   All of that is the spoken word.
       I am interested to know whether there was the physical
       action that I almost managed to do then of the arm coming
       up and showing people as well what you were wanting them
       to do? - A. Of course we were gesticulating cowards the
       crowd to ask them to ease back, yes.

    Q. So in simple language you were moving them back by a
       sweep of the arm, making it clear? - A. Not at this
       stage, sir, because as soon as the gates were closed I
       was holding the gates closed with my right hand.    I
       could not say...   I saw other officers waving their
       hands, yes.

    Q. It is not just a question of the person at the front who
       may not be visible to somebody further back in the queue,
       you are an officer standing proud above the crowd and
       somebody who would be visible from further back in the




H
                                                              105



                                                    S. H. THOMAS


       crowd? - A. Yes, sir.   It depends how dense the crowd
       is, obviously.

    Q. Your evidence was the people immediately proximate to you
       probably didn't have a choice about whether they were
B      pushing or not pushing? - A. That's right, sir.

    Q. Although at the moment you actually formed the cordon
       those people did have a choice? - A. That's right.

    Q. It has to be people who were further back in the crowd
       who were actually doing that pushing? - A. That's right.

    Q. Doing it notwithstanding the sight of a cordon of five or
       six police horses and officers on those horses making it
       very clear that they didn't want them to be pushing
       forward? - A. Yes, that's right.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

    Q. Sergeant, you were asked about what was reasonable in
       planning.   Do you say it is reasonable in planning to
       have no plans whatsoever for coping with exceptionally
       large numbers of spectators arriving at the ground at the
       same time? - A. They were never foreseen, sir.

    Q. Do you think it is reasonable to have no contingency
       plans at all? - A. The plans were drawn up on past
       experience of the previous semi-finals.

    Q. I am asking you:  therefore you are saying it is
       reasonable to have no contingency plans at all for
       exceptionally large numbers of spectators arriving at the
       ground at the same time? - A. As I say, sir, you can
       never foresee...

    Q. So you are saying it is reasonable to have no contingency
       plans? - A. I have never experienced that before.

    Q. When people are making planning operations they obviously
       go on experience.  Do they also go on advice which they
       receive? - A. I would think so, yes, sir.

    Q. You can get advice from a number of'sources? - A. That's
       right, sir.

    Q. You can get advice from the government, for example? - A.
       That's right, sir.

    Q. You weren't involved with the planning itself, were you?
       - A. No, sir.

    Q. You would imagine that those who were involved with the
       planning, if that had advice published by the government,




H
                                                  S. H. THOMAS


they should have regard to it? - A. I would have thought
scf, yes, sir.

Did you yourself know anything about something called the
Green Guide? - A. No, sir.

I won't deal with that any further. You   werealso asked
about your confidence in Inspector Hand-Davis and you
agreed you had confidence in him? - A. Yes, sir.

You heard him give evidence this afternoon.    Do you
therefore agree with him, from experience, that unless
the bulk of the spectators are in the ground at the
Leppings Lane end by two o'clock there is going to be
trouble? - A. Not really, sir.

     THE CORONER:      Did he quite say that?

     MR. KING:   I beg your pardon, sir.        I understood
him to say that.

     THE CORONER:   I don't think I understood that.   I
know there was a point about two o'clock.   I think he
was saying he was expecting people to arrive...

     MR. KING:   I understood him to say, sir, and it may
be I will have to look at the transcript before I
continue this cross-examination.   I understood him to
say that he was saying...   I was putting to him that you
are saying, officer that you have to have the bulk of the
people there by 2.30.   He said no, and went further than
that, sir, and said you have to have the bulk of the
people there by two o'clock if you are going to cope.

     THE CORONER:   Not necessarily in the ground though.
I think there is a difference between having the bulk of
the people there and having the bulk of the people in the
ground.   Those two things are not...   All I can say is
that it is not my recollection of his answer, certainly
not my understanding of it.

     MR. KING:   Can I read the note, sir, which those
behind me have written, and I had no part in this note
whatsoever?

     THE CORONER:      Yes.

     MR. KING:      His answer was:

     "Crucial that people arrive by two o'clock.   If
     people hadn't arrived at two o'clock those inside
     the ground would know they were in for a problem."
                                                              107


                                                     S. H. THOMAS


          THE CORONER:   Yes, that is exactly what he said.
     My understanding of your question was:  if the people
     were not inside the ground at two o'clock.   I don t
     think you meant that but that is how I understood your
     question.   Forgive me, I interrupted you this time.

          MR. KING:    Not at all, sir.    It is important:

Q.   You understood what he was saying, that the bulk of
     people had to arrive at the turnstiles, be ready to go in
     by two o'clock, otherwise there would be a problem.   Do
     you agree with that? - A. Not really because you rely on
     people arriving at various stages between the turnstiles
     opening to their closing.

Q. Those turnstiles can only take so many people, can't
   they? - A. I believe so, yes, sir.  I don't know exactly
   what...

Q. There is a flow rate? - A. Yes, sir, but I couldn't tell
   you...

Q.   You don't know   anything about them? -A. No.

Q.   You would rely on Inspector Hand-Davis, he has got
     experience?   He is a man who knows his job?   It has
     been put to you he knows his job, you would agree with
     that? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Let me go further in time because two o'clock may be too
   early for this proposition.   Certainly by 2.30 it would
   appear that if the majority of fans hadn't arrived
   certainly Inspector Hand-Davis would say that you aren't
   going to be able to cope. Would you agree with that that
   if the bulk of the people hadn't arrived by 2.30 that you
   are not going to be able to cope? - A. If we had that
   information.

Q. What if you had that information? - A. If we had that
   information given to us that the bulk of the people
   hadn't arrived then perhaps problems would arise.

Q. Even if you didn't have the information problems could
   arise? - A. Of course, yes.

Q. Are you agreeing, therefore, that if the majority of fans
   - if a large number of fans have still to arrive when you
   arrive at 2.30, then you are in for a problem, is that
   what you are saying? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were under the control of the Ground Commander, it
   has been put to you? - A. That's right.   On the day I
   was under the direct control of Inspector Hand-Davis.
                                             S. H. THOMAS


Right at the top is the Ground Commander? - A. Yes.

The Ground Commander as far as you know is inside the
ground in the control box? - A. Yes, sir.

He will have access to knowledge which you don't have
access to, as to how many people are already in the
ground and how many people are therefore still to come at
an all-ticket match? - A. That's right.

Did you yourself receive any information or did you hear
any information yourself over the radio waves giving any
notice as to how many people were still to come based on
how many people were in the ground? - A. No, sir.

You had a radio? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you yourself on the radio hear any message being sent
to ground control on the lines, "It's 2.35.   There are
so many people here and there are so many people I can
see coming down Leppings Lane.  It's out of control."?
Or words to that effect? - A. I can't say for definite,
sir, because there was a lot of noise activity around me.
Whether there was a message given I couldn't tell you.




             Q. You didn't hear one
                                                                 109

                                                    S. H. THOMAS




    Q. Yoi| did not hear one? - A. No, sir.

    0. Can I deal now with just one or two details of your
       evidence? You said you were distracted by those who
n      were concerned about tickets and so forth, and you
"      looked up and saw a build up of fans inside the pens,
       and the people were joining the area, and you could see
       Officers in it. Tell ae, those fans who were joining,
       going into that area, they had to go tiirough the
       periraeter gates? - A. That is right, sir.

    Q. Ihose perimeter gates were open? - A. That is right.

    0. And all tine time they were just joining the people
       inside the pens? - A. Yes, sir, just a steady flow of
       supporters into that area.

    0. There was no one who was in fact manning the perimeter
       gates, controlling, the numbers going in? - A. We had
       horses on the perimeter gates but not broadside, they
       were just filtering through the horses.

    Q. They were not controlling the numbers going in as such?
D      - A. i.ot at that tine, sir.
    0.   So tne problera was when you saw the two Merseyside
         Officers acting in there, and you took your own horse
         in, people were still able to join the throng already
         in the turnstile area, by going through the perimeter
         gates? - A. That is right, sir.

    0. It was only vrnen - and I commend you for this, it is
       not a criticism of you, Officer - but when you decided
       to stop people going through the periraeter gates by
       putting tnis cordon up, it was at that stage that a
       positive act was being taken to stop people going
       through the perimeter gates? - A. Yes, sir.   I must
       stress tnat there was a lot of space between the back
       of tne fans, towards tne perimeter ....

    u,   I understand what you are saying on tnat, but you could
         see tne problerr. wnich was the problem apparently of
         crushing at the turnstile front? - A. Yes, sir.

    0. Anc there was a mass of people behind that, albeit
       tnere was this space you have described? - A. Yes, sir.

         It was crucial to stop people joining on the end,
         wasn't it? - A. Tnat is right, sir.

    0. And again it is not a criticism of you, because you had
       that foresignt, but tne only tioe on your evidence tnat
       a positive effort was nade to stop people getting into
       the perimeter area was when you used that cordon? - A.




H
                                                                  110

                                                      S. H. THOMAS




         Th^t is right, sir. As I have said earlier on, tnere
         were a few fans arriving front the Penistone Road area
         from the back of the South Stand.

         But there were already problems, because you are
B        describing thera, in that turnstile area? - A. At that
         stage, yes, sir.

    0. And at the stage when you describe attempting actually
       to shut the gates, the ones you describe on tne left
       nand side, at that stage of course aore and more people
       were coming down Leppings Lane, perhaps over the
       bridge, to join the throng outside the gates? - A. That
       is rignt, sir.

    0. And they were joining that throng at the back? - A.
       Sorry, sir?

    Q. They were joining the throng at the back? - A. That is
       right.

    0. And putting pressure on those who were by the gates? -
       A. Tnat is right.
D
    0. And you very fairly said tnat those who were by you
       were being so pressured that really they had no choice
       over their raoveraents? - A. There were some of the fans
       brushing past us and trying to climb over tne gates as
       well.

    0. I understand tnat. As I understand it, at no time in
       tne planning provisions which you have been asked about
       by others of ray colleagues, tnere was no provision for
       controlling the numbers as they cacie down Leppings Lane
       or over the bridge, the only control was when they got
       to the turnstile area, that is right, isn't it? - A.
       That is right, sir.

                    Cross-Examined by HRS. HcBRIE;*

    0. Officer, you said you noticed people coding from
       Penistone Road.  I was just wonciering whicn way they
       came? - A. Tney came froa the direction of Penistone
       Road, they walked behind the South Stand area, all the
       way up towards Leppings Lane.

    0. That is between the river and the perimeter of the
       ground? - A. Yes, raa'am.

    0.        THE CORONER:   Just turn round, Officer, are you
         indicating that path along there? - A. Yes, sir.

              THE CORQiiER:  Is tnat clear tc you, Mrs. HcBrien.
         Could you see that? Do it again, Sergeant Griffiths.




H
                                                          Ill

                                               S. H. THOHaS




     /   HRS. McSRIEN;   Tnank you:

0. Did nobody stop these people coning round the track? -
   A. \ i o , ma'am.

Q. 1 have heard a lot about segregation of the Notts.
   Forest fans from the Liverpool fans, so there was
   nothing to stop the Notts. Forest fans coming along or
   vice versa? - A . No, raa'ara.

Q. You said that because your horse could not get into the
   area near the turnstiles you were just wasting your
   tirae at that point? - A. I tried to get in, to try and
   join PCs Grunhill and Stanbridge.   1 felt because I
   could not get in 1 was just wasting my time, and
   perhaps adding to the pressure inside that pen area, so
   1 decided on a different tactic, to take tie horse from
   tnere and to take him to the perineter gates to
   organise a cordon across there.

Q. You did try to do sonething constructive, in other
   words, in another spot? - A. Yes, laa'aa.

0. Do you think that closed perimeter gates fnight have
   been isore effective than a cordon of horses? As the
   gates were opened benind the horses people could still
   find gaps through, couldn't they, into the turnstile
   area? - A. In ray experience of working at that ground,
   1 have never ever experienced the perimeter gates being
   used as a filter system.

0. Were you at the 1988 serai-final? - A. Yes, ma'ara.  .y
   duties at that sesni-final, I was detailed to work on
   :iiddlewood Road, Wadsley Lane area, Parkside Road area.

0. Were you at the Leppings Lane end? - A. I assisted at
   Leppings Lane but was not utilised as I was on the '89
   semi-final.

0. So are you saying that the gates were not closed in
   1938? - A. I have no recollection of them being closed.
   1 could not say positively that they were closed, or
   that they were left open.

0. 1 was wondering what caused your horse to stumble? - A.
   The pressure of the fans pushing against the horse and
   the gate giving way, because once the bolt gave way
   that was actually holding the gate closed, the horse
   had no other way to go, other than to tne right, and
   with tne sheer pressure just fell and stumbled to the
   ground, onto his knees.

Q. This horse was 650 kilos, wasn't he? - A. That is
   right.
                                                                112

                                                          THOI-iAS




    O. Jie/is a heavy animal? - A. That is right.

    Q. So do you think that could be a dangerous thing for
       anybody near that horse? - A. The horse fell towards
       the gates and the gates flew open, and it actually I
B      believe made contact with a foot Sergeant, but the
       gates, if I remember right, just swung open.  There
       were no fans directly Denind it. Tne only danger tnat
       could have been caused is the horse losing its footing
       and falling over completely and then thrashing about.

    Q. So they were lucky really.  There were no injuries in
       connection with this incident? -    No, os am.

    Q< Luckily? - A. That is right, luckily, yes.

    Q. Does it surprise you then fans go underneath the
       norses? They do that, don't they? - A. I nave never
       experienced tnat.

    0. You haven't? - A. Ho, not in ay   experience.  I could
       not say whether there were fans   diving under the horses
       at that particular time.  I was   just concentrating on
U      tne particular area where I was   trying to hold tne
       cordon, to relieve the pressure   on the turnstiles.

    Q. You don't think it was because there were so many
       people around that some were getting under the horse to
       avoic being near the horse? - A. There was nowhere for
       thea to go because the perimeter gates were closed at
       tnat stage? Are you referring to the gates oeing open?

    0. i«nen you nad the cordon, when you formed a cordon and
       the gates were open, did fans go under the horse at
       all? - A. As I say, I could not see that from w^iere I
       was. At that time tnere were fans brushing past m y
       norse, either in front or ducking under its head, or
       pusnirig froa benind and just aoving the horse's back
       end and ju-nping througn tne gap.

      Quite a number of Officers s e e m to nave nad trouoxe
      witn their radios tnat day, it seemed to be quite a
      problem, a connion problem.  If you are unable to get
      message througn on your radio, tnen did you tnink of
      trotting arouna on your norse to get a message to a
      senior Officer in tnat way? - A. Well, in tne situation
      tnat I found ayseif in, particularly in the cordon,
      once you left the cordon fans just went througn the
      Sa Pi so it was vital that you just kept that position
      in tnat line.

    0. When you were shouting out emergency, or trying to get
       this message across? - A. When I was trying to get over




H
                                                               113


                                                   S. H. THOMAS




    the r^dio, because there was tnat much traffic o!   :ne
    radio.

    Q. Did you inform a senior Officer of that situation, that
       emergency situation? - A. Wo, because I could not see
B      the senior Officer at that stage.  It was very, very
       difficult to communicate 5 or 6 yards in front of you.
       You really had to shout to the people surrounding you.

    Q. You did say that it is generally easier to supervise an
       all ticket match, as opposed to a paying oatch, didn't
       you    A. That is right, m a am, yes.

    Q. Trians you, Officer.

                       Further by THE CORONER

    0. I just want to check one thine with you.  You know
       these fans who you said came up from the south? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. Behind the South Stand.  How many would you say there
       were, in round terms? - A. It is very, very difficult
D      to put an exact figure on that, sir, because - in fact,
       I don't think I could put a figure on.

    0. would I be right, from your position you could not
       actually see benind the South Stand? - A . Yes, sir,
       frora where I was on tnat perimeter gate near to tne
       river I could see down past Gate C towards the
       Directors' car-park.

    0. How far down could you see? - A. Right down towards the
       Directors' car-park.

    Q. have a look at 301. Can you see that there is Gate C
       there on your rignt? - A. That is rignt, sir.

    0. You can see some mounted Officers.   There is a chap
       standing on what looks like a lamp standare, and then
       there are sonie Police Officers and what look like
       barriers.  Can you see those? - A. In the distance --
       yes, sir, on the barriers.

    Q. what were they sealing off? - A. I have no idea, sir.

    0. If that is Gate C, can you look on the model, that is
       Gate C, that is what you can see on your right? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. You can see some Police Officers there, c a n you see
       then, just past t;iat gate, so \*here were those barriers
       located? - A. Fro;n the photograph, just past Gate C.




H
                                                            114

                                               S. ii. THOMAS




Q. Di4 you recollect those barriers at all? - A. Hot at
   all, sir, no.

Q. You don't recollect them at all? - A. No.

0. The second question I want to ask you, because it
   arises out of what Mrs. McBrien said about trie
   segregation, from your knowledge do you know whether or
   not there was any control around the back there
   somewhere trying to segregate Liverpool and Forest
   fans? - A. Mo, sir, I don*t.

0. You don't know? - A. No, sir.

0. Or you know that there was not? - A. I don't know, sir.

Q. You don't know? - A. I have no recollection of it at
   all.

Q. I ara not trapping you, be assured of that, all I am
   trying to do is establish what you know. What I want
   to know is, did you know as a fact that there was no
   control preventing people all the way round trie back
   there, or don't you know that? - A. I have no
   recollection of it at all, sir.

         THE CORQKER:   Mrs. ilcBrien, do you want to ask
   anyttiing else arising out of that? You raised the
   point and I just wanted to oiake sure, but is tnere
   anything else you would like to ask hira?




            JIRS. McBRIEH:   Not really ....
                                                           115




      MRS. McBRIEN:   Not really. I just think so much time
is spent on segregating the opposing fans and yet it seemed
such/ a simple route to take.

     THE CORONER:   This is the point and this is why I
raised it with the Officer because I think his response to
you was injudicious because he could not see round the
corner and know what was going on. All he knows is that
some fans appeared to be coming up in small numbers.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I sun quite satisfied with what the
Officer says, thank you.

     THE CORONER:   I do not like it when I think you have
got an answer which does not make sense.  If it does not
make sense then one sticks by it, so be it, but I like it
clarified. Any other questions of this Officer? Thank you
very much indeed. Ten o'clock tomorrow morning.    Our
schedule for tomorrow morning is somebody called Mr.
Lackey, who I think is a supporter.  There is Police
Constable Kerry then who is another mounted Officer.   Then
we have got Mr. Ludham and Mr. Laycock.  These are
turnstile operators and possibly another one, Mr. Smith,
and we will see how we do. That is all we have got listed
for tomorrow. We have to shift some of these names around
because one or two of them have got problems with regard to
availability.  I just have to do the best I can on the day.
Are we going to want to talk about anything, ladies and
gentlemen? Actually there is something I want to talk
about and it will only take me a minute.

                (in the absence of the Jury)

     THE CORONER:   It is with regard to yesterday's
transcript.  It is actually a fairly trivial point but I
want to clarify it. Do you remember yesterday I was
talking about gates, my front garden gates, the park gates
and all the rest of it? At one point Mrs. McBrien got up
and said that it was only common sense, that your front
garden gate is the boundary or something like that.   I
cannot remember the exact words which is why I am looking
for the transcript. A few minutes later I said to you that
I agreed with you, Mrs. McBrien, and then I said that we
are going to continue with the investigations.   At the time
I was not too happy and the more I think about it the less
happy I am.  I do not want any misunderstandings.   When I
said that I agree with you I do not necessarily mean I
agree that that is the end of the story. What I cun saying
is that I agree we must continue looking at this issue.    It
is only a small point but it occurred to me that it was
open to misunderstanding and I did not want, you to
misunderstand me on that score.  That is all I want to say.
I think I have dealt with the point and I do not have to
quote it verbatim.
                                                             116


A

         MR. KING:  I know not, sir, whether we need to
    investigate whether the photograph which appears as
    Appendix 5 in the Taylor Report is available to us.   I do
    not want it at this very second but while we have got
    together this very useful collection already, this is the
B   position at 16.59 and at some stage, sir, we will need it.

         THE CORONER:    We are trying to locate the original
    photographs, if you like, on that and pick out whatever is
    appropriate.  I cun most grateful to you.  I think those are
    very useful and they did help this morning.   Thank you.

         MR. MANNING:   Sir, two matters, and one is that Mr.
    King and I were jointly responsible for that, if you like.
c   I consider, and probably you consider as well, that that is
    going to be a pretty vital set of photographs for ongoing
    use.  It is a matter in your discretion whether you want to
    make them available as you have made the other bundle or if
    you do not and I have got to pay for them I will pay.  I am
    making you an offer you cannot refuse!  The other matter is
    much more trivial than that and that is I may be late
    tomorrow morning.

D        THE CORONER:   Thank you all very much indeed.    Good
    night.

           (The Inquests were adjourned until 10 o'clock
                       the following morning)




E




F




G




H
