                                                                                                                 M IR .15




 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                       Date and time raised                )°\                 o      .        Number


 T jtle                                                   Q~T                1M
^ c / u c t e S° u rce and any document number i f relevant)


 Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No -------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                                    Receiver




                                                                                                                                                       Indexer
 Document registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                                Statement Reader
 Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                                                       Indexer
  Indexed as indicated

 No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                                O /M         SIO
 Examined - further action to be taken


                                                                                                                                                \ea\
                                                                                                                                                       Indexer
  Further action No(s)

 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                 STADIUM DISASTER

             ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



            INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                 DAVID JOHN BENSON




                        Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,    LL.B, B.MED.Sci,      BM, B S , MRCGP

              (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                          At

            The Medico-Legal Centre,
                 Watery Street,
                   Shef f i e l d .

                          On

                   25th April 1990




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen S t r e e t S h e f f i e l d SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                           INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                                                                 Page N o ,

                    P]10F. STEPHEN JONES Called

                            By THE CORONER ...................

                    ]p(|)LICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PAPJCES Called

                            By THE CORONER ...............

                        (bLICE Il'TSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                            By THE CORONER




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G
i




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
2 5th April. 1990


          INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF DAVID JOHN BENSON

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, you are now going to hear
evidence in relation to David Benson* His mum and dad
are in Court with their social worker, I appear for
the family in a personal capacity but also, of course,
as a member of the Hillsborough Steering Committee*

     THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs. Benson, I do not know
whether you were here the first day but just in case
you were not I am going to briefly tell you what is
going to happen so that you can understand the sequence.

     First of all, I will read the evidence which I took
on the opening which, in the case of David, was on the
19th April, 1 9 8 9 . Then if there are any errors in that
we deal with it. Then I deal with the alcohol level -
just a matter of recording it formally because the
evidence has been taken — and then we listen to Prof.
Stephen Jones. When he lias given his evidence we then
listen to the presenting Officers telling us what else
we are able to deal with at this stage and, when that
has been completed, we end. I usually say that the
Officers, when they refer to the plans and the photographs
give a lot of reference numbers which you might not
understand why but the reason is that we need to record
it so that in future we know which plan or photograph we
were talking about because there is no other way of
remembering. Is that reasonably clear to you as to
what is going to happen?

         HR, AND MRS. BENSON:           Yes.

     THE CORONER: Perhaps I ought also to say that Prof.
Jones has said that he would be quite happy, if you
would find it helpful, to talk to you privately after
the Inquest in case there is anything that you need to
talk to him about.
     This is the resumed Inquest which was opened on the
1 9 th
     April, 1 9 8 9 . On that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
Acting Coroner’s Officer, said:

            "The body which is the subject of this
            Inquest has been identified to PC 16 2 9
            Rogan of the South Yorkshire Police as
            that of David John Benson by Brian L.
            Benson, his father. He was 22 years of
            age having been born on the 2 0 th
            November, 1 9 6 6 at Liverpool. He was a
            single man and he lived at
                    |Warrington. He was a sales
            representative by occupation. He died at



                                - 1 -
                                                                 PROF. S. JONES



                                  the Hillsborough Football Ground following
                                  an incident there on Saturday, 1 5 th April,
                                  1989. PC 1629 Rogan caused the body to be
                                  removed to the Medico Legal Centre ana there
                                  he identified it to Detective Constable Simon
                                  TJeigold who subsequently identified the same
                                  body to Dr. Jones. It is the family wish
                                  that the body should be cremated."
                    B
                               Then I wrote to you and you, Mr. Benson, Brian
                          Lawrence Benson, signed this form which I sent to you
                          on the 27th April, 1 9 8 9 - you may not remember but you
                          did — and you confirmed that the name and age and date
                          of birth and place of birth were correct and that is
                          still so, is it not?

                               MR. BENSON (Snr):     Yes.
                               THE CORONER:   Dr. Forrest measured the alcohol
                          levels for everybody and he gave evidence regarding
                          this on the first day and, in respect of David, the
                          level that he measured was less than 10 mg/100 ml.

                               Prof. Jones?
                    D
                                        PROF. STEPHEN JONES Called:

                                              Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Yes, Prof? - A. The body of David Benson, which was
                           given the number 80, was identified to me at the Medico
                    E      Legal Centre by Detective Constable Weigold. The
                           body was that of a young adult male who was of average
                           stature and there was very little in the way of any
                           injury on external examination save for just a feint
                           bruise on the left upper eyelid.   There was generalised
                           cyanosis, that is, a blue discolouration of the skin,
                           of the face and neck and shoulders and of the fingertips.
                           There was congestion of the blood vessels of the eyes
                           but no petechial haemorrhages were present on external
                           examination. There were, however, petechial
                           haemorrhages present on the internal organs and these
                           petechial haemorrhages are little pinpoint ruptures of
                           blood vessels associated with asphyxia. There was no
                           evidence of any internal injury at all and I concluded
                           by the finding of these petechial haemorrhages on
                           the particular organs, especially on the heart and the
                           lungs - the lungs were very congested - that death
                           was due to traumatic asphyxia.   So there were no
                           other injuries of any relevance and there was 110
                           evidence of any natural disease.

                        Q. And, in fact, in this case there was quite a lot of
                           severe bleeding, I think, was there not? - A. Yes,
                           there was indeed.
                H
                                MR. FRASER:    David’s family have no questions

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   -2-
                                                                  PROF. S. JONES
                                                                  G. PARKES


                             but they are grateful for the Prof.’s offer to chat
                             to them afterwards privately.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Thank you, Prof. Jones, for your
                             kindness in that respect. — A. Thank you.

                                  POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKES Called:

                    B                        By THE CORONER:

                        Q. Yes, would you give your name, please? - A. Gillian
                           Parkes, Police Constable in the West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Yes? — A. The circumstances arc as follows: at about
                           1020 hours on Saturda3^, 1 5 th April, 1989* Mr* ^an
                           Mark Long left Warrington travelling as a passenger
                           in a motor car driven by David John Benson. It
                           was their intention to attend the FA Cup Semi Final
                           Football match at the Hillsborough Stadium Sheffield
                           that day. They arrived at about 1315 hours and
                           parked the car approximately half a mile from the
                           staditim then obtained food from a take-away food shop.
                           At about 1430 hours they arrived at the Leppings
                           Lane entrance where they separated, having tickets
                    D      for different areas within the stadium. David
                           Benson was in possession of a ticket for the West
                           Stand terraces.

                             Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                             terraces, Terence Steven Pitt, a spectator, saw three
                             other spectators who have not been identified carrying
                             a person he now knows to be David Benson along the
                    E        tunnel leading from the terraces. Mr. Pitt assisted
                             the spectators and placed David Benson on the ground
                             in the concourse area at the rear of the West Stand
                             near to the mouth of the tunnel. Mr. Pitt then
                             commenced mouth to mouth resuscitation, assisted by
                             a woman police constable who applied chest compressions.
                             The officer has not been identified. Mr. Pitt left
                             David to assist others.
                             Police Constable Roger Uttley was in the concourse
                             area at that time and he saw three supporters carrying
                             a man he now knows to be David Benson from the tunnel
                             to the concourse area at the rear of the West Stand.
                             Police Constable Uttley performed mouth to mouth
                             resuscitation. There was no response and Police
                             Constable Uttley then moved the body of David B enson
                             to a position near to Gate C# He left David to
                             assist other persons. Both Mr. Pitt and Police
                             Constable Uttley identified David Benson from a
                             photograph and no other evidence is available to show
                             in what sequence they assisted him.
                             At about 1620 hours Police Constable Rogan went to
                H            the concourse area. Laid alongside a wall adjacent
                             to Gate C were a number of bodies, one of which was
                             David Benson.  Police Constable Rogan assumed
                             responsibility for David on the instructions of
J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                   -3-
                                                                 G. PARKES



                          Police Inspector Grace.
                          At 163^ hours that day Dr, John Richard Ashton
                          attended the area and examined David Benson and
                          certified his life extinct. Police Constable Rogan
                          accompanied the body of David to the gymnasium of
                          the stadium where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

                          At 0205 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1 9 8 9 Mr. Brian
                    B     Lawrence Benson identified the body of his son,
                          David, to Police Constable Rogan at the gymnasium.

                          Police Constable Rogan later accompanied the body of
                          David Benson to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed
                          identification to Detective Constable Veigold.

                          On 16th April, 1 9 8 9 , following identification by
                          Detective Constable Weigold, Prof. Stephen Jones
                          carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
                          the cause of death.

                          Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                          blood sample taken from David where the presence of
                          ethanol was detected. The witnesses proving
                    D     continuity of the blood sample are Michael Lee,
                          Detective Sergeant John Turner and Detective Sergeant
                          James Fletcher. Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest carried
                          out the analysis.

                           Found in the personal effects of David Benson was a
                           ticket counterfoil for the match but, in the
                           circumstances, it cannot be established exactly how
                    E      or when he entered the stadium.

                           That concludes the summary, sir.

                        Q. The only real problem is Terence Pitt and Roger
                           Uttley, is it not, because they both identified this
                           young man from photographs and they both appear to
                           be doing it independently, that is right, is it not? -
                           A. That is correct, sir, yes.

                        0. So the only explanation is that they did it either
                           one after the other or that one or other is mistaken.
                           That would be so, would it not? - A. That is right.
                           There is no doubt that both the persons named did,
                           in fact, resuscitate David Benson but it is impossible
                           to say in what order that took place.

                        Q. This is based on their photographic recognition of
                           him. is it not? - A. That is correct.

                                MR. FRASER:   The family have no questions, sir,
                           thank you.

                H
                                                 -4-
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 M. LAYTON



                              POLICE INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called;

                                       By THE CORONER;

                               THE WITNESS:   Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                          West Midlands Police,

                        Q, Yes? - A. Sir, an examination of* video film and
                    B      photographic evidence has been made and David is
                           believed to have been in Enclosure No, 3«

                           Mr. Brian Benson, that is, David’s father, Saw a
                           photograph in a nev/spaper. Sir, we have given that
                           photograph a reference number LPE1/4 and he believes
                           that this photograph does show his son in Enclosure
                           No. 3. Although that photograph is not timed, sir,
                           it shoxfs the players still on the pitch, in fact,
                           in the process of leaving so w e believe it may be
                           somewhere in the region of 1506. I have, in fact,
                           spoken to Mr. Benson in respect of that photograph
                           and I think it is fair to say, as in many cases, he
                           believes, to the best of his ability, that it does
                           show David but he cannot be absolutely sure.

                    D      Mr. Terence Steven Pitt has been shown photographs
                           and he has identified David as the person that he
                           assisted from the tunnel and attempted to resuscitate.
                           He has signed a plan of the tunnel area indicating
                           the point at which he saw David and that plan, sir,
                           was referenced TSP/1. A further plan was done on the
                           reverse side of that document which shows the position
                           at which he left David which, in fact, sir, for the
                    E      record, is marked TSP/1 overleaf.

                           PC Uttley has been shown photographs and he has
                           identified David as being the person that he attempted
                           to resuscitate. He also has signed a plan of the same
                           concourse area indicating the position at which he
                           believes he first came into contact with David.  Sir,
                           that plan is referenced RU/2.

                        Q. And just so we can be quite clear about these plans,
                           these plans are based upon what people remember as to
                           where the}*- .... - A. That is right, sir, yes.

                        Q. In quite a large area? - A. Yes, it is. Sir, can I
                           refer you to a plan which has been given the reference
                           number MWJL 9 8 * It is a plan of the terraces and
                           relates to the identification on photographs.

                           That is C100.

                                 THE CORONER:    We will be demonstrating these
                           plants in a moment.

                H       Q. Yes? - A. Sir, can you just confirm which plans you
                           would want to refer to. Terence Pitt has signed a
                           plan, TSP/1, which is of the terraces which shows
                           the location within the tunnel area?
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   -5-
                                                                   M. LAYTON



                        Q. Let us take that one as well.   C1Q1. - A. Right, sir.
                           I have also completed, sir, two other plans and I do
                           not know whether you would wish to produce both of
                           them? The}'-, in fact, show very much the same area,
                           the concourse area. One relates to Terence Pitfc and
                           the other one relates to the officer.

                        Q. T. think we ought to show them both because so shall
                    B      we take them in numerical order? - A. The first one,
                           sir, is 1-117JL 145.
                        Q. That will be C102? - A. Yes, sir. That plan refers to
                           the plan TSP/1 overleaf, as it were.

                        q. Yes, it is Mr. Pitt’s? -     A. That is right.   Then MtfJL
                           146, which refers to the     plan RU/2.

                        Q. That is C103? - A. Yes.
                                THE CORONER:   These numbers are very confusing.
                           Try and ignore them. It is easier      when you readit.

                        Q. Yes? - A. Sir, if we can just dealwith the plan,^
                           IH/JL 9 8 , which refers to the photographic identification,
                    D      that, sir, is indicating Enclosure No. 3 in approximately
                           this area here.

                        Q. Just above that barrier which, at some point or other,
                           broke? - A. Yes, that is signified by the dotted line.
                           Sir, in relation to TPS/1, that is the first plan
                           by Terence Pitt, the point at which he indicates
                           David’s position is here, so just inside the tunnel
                    E      area by the dividing fence. Then, sir, if we can deal
                           with MTUL 145, that relates to this plan and the area
                           referred to is the concourse area, which is this area
                           here and the point at which he has indicated is
                           approximately in this location here. The dotted line
                           is the tunnel and then this is the concourse area
                           and the point we are looking at is there. I 11 fact,
                           sir, if we deal with MtfJL 146, the same location is
                           actually pointed out by the officer.

                        Q. Yes, and if I can just go back to Mr. Pitt’s plan*
                           the one where he indicated in the tunnel, I think,
                           if I am right in remembering, what he is saying is
                           that is where he first came across him when he was
                           being carried? - A. That is right, he was in the
                    G      process of being carried.

                        Q. He was not laying at that point? - A. No.

                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, the family have no questions
                           for the officer but I rise at their specific request
                           at this stage to mention the witness, Mr. Pitt, sir.
                           David’s mum and dad are very grateful to him for what
                H          he did to attempt to save their son’s life.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                 -6-
Tragicall}'’ his efforts were in vain. It may be then
have been too late. They havef in fact, spolcon at
some length to Mr. Pitt since they lost their son
and the3^ have thanked him personally but they want,
through the record, to make an official record of
their thanks for his valiant efforts on the 1 5 th
April, sir.
      THE CORONER:  Thank you very much indeed. I
am sure that is very kind of you to feel able to do
that.
     Any questions from you?     (No questions from the
Jury)
     Mr. and Mrs. Benson, I am pleased to see you here
though, of course, I would much rather it were not
necessary. I am sure you understand that. I just
want to say how very sorry I am indeed that you have
lost your lad in this incident. I know there are
many others who lost their lives on this occasion
and that is very, very said, but for you, of course,
you have got a personal tragedy to live with and it
is difficult for other people to put themselves into
your shoes but, as far as one is able, I want you to
know that we feel for you.

     MR. AND MRS. BENSON:      Thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, we are now
going to rise and we will start again at 2 p.m.

     Prof. Jones, are you in any more cases?

     PROF. JONES:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:   In that case, I shall look forward
to seeing you, and all of you as well of course.

              (Luncheon Adjournment)
