                                                                                                    M I R . 15




  OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                     Date and tim e raised   ' ^   I   '‘n O    ■           Num ber



  Title                                      c jzl,                  v~2_     \< c m H A M t c l n i M                i<R n ^ Q r 9
^ ( In c lu d e source a n d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)      ^3x<2>«£L


^Receiver's instructions — urgent action - Yes/No
     V                                                                                                                          Receiver
     \


                                                                                                                                 Indexer
  Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                            Statem ent Reader
  Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                 Indexer
  Indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised

  Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                              S IO




                                                                                                                                Indexer
  Further action No(s)


  When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER
    ______ OH THE 15th OF APRIL 1989_________


           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

               ROY HARRY HAMILTON




                       Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her M a j e s t y ’s Coroner)




                         At

               The Memorial Hall,
                   City Hall,
                   Sheffield.

                         On

          Thursday,    19th April,    1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A . ADDLEMAN          Police Federation of England-and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                           INDEX


                        DR. LLOYD DENMARK - Called

                         By THE CORONER       ............................................. 2

                    B   DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GEORGE GADSBY - Called

                          By THE C O R O N E R .............................................. 5


                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called




                                                                                              ~vl
                          By THE CORONER ...........................................




                                                                                              O
                          Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Recalled

                          Further by THE C O R O N E R ....................................10
                          Further Cros s-Examined by MR. C A T C H P O L E ................. 11

                    D


                                                       — oo— oo—


                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        19th April. 1990

                                 INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF ROY HARRY HAMILTON

                                THE CORONER:   Are Mr.       and Mrs.   Hamilton here,   you can
                           tell me that?

                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, Mrs. Hamilton is not here but at -her
                           specific request, the Social Worker who has been assisting
                           the family, Mr. David Alexander, is present in Court and
                    B      will hear the evidence presented.

                                THE CORONER:    Was the Social Worker here yesterday?

                                MR. FRASER:    Yes,   sir,    he was-

                                THE CORONER:   He understands the format and he does
                           not need me to repeat it?

                                MR. FRASER:    He nods his approval,        sir, yes.

                                THE CORONER:   In that case I will proceed    This is
                           again a resumed Inquest which was opened on 18th April 1989.
                           Neil Anthony Parkin, rny Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                “The body which is the subject of this Inquest had been
                    D           identified by DC 2947 Liversidge of the South Yorkshire
                                Police as that of Roy Harry Hamilton by Wendy Hamilton,
                                his wife.   He was 33 years of age having been born on
                                22nd May 1955 at Liverpool.    He was a married man,
                                lived at                            |Liverpool.  He was a
                                Rail.way Techni cian by occupation.  He died at
                                Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
                    E           there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.    DC Liversidge
                                caused the body to be moved to the Medico-Legal Centre
                                and there he identified it to Detective Constable
                                Simon Wei goId who subsequently identified the same body
                                to Dr. Denmark.    It is the family wish that the body
                                should be cremated."

                           Now there at least two errors in this opening comment which
                           you would not recognise but which I can tell you.  One is
                           that the identification wasn't done by DC Liversidge but by
                           I think PC Cowgill and we will hear about that in the
                           summary in a moment and the second is that Simon Weigold
                           didn't identify this body to Dr. Denmark and we will deal
                           with that as well in the summary.  I am reading out the
                           evidence as it was given at the time and correcting it as we
                           are going along.  Are you content with that, or do you want
                           me to amend it in the reading?

                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, I think as the amendments are noted
                           and on the record as I think what is important is what comes
                           out of the final transcript for each partic ular family.



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          DR.   L. DENMARPt

                               THE CORONER:   I am anxious because most of the
                          families weren't present at these openings and I do not want
                          them to feel that we are messing around, if I can use that
                          word, with the evidence which is why I prefer to read it
                          warts and all and deal with anything that needs correcting
                          as we go along.

                               Now if we can have Dr. Lloyd Denmark, the pathologist,
                          please.  Before you take the oath, Dr. Denmark, if I can
                    B     explain because you weren't here yesterday, my Officer is
                          going to swear you in.  The format is slightly different to
                          what we normally do because what we are trying to do   is to
                          get you to take the oath just once so that you actually take
                          the oath in respect of all the cases in which you will be
                          involved over the next however often you have to attend.     So
                          be prepared for a slight variation to standard f orrn.

                           DR. LLOYD DENMARK was called and took the following oath:

                                "I swear by Almighty God that the evidence I shall give
                                shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
                                truth in respect of each of the bodies on which I
                                performed a post mortem examination as a result of an
                                incident which occurred at the Hillsborough Football
                    D           Stadium on the 15th April '1989."

                                                 By THE C O R O N E R ;

                        Q. Good morning, Dr. Denmark.   Could you tell me (a) your full
                           names, (b) your qualifications and (c) where you work.-’
                        A. I am Dr. Lloyd Denmark of the Department of Forensic
                           Medicine at Leeds Un iversity where I hold the post of
                    E      Lecturer.  My qualif ications are I am a Bachelor of Science,
                           Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery and a Member of
                           the Royal College of Pathologists.   I hold a Diploma in
                           Medical Jurisprudence.

                        Q. You perf ormed an autopsy on a body which you have described
                           as Roy Hamilton, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is
                           correct.

                        Q. This was done on 16th April     1989,   that     is right,    isn't   it?
                        A. That is correct.

                        Q. Can you just help me with regard to the identification?     How
                            did you satisfy yourself you were dealing with a body known
                            as Roy Hamilton?  In fact, I think you also refer to him as
                            body No. 12? - A. Yes, there was a system whereby there was
                            a numbering tag which I compared with a form I was handed.
                            I was told at the time that this was being conducted by DC
                            Timms although subsequently I arn not sure if that was the
                           •case.  I then tallied the piece of paper I was given with



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   DR.    DENMARK

                             the number and the ticket which was on the body itself.

                        Q.   Indeed, the bodies were all marked, weren't they, on the
                             legs as well? - A. They had the name written down the leg as
                             well and we took photographs of that.
                    B
                        Q. You are quite satisfied we are talking about     the right
                           person? - A. Yes.

                        Q. Now what I would like you to do is - on your post mortem
                           report I think there is a typographical error because you
                           have given the date of death as the same? - A- That is
                           correct.

                        Q.   It should be 15th April? - A- Yes,   and I have issued a
                             supplementary r e p o r t .

                        Q. That isfine-   I don't think I have got that     in front of me
                           but the important thing is that you agree it     was the 15th? -
                        A. Yes, it was.
                    D
                        Q. Can you give me the cause of death? - A. The cause of death
                           was traumatic asphyxia.

                        Q. Were you in Court when Prof. Usher gave his evidence a
                           moment ago? - A. This morning?

                        Q. Yes? - A. Yes-
                    E
                        Q. Yes.   The family don't happen to be here on this occasion
                           but we don't want to upset or distress them more than is
                           nece ssary and so outline the reasons why you have given this
                           cause of deat h? - A. The deceased - can I just- go through my
                           report ?

                        Q. Yes, your su mmary? - A. The deceased was a well built young
                           adult male.   There was congestion of the upper part of the
                           body with petechiae present around both eyes-

                        Q. Dr. Denmark, you must speak up because the Jury are miles
                           away and they cannot hear you.   Perhaps if you sort of stand
                           a little bit near er the mike it might pick it up a bit
                           better? - A. There is purplish congestion of the upper part
                           of the body above a line across the shoulders.   There was
                           petechiae of both eyes, small dot haemorrhages and there are
                           also petechiae in the skin of the face.   There were minor
                           abrasions on the surface of the face and under the chin but
                           I don't think any of these were of great significance.

                                  THE CORONER:   Can you hear?

                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       DR.   L. DENMARK

                                  THE WITNESS:   The internal findings was that there was
                             gross congestion of the internal organs as one would expect
                             in this sort of cause.

                        Q.   Did you find any natural disease? - A. There is no
                             significant natural disease contributing to this death.

                        Q.   There weren't any broken bones I think that        is right,   isn't
                    B        it? - A. No.

                        Q.   There was a little bit of bruising around the larynx I
                             notice, is that right? - A- Yes, a diffuse area at the back
                             of the thyroid gland but I didn't attach any great
                             significance to this.  I feel this could partly be due to
                             just congestion of a vessel t-hat has ruptured rather than
                             any specific injury.

                        Q.   This   had nothing to do with the cause of death but I just
                             want   to make sure.  You did find a scar on the right hip, is
                             that   right? - A. I think there is a scar  across the lower
                             part   of the abdomen and then an old scar on the right hip.

                        Q.   Can you just give us the size of that scar, particularly          I
                             think you call it a transfer super-pubic scar, in other
                    D        words, page 2? - A. Yes, 8 centimetres in length.

                        Q.   Was it on the right side or the left?  Can you remember? -
                        A.   On my original sketch I have got it on the right side of the
                             midiine.

                                  THE CORONER:   Actually you say the right side in your
                             statement.  Mr. Fraser.
                    E
                                    MR.   FRASER:   The family have no questions,    sir,   thank
                             you.

                                   THE CORONER:           Any questions from you?   Did you follow
                             that?   (no r e s p o n s e ) You will eee why I have asked about
                             the scar in a moment.           Thank you, Dr. Denmark, that is fine.

                                  MR. FRASER:   You did not mention blood alcohol.           I do
                             not know whether you specifically want to.

                                    THE CORONER:    Pardon?

                                    MR.   FRASER:   You did not mention blood alcohol,      sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.   In this
                             case there was a blood alcohol level.  It was mentioned at
                             118 milligrammes per 100 mils if we can record that please.
                             As I usually mention we have the names and dates and so on
                             confirmed by a sister-in-law, Mrs. Yvonne Johnson.



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                           D.C.   P- G. GADSBY

                              DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GEORGE GADSBY              - Called;

                                                  By THE C O R O N E R ;

                        Q. You have already been sworn but if you would give your name
                           and title please':' - A- I am Peter George G a d s b y , Detective
                           Constable of the West Midlands Police, sir.

                    B   Q. You are now going to take me through the summary which has
                           been prepared, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.  It wat> at
                           about 9.30 a.m. on Saturday, 15th April 1989, that
                           Mrs. Wendy Hamilton took her son, Stuart Hamilton, and her
                           husband, Roy Harry Hamilton, to meet Robert Alcock, the
                           deceased's brother-in-law, so that they could travel to
                           Sheffield to watch the FA Cup Semi Final football match at
                           the Hillsborough Stadium.
                    C
                                Roy Hamilton, his stepson Stuart, and Robert Alcock met
                           the remainder of their party on the car park at the Horse
                           and Jockey public house in Mel ling, Liverpool.  They set off
                           for Sheff ield at about 0945 hours in a coach owned by Ferry
                           Coaches.

                                The party stopped at the Rose and Crown public house,
                    D      Dalton, near Sheffield, for approximately one hour where
                           they had refreshments before completing their journey to
                           Sheffield.

                                Roy Hamilton and Stuart Hamilton got off the coach near
                           the ground and made their way to the entrance arriving at
                           1420 hours.  Robert Alcock remained on the coach.  Roy
                    E      Hamilton saw his stepson Stuart into the ground.  He had a
                           ticket for the North Stand.  Originally Mr. Hamilton had a
                           ticket for the Leppings Lane terrace but swapped it on the
                           coach for a seat in the West Stand.  When Mr. Hamilton left
                           his stepson Stuart he still had the ticket for the West
                           Stand.

                                Shortly after 1505 hours, following the severe crushing
                    F      in the West Stand terracing, Police Constable David Allen
                           made his way into Pen 3 via the tunnel and then on to the
                           pitch.   PC Allen saw a man he believes may be Roy Hamilton
                           lying midway between the 18 yard area and centre circle at
                           the Leppings Lane end of the ground.   He assisted a number
                           of supports to place Mr. Hamilton on to a hoarding and carry
                           him to a location behind the North Stand, adjoining the
                           gymnasium where he unsuccessful 1y  attempted to resuscitate
                    G      him-   Roy Hamilton was then taken into the gymnasium where a
                           temporary mortuary had been set up.

                                 At 1600 hours Police Constable Tony Cowgill entered the
                           gymna sium and assumed r e s p o n s i b i 1 ity for the body of Roy


                                                            5
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  D.C.   P. G. GADSBY

                          Hamilton.    At 1608 hoars Dr. Andrew Byrne examined Mr.
                          Ham ilton in the temporary mortuary and certi fied life
                          ext in e t .

                                At 0240 hours on Sunday, 16th A p r i l , Mr. Robert Alcock
                          identified the body of his brother-in-law to Police
                          Const able Cowgill in the temporary mortuary at the
                          gymnasium.   Police Constable Cowgill later escorted the body
                    B     of Roy Hamilton to the Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the
                          identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

                               Some time later the same day Mrs. Wendy Hamilton
                          attended at the Medico-Legal Centre where she confirmed the
                          identification of her husband to Detective Constable David
                          Ian Liversidge.

                               On 16th April 1989 Dr. Lloyd Denmark carried out an
                          autopsy and submi tted a report giving cause of death.

                               Evidence is available rega rding the analysis of the
                          blood sample from the deceased where the presence of ethanol
                          was detected.   The witnesses proving continuity are
                          Detective Constable Thomas B a r d e l 1, Detective Sergeant John
                          Turner and Dete ctive Sergeant James Fletcher.       Dr. Alexander
                    D
                          Forrest carried out the analysis.

                                Found in the personal effects of Roy Hamilton was a
                           part ticket for the Leppings Lane terrace which indicates to
                           us that Mr. Hamilton must have changed his West Stand ticket
                           some time between leaving his son and entering the ground.
                           It is fair to say that throughout the evidence it appears
                    E      that it was Mr. Hamilton's intention if possible to watch
                           the game from the Leppings Lane terraces rather than a
                           stand.

                        Q. Yes, I was going to say Mrs. Hamilton said that he enjoyed
                           watching it from the terraces rather than from a stand? -
                        A- That evidence comes through quite clearly.

                        Q. Also his stepson said he thought he would swap it i f he
                           could, didn't he? - A. Yes, that is right.

                        Q. With regard to the identifications, I think Simon Weigold
                           originally indicated that he had carried out the
                           identification but has subsequently provided a correcting
                           statement to say that this is not the case? - A. Yes.

                        Q. This is mainly because there was some misunderstanding as to
                           the number of pathologists who were present? - A. It would
                           appear Mr. Weigold had originally assumed that all the
                           pathol ogists who were going to be engaged were present at
                           the 9-30 identification but it transpired that some of them



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                D.   I. M. LAYTON

                             came later and so he couldn't actually identify to those but
                             when he made his first statement he was of the opinion that
                             they were all there.

                        Q.   In this particular instance there were two visual
                             identifications.  There was the one by Robert Alcock to
                             Police Constable Cowgill,that is right, isn't it, paragraph
                             8? - A. At the temporary gymnasium.
                    B
                        Q. At the temporary mortuary? - A. Temporary m o r t u a r y -

                        Q. And then later on Mrs. Wendy Hamilton also attended and saw
                           DC Live rsidge? - A. Liversidge.

                        Q. That      is where my Officer got that        name from? - A. Yes.
                    C                MR.   FRASER:   The family have no questions,              sir,   thank
                             you -

                                     THE CORONER:     Any qu estions?       (no r e s p o n s e )

                                      DETE CTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - C a l l e d ;

                    D                                  By THE C O R O N E R ;

                        Q.   If you could just repeat your name? - A. Sir, Michael
                             Layton, Detec tive Inspector, West Midlands Police.  Sir,                    in
                             respect of this partic ular dec eased I have made an
                             examination of video film and photographic evidence and
                             Mr. Hamilton has been identified outside the ground and
                             alive in Pen 3 and also apparently dead on the pitch.
                    E
                                  Mrs. Wendy Hamilton, his wife, has viewed visual
                             evidence and she has identified her husband on video outside
                             the ground on a BBC video tape.   She has also subsequently
                             seen hi m on a video, again a BBC video, which shows him in
                             the enclosure known as No. 3.

                                  In respect of the reference numbers for those matters,
                    F        the video outside the ground is referenced Map 9 with the
                             serial numbers 0010:20:08.  I should say that that d o e s n ’t
                             indicate an actual time as such.  The database on that video
                             wasn't actually set for an accurate time.  In respect of the
                             video inside the ground the reference number is Map I
                             1456:32:02.

                                  Police Constable Allen   of the South Yorkshire Police
                    G        has viewed visual evidence and he has identified a man who
                             he believes may well be Mr.   Hamilton being carried across
                             the pitch. He has signed a plan of the pitch area
                             indicating the appr oximate location at which he found
                             Mr. Hamilton.   In respect of those identifications they are


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      D.I.    M. LAYTON

                             shown on a ph otograph referenced CS'I /52 and a plan which is
                             referenced DA I -

                        Q.   I think you have prepared some plans as well,        haven't you?
                        A.   Yes, sir, that is correct.

                        Q.   I am going to ask you to show us where these plans   are,
                    g        MWJL19, C6, and I think we also ought to label this one   here
                             MWJL97 will be C7? - A. Yes, sir.    Perhaps if I could assist
                             just in relation to the video identification for that
                             particular plan, although we can't give a precise time
                             because there wasn't the camera, the camera was not filming
                             continuously, we believe that that partic ular identification
                             of Mr. Hamilton occurred some time between 1437 and 1450
                             hours.

                        Q.   Is it reasonably firm that, view?    - A- Yes,    sir,   it is.    It
                             is within minutes.

                        Q. The identification within the ground,       the 1456
                           identification? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. I think you formed the view on that particular shot, Mr.
                    D   .  Hamilton at that stage doesn't appear to be distressed? -
                        A. That is correct, sir, yes.

                                    MR.   FRASER:   The family have no questions,     sir,     thank
                             you.

                                  THE CORONER:   Actually we will demonstrate the plans
                             first and then I will ask you again in case there is
                    E        something else.

                        Q.   If you could just show us? - A. Sir, if we could refer to
                             the large scale plan of the terraces, in relation to the
                             video identification of 1456 the position that' we believe
                             Mr. Hamilton was in was approximately there (indicat- i n g ) in
                             Enclosure 3-  There is photographic evidence which was
                             supplied by Mrs. Hamilton which is at a later time and that
                             position is indicated again in Encl osure 3 in that location
                             there.

                        Q. That was another live identification? - A. That is correct,
                           sir, yes.  In fact, the pho tographs are the South Yorkshire
                           Police photographs and it was a live identification.

                        Q.   If you could just now show us where you found him outside,
                             if possible using the larger of the plan which I have got in
                             front of me?  That will be that big one on the wall I think.
                             That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, the difficulty - the
                             location we believe that video print was taken was, in fact,
                             near to the perimeter gates which are not shown on this
                             particular plan.

                H                                            8



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                           D .I . M. LAYTON

                        Q. If you just show us on that plan where you have put your
                           spot and then you can come back to this one and repeat it7'
                        A. The identification has been placed here (indicat i n g ) based
                           on the fact it was the Leppings Lane end of the perimeter
                           gates.

                        Q.   That is really just   intended     to show outside       identification?
                        A.   That is right, yes.
                    B
                        Q.   As opposed to inside identification.         If you show us just so
                             that the Jury know where you think it        was? - A. We believe
                             it was in this area here ( indicat i n g ) -

                        Q. Are you indicating a spot near the concertina gates? - A.
                           No, sir, the peri meter gates.

                        Q. Oh I see,    right out side? - A. The edge of the perimeter
                           gates.

                        Q. Still on the road, in fact, still on Leppings Lane? - A. The
                           roadside of the perimeter fence.

                        Q. Thank you, that is what I wanted to know.          Perhaps we had
                           better just have one more plan and one more C reference
                    D      which will be C8 I take it.   That is D A 1 . This is where DC
                           Allen found or dealt with a young man but he was dead or he
                           thought he was dead? - A- The location that PC Allen
                           referred to is in this area here (i n d i c a t i n g ) ■

                        Q.   Near the centre of the pitch       in other words? - A. That       is
                             right.
                    E
                                  THE CORONER:    Now, Mr.       Fraser,   I am sorry,    is there
                             anything else ari sing?

                                  MR. FRASER:        No thank you, sir.

                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:        Sir,    there isonly one matter.

                                  THE CORONER:      Will you state your name?

                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:      Sir,     Stuart Catchpole for Sheffield
                             Wednesday.

                                          Cross-Examined by MR. C A T C H P O L E ;

                        Q.   Inspector, I just wonder whether you have the time for the
                             South Yorkshire photograph referred to that was provided by
                             Mrs. H amilton? - A. It is available, not just at this
                             precise second but I can make it available.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:      If you are happy,       if you look    it up at



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       D .I . M. LAYTON

                          some convenient time and we will fit it in when we are
                          dealing with another inquest? - A. Yes, sir.

                               THE CORONER:    That conc ludes the evidence which we are
                          going to take in this pa rticular case.   Now 1 know the
                          family aren't here but will you be good enough when you see
                          the family to convey to them our sorrow at their loss which
                          has happened.   I mean they are all tragic cases.   How can
                    B     you pick one out from another?'   I want them to know that we
                          are conscious of the loss which they have suffered.

                               We are now going to adjourn and we will have a slightly
                          longer period so that you can have a drink of tea or coffee
                          or whatever is available.  Is that satisf actory I hope to
                          all of you?  A quarter of an hour.

                                                (Short- Ad journment-)

                               THE CORONER:    Can I just return for a moment to Mr.
                          Roy Harry Hamilton's Inquest?   You will remember we referred
                          to that centre plan to show the position outside the
                          Leppings Lane.   That plan we didn't give a C reference to
                          and so we are going to do that.   The trouble is that we need
                          to make a few smaller versions of it.    So it will be C9 but
                    D     I can't just tell you what the West Midlands reference
                          number is going to be.   I will tell you that when I know it.
                          Perhaps you, Mr- Fraser, and everybody else will accept a
                          late entry with regard to that plan.    It is just so that we
                          can all find our way around later on in the transcripts if
                          we need to.

                    E           MR. CATCHPOLE:   If it is convenient, I understand from
                           the Officer who is giving evidence in Mr. Hamilt on's Inquest
                           that he has an answer to the question that I raised and
                           since you have briefly re-opened it, it may be convenient
                           just to give the time I sought.

                                DETECTIVE   INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - R e c a l l e d ;

                                              Further by THE C O R O N E R :

                        Q. Yes, Inspector Layton.  It was I think the timing on one of
                           the photographs, wasn't it? - A. Yes, that is right, sir.
                           In fact, there are a number of photographs and they are all
                           in the same location.  The times on one of them is 1503 and
                           there are another three photographs which show 1504 and two
                           at 1505.  Perhaps I should mention the later photograph on
                           the pitch actually shows the clock with the time 1532.

                        Q. Which is the 1532 one? - A.      I am sorry,    sir,   yes.    That   is
                           referenced 4CS1/53.



                                                           10
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          D.I.   M . LAYTON

                        Q.   Is it within the enclosure or--.? - A. That            is on the pitch,
                             sir.

                        Q.   It is MWJL19 we are talking about,          isn't   it? - A. That   is
                             correct, sir, yes, C6.

                        Q. What   is it? - A. C 6.

                    B   Q. And it is P R 1 . What time did you say that film was? -
                        A. The first one, sir, is P R 1 • Perhaps I can just refer to the
                           plan specifically.    The one referred to on the plan is
                           PR1/32A and that time is shown as 1505.

                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:       Just one supplementary question?

                                  THE CORONER:       Yes,   certainly.
                    C
                                     Furthe r Cross-Examined by MR. C A T C H P O L E :

                        Q.   Just to confirm, that is where Mr. Hamilton was apparently
                             still alive in Pen 3? - A. Well, "apparently" being the
                             correct word, sir, yes.

                    D   Q.      THE CORONER:         You were indicated him as still alive? -
                        A. Yes.

                        Q. But you are showing a certain degree of hesitation?
                        A. Well, the difficulty is, sir, that the photographs, the
                           identification was made by Mrs. Hamilton in respect of those
                           p articular photographs.    They don't actually show a great
                           deal of detail although Mrs. Hamilton is satisfied it is her
                    E      husband.     It is because of that fact that I can't be too
                           speci f ic .

                                  THE CORONER:       Thank you.

                                (The Inquest into the death of ROY HARRY HAMILTON
                                       was adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )

                    F




                    G




                H                                             I 1




J. L. Harpham Ltd
