                                                                                              89                                3 4
    INQUISITION
    An inquisition taken for our Sovereign Lady the Queen

    At        C o ro n ers C ou rt              inthe     W est D i s t r i c t              of     S o u th Y o r k s h ir e

    On the          1 8 th             day of                      A p r il                   19 89
    [Andby adjournment On v a r i o u s d a t e s             up t o    and      in c lu d in g    th e
    <3&8ikx                                     day of                                       19     91    1
    [Before and by] t1] me                        STEFAN LEOPOLD POPPER

    One of Her Majesty’s coroners for tbessatft          S o u th Y o r k s h ir e    (W est)      D istrict

    [and the undermentioned jurors] touching on the death of
                                                                              VICTORIA JANE HICKS

    The following matters are found                                           VICTORIA JANE HICKS
1 Name of deceased

2 Injury or disease causing death: [2]
                                                         1(a)    T r a u m a tic A s p h y x ia


3 Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury was sustained: [3]

    'DxoA on iW 16 April                       as a vosoUb oj cn*sK irypnaa
            t/uxci a t       HvU.^\oe>ro0 ^rv Fook-baJJl 0rot>id 5W(L^\al<i.

4 Conclusion of the jury/coroner as to the death: [4]



5 Particulars for the time being required by the Registration Acts to be registered concerning the death

  a Date and place of birth
€
                                                                     e Date and place of death 15.4.89                S h effield
j 2 0 . 7 . 1 9 7 3 ___________ B e d f o r d                          Northen G en eral H o sp ita l
     b Name and surname of deceased                                  f Occupation and usual address
                                                                        S ch oolgirl.          D a u g h te r o f T r e v o r
         V ictoria         Jane   H icks
                                                                        H ic k s a M anaging D i r e c t o r and
                                                                        J e n n i f e r H i c k s . T e c h n i c i a n now
    c Sex         F e m a le
                                                                                                                    student.
    d Maiden surname of a woman who has married


                                                                     Signature

    Signature of jurors:




                                                                                                                     Please turn over
   NOTES
1 Modify this as necessary according to whether the
  inquest is held with or without a jury or partly
  with and partly without a jury.
2 In the case of a death from natural causes or from
  industrial disease, want of attention at birth, chronic
  alcoholism or addiction to drugs insert the immediate
  cause of death and morbid conditions (if any) giving                    Date             19
  rise to the immediate cause of death.

3 Omit this if the cause of death is one to which
  Note 2 applies.

4 a Where the cause of death is one to which Note 2
    applies, it is suggested that one of the following
    forms be adopted:
     C.D. died from natural causes.
     C.D. died from the industrial disease of

     C.D. died from dependence on drugs/non-dependable
     on drugs.
     C.D. died from want of attention at birth.

     (In any of the above cases, but in no other, it is
     suggested that the following words may, where
     appropriate, be added:
     "and the cause of death was aggravated by lack of                    Cause of death
     care/self-neglect’).

   b In any other case except murder, manslaughter,
     infanticide or stillbirth, it is suggested that one
     of the following forms be adopted:
     C.D. killed himself/herself (whilst the balance of
     his/her mind was disturbed).

     C.D. died as the result of an attempted/self­
     induced abortion.                                                    Verdict
     C.D. died as the result of an accident/misadventure.
     C.D. was killed lawfully.

     Open verdict, namely, the evidence did not fully or
     further disclose the means whereby the cause of death
     arose.

  c In the case of murder, manslaughter or infanticide
    it is suggested that the following form be adopted.

     C.D. was killed unlawfully.
  d In the case of a stillbirth insert 'stillbirth1and do not
    complete the remainder of the form.




  Price £4.00 for 25 copies or £14.00 for 100 copies (exclusive of tax)

  ISBN 011 340764 5
  Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty's Stationery Office
  Dd 291453 C130 11/88
                                           OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR         MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                              WATERY STREET
                                                 . SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                        (West District)
                                                                              SHEFFIELD
                                                                              S3 7ET
              STEFAN L POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.Q.P.
                                                           CORONER


                                       Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                         19



        Your Ref: DRF/SB/WHELAN

         S ilve rman-L ive rmo re,
         Solicitors,
         11/13 Victoria Street,
         Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




        Our Ref: Hills/Sol/4/SLP/JT                                         17th September 1990

o       Dear Sirs,

        Re: RESUMED INQUESTS 19th NOVEMBER 1990.


        If you are not already aware, I intend to resume the Inquests into the deaths
        of the 95 people who died at Hillsborough, one or more of whom you represent,
        on the 19th of November 1990 at 10.a.m. Details of venue will be notified in
        due course.

        I do not have to remind you of the fact that a considerable amount of
        evidence has already been taken, nor of the nature and limitations of a
        coronal investigation which you will recollect is not adversarial but
        inquisitorial in nature, and which of course has only limited objectives.

        Subject to the Coroners’ Act 1988 and the Coroners’ Rules, the Inquest is
        under my control, and in particular, it is my responsibility to select the
        witnesses who wish to give evidence.  I am at present engaged in considering
        this and in determining who I wish to invite to attend.

        Without prejudice in any way to my rights in the matter, I am writing to you
        to give you an opportunity to draw to my attention the names and other
        appropriate details of any witness or witnesses whom you would like me to
        consider calling to give evidence at the resumed Inquests.

        May I please ask you in considering whether you wish to draw any names to my
        attention, to bear in mind the scope and limitations of an Inquest.

        I also want to make it absolutely clear that the submission of a name or
        names for consideration is nothing more than that, and that the decision as
        to who to call to give evidence is and remains a matter for me.

        I would be grateful if you could respond as soon as possible. If I have not
        heard from you by tt                   I will assume you have no names to
        submit.

        Yours faithfully


  R3606 i^srL.tamper,
LM&ftft.'lH.M.Coroner.
                              OFFICE OF H.M. SORONER FOR            MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                    WATERY STREET
                                        OUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                    SHEFFIELD
                                             West District)
                                                                    S3 7ET        * •«««**»
                                          / /
STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Soi.. B W y ^ S .. M.R.C^Q.P.
                                       ; / CORONER

                          Telephone: SHE^FIEL^,/(0742) 738721
                                                                    21stAti«aat          1989


SLP/OT7H/006,

Si&terman Livermore, /
11/13 Victoria Str
Liverpool*




^ eJ        VICTORIA                            (dec«aa«d) Ho.89.

As you' are aware, the Inquest(s) arising out of the Hillsborough
Disaster stand adjourned to a date to be fixed. You may also
be aware that it had been in my mind to resume these Inquests
on the 15th of January 1990.

I have now been informed that the Director of Public Prosecutions
has decided to have a criminal investigation undertaken on his
behalf.! In these circumstances, I have decided not- to resume the
Inquest(s) on the date mentioned.
    //■■.      /
I will review the matter further after the Director of Public
Prosecutions has announced his decision as to what action (if any)
he majr/wish to undertake.

I am not in a position to say how long the Police Inquiry
or the Director of Public Prosecutions consideration of the
matter will take. I anticipate however that there will be
a substantial period of time before I am in a position to communicate
on/this matter further.

I would be grateful if you could please ensure that this information
is conveyed to members of the bereaved family so that they may be
fully informed of the position regarding the Inquest(s).

Yours faithfully,



S.L.Popper,
H.M. Coroner.
                                                         J
                                                         ’^Fiinimrsn                                                        AT.
                                                         JSMMMM                                                            Zi>
                                                                                                                           3 °

                        Silverman* Livermore
                        S O L I C I T O R S
                                       11/13 Victoria Street, Liverpool L2 5Q Q
                                                                                                                                 (#U
                        Telephone: 051 227 1871.        DX: 14190.         Fax: 051 255 0216
                                                                                                                                 <P&
      ■Dr S L Popper                                                      Our ref:      DRF/SB/McBRIEN/HILLSB
                                                                                                                                 W/
       HM Coroner for Sheffield
       Medico Legal Centre                                                Your ref:
                                                                                                                                  <
       Watery Street
                                                                          When calling please ask for:         MR FRASER
       Sheffield                                                                                                                 ■$=j-
       S3 7ET



                                                                                                                             q(i-




      3rd August 1989

      Dear Sir

      RE: HILLSBOROUGH

      Many thanks for your letter of the 27th July enclosing copies of the Post-Mortem
      Reports.

      I will certainly make clear to my clients the conditions under which these
      Reports have been released.

      A cheque for £26.95 to cover your copying charges is attached, might I trouble
      you for a receipt for accounting purposes.


■Oi   Since I gave you my list of deceased a further one has been added, he is
      John McBrien
      have a copy of his Report to complete the set.
                                                                   night I please


      Yours faithfully
                               A
                                                                                                                   ' <V' S C=\
                                                               O W fc C tu e      ^£.-T v>tt-vo «S O




                        A.F. FARRAND LL.B., C.P. STEBBING LL.B., E.M. SHELVEY LL.B., D.R. FRASER,
                                      J.L. W ALKER LL.B., Sir HARRY LIVERM ORE (Consultant).
                     Also at: Rutland House Mall, Shopping City, Runcorn WA7 2ES. Tel: 714121. Fax: 09828 718135
                                         137 Leathers Lane, Halewood, L26 0TS. Tel: 051-486 0131/2
                              This firm is rem lated by the Law Society in the conduct of Investment Business.
                                                          VAT Reg. No. 164 4312 81
                ck _     ''’’"Sft.i*          OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR        MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                WATERY STREET
               14tthe.
                '
                                       n               SOUTH YORKSHIRE          SHEFFIELD
                                                            (West District)
                                                                                S3 7ET
               STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., 8.MED.Soi.. S.M., S.S., M.RC.G.P.
                                                             CORONER


                                           Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                                   27thJuly        19.89.


            SLP/JT/H/H'!/001 •


             Silverman Livermore,
             ll/l? Victoria Street,
             Liverpool. L2 50,Q.




            Dear Sirs,

(0          You "ill be aware that I do not normally release post mortem
            reports until ths resumption of the Inquest, -men they are
            in fact put in as evidence.

            However, in view of the numerous requests xs’hich I have received,
            and the obvious distress which delay is causing to your clients,
            I have decided that subject to certain conditions set out below,
                 prepared to release to you upon request, the post mortem
            report of your client^)0                      *




            Ihe release of these post mortem reports are cn the basis that:-■

                    a.       They have to be treated as provisional, and t h e r e f o r e
                             subject to amendment or alteration until such time as
                             they are given or produced in evidence at the Inquest.

                    b.       xney are to oe used only for the purpose of bereavement
                             conselling of the deceased's relatives or for proper
_                            legitimate purposes in connection with any legal proceedings
                             in which solicitors may be engaged.

                    c.       subject to ~n£'caQQve 1 they are to be kept confidential until
                             ~hey come into the public domain at the resumed Inauests.

            I have yc-ur request for the post mortem report to hand, in respect
            of each of the persons listed on the attached sheet, and on the
            assumption thax you will confirm that the report in restiect of
            each of your respective clients is accepted on the terms set out
            above, and in order to save further delay and upset to your client,
            I enclose a copy of the relevant post mortem report. If for any
            reason you cannot agree to the contents of this letter, please return
            the post mortem report to me, without of course making any use of it.

            The cost for the copy post mortem report(s) is   ■?*/ per sheet (total £ U                      JY '   )
            Please make your cheques payable to the City of Sheffield.

            Yours faithfully,



    38606

            S.L.Popper,
            Eul-LCoroner.
                   S il verman
                           III •Livermore
                   S O L I C I T O R S
                                  11/13 Victoria Street, Liverpool L2 5QQ
                   Telephone: 051 227 1871.       DX: 14190.           Fax:051 255 0216

Mr S L Popper                                                           Our ref:    DRF/ SB
H.M Coroner for South Yorkshire
Medico Legal Centre                                                     Your ref:
Watery Street
Sheffield                                                               When calling please ask for: MR FRASER
S3 7ET




4th July 1989

Dear Mr Popper

I write following my very helpful conversation this afternoon with Mr Thompson
from your office to confirm a number of points.

Firstly, I understand that you are .favourably inclined towards the requests
that you have recieved from a number of Solicitors to release copies of
the Post-Mortem Reports on the victims of the Hillsborough Disaster in advance
of resumed Inquest Hearings and in this regard might I ask you to let me
have copies of the Reports on the deceased named in the attached list the
families of whom I respresent.

There is a strong feeling from many of the families that early receipt of copies
of the P.M. Reports would be beneficial both in terms of answering some
hiterto unanswered questions and also in perhaps reducing the anguish which
might be suffered when full details of the cause of death become known at a
public hearing perhaps some weeks or months hence.

If payment is required for copies of any of the Reports then needless to say
I will be happy to deal with this.

I understand that the relative positions of approximately 50 of those who
suffered fatal injuries has been established at or immediately prior to the
estimated time of death, this information is being generally discussed and
although I am not asking you at this stage to release the names of the 50
involved I would be very greatful if you would confirm that this information
is correct, perhaps the number has increased from 50? Would it be your intention
to release this information prior to reopening of the inquests?

Finally, I confirm that I will speak to my fellow committee members tomorrow
(Wednesday) about the issue of 'block representation' of the bereaved families at the



                    A.F. FARRAND LL.B., C.P. STEBBINO LL.B.. E.M . SHELVEY LL.B., D R. FRASER,
                                  J.L. W ALKER LL.B., Sir HARRY LIVERM ORE (Consultant).
                 Also at: Rutland House Mall, Shopping City, Runcorn WA7 2ES. Tel: 714121. Fax: 09828 718135
                                     137 Leathers Lane, Halewood. L26 0TS. Tel: 051-486 0131/2
                          This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of Investment Business.
                                                      VAT Re?. No. 164 *312 31
resumed hearing and will get back to you with their feelings but I am happy
to confirm in the meantime that if you feel it would be beneficial I would be
more than happy to come and see you in Sheffield for a general discussion.

I look forward to hearing from you.

Youqq pipcerely




      .ser

A member of Hillsborough Steering Committee
                    S          O           L          I         C          I         T          O           R           S
                                   11/13 Victoria Street, Liverpool L2 5QQ
                    Telephone; 051 227 1871.         DX; 14190.        Fax: 051 255 0216

• Mr S L Popper H.M Coroner                                                         Our ref: DRF/SB
  for South Yorkshire
  Medico Legal Centre                                                               Your ref:
  Watery Street
  Sheffield                                                                         When calling please ask for: jyjp FRASER
  S3 7ET




 16th May 1989

 Dear Sir

 With my sincere apologies for the delay in forwarding it I am enclosing list
 containing details of the name and addresses of the fans who died at
 Hillsborough for whose next of kin we act.

 If I can be of any further assistance concerning any of the names on the
 list please do not hesitate to contact me.

 Yours sincerely




*
                    A .F . F A R R A N D LL.B.. C.P. S T E B B I N G LL.B.. E.M . S H E L V E Y LL.B.. E. L E A S K LL.B.,
                            D.R. F R A S E R . J.L. W A L K E R LL.B.. Sir H A R R Y L I V E R M O R E (Consultant).
                 Also at: Rutland H o u se Mall. Shopp ing City. Runcorn W A 7 2E S. Tel: 7 1 4 1 2 1 . Fax: 0 9 8 2 8 71 8 135
                                       137 Le ath ers La ne. H a le w o o d L26 0 T S . Tei: 05 i 48 6 0 1 3 1 / 2
                           Co unt y H o u se , 6 4 A D er b y Road , H uy ton . Liverpool L3 6 9 U L . Tel: 051 4 8 0 218 8
                             This firm is regulated bv the Law Society in the condu ct of In vestm ent Business.
                                                              V A T Reg. N o ’ 164 4 3 1 2 81
TH/ATR                                                                        9 October 1990


Dr S L Popper
H M Coroner
Medico Legal Centre
Watery S t r e e t
Sheffield
S3 7ET




Dear Dr Popper

Thank you f o r your l e t t e r of 1: October r e g a r d i n g t h e resumed i n q u e s t s .
T h e r e b y r e t u r n t h e proforma duly completed.

Ple a se acc ept my apo lo g ie s f o r t h e delay in re spon ding but as you w i l l
see I have now moved and did not r e c e i v e t h e l e t t e r u n t i l to d ay , due t o
i t having t o be r e - d i r e c t e d .        Could you p l e a s e amend your re co rd s
a c c o rd in g l y and address a l l f u t u r e corresponde nce t o t h e above.

Yours ^4*}cer^y______




'\7~-
T r e v o r Hicks
"Sheffield Coroners Court                                   24/4/90

            INQUEST INTO DEATH OF VICTORIA JANE HICKS

Questions and matters arising from "Summaries" and evidence todate.

Q's. to Dr. Denmark - Autopsy




For the record can Dr. Denmark confirm that these are the result
of the adrenelin/ others substances administered by the Northern
General Staff during the resusitation attempt.




can Dr. Denmark comment as to wether this is "normal" and possible
cause /effect.




can Dr. Denmark comment on the circumstances that could lead to an
injury of this type & and had resusitation been successful would
Victoria have survived/' suffered further.



can Dr. Denmark please comment on possible cause and effect.

4.General questions -

a) Would attempts at fibrilation on Saturday leave indications that
would be visible at post-mortem and did Victoria's body show such
signs.

b) in Dr. Denmarks opinion,and based purely on his experience and
general impression of her body at post-mortem, did Victoria suffer
more, or the same than is the average one could expect under the
circumstances.

Statement & Q's to Dr. Wardrope

Dr. Wardrope, Mr Hicks as you may already be aware,accompanied
Victoria to the Northern General Hospital and was present at the
initial "treatment" in casualty. He also heard at the opening day
of the generic evidence that no. notes exist regarding Victoria's
treatment.

Mr & Mrs Hicks wish to state publicly and for the record that
whilst this is regrettable and should not have happened they agree
with your comments on the opening day that priority was given to
patient care & Mr-Hicks reiterates his opinion that the medical
staff appeared to be "flat out", in control, and doing all that
they could in extremely difficult circumstances.
Please relay their gratitude to all concerned.

Having stated the foregoing two questions require to be cleared
u p :-

1.Could Dr, Wardrope confirm that the needle marks refferred to in
the post-mortem were a result of the resusitation attempt.

2. Could Dr.Wardrope confirm wether fibrilation was attempted or
n o t . and i f not why n o t .

Q & statement to D e t .Sgt Me Combie.

1. Having considered the various statements that exist regarding
timing of any initial treatment, is it your opinion that Victoria
recieved resuscitation attempts at the earliest practical time.

S gt .Me Combie, Mr & Mrs Hicks wish to place on public record their
gratitude to yourself, Sgt.Appleton and indeed the other West
Midlands Officers for the care and consideration you have shown
them during your investigations.

Q for D r . Popper

1. Further to your statement during the opening session we.
understand that it is normal practise to do "ethanol blood tests"
that reveal any foreign substance in the blood.

a)Could you explain why you chose blood alcohol levels only.

b)Can you give an assurance that this was your descision entirely
and that no police pressure was involved.

2)We accept Dr. Poppers statement that it was neccessary to "have
a system" in the identification process but in the light of our
experience with Victoria's body being removed back to the Ground
could he try to ensure that in any future incident a body
unequivically identified by a close relative is left in peace at
the hospital mortuary.
    TELEPHONE:                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
    SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                      POLICE HEADQUARTERS

    TELEX: 547996                                  SNIG HILL
    FAX: (0742) 523243                              SHEFFIELD S3 SLY


    P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
    CHIEF CONSTABLE


    Dr S L Popper                                18 April 1989
    Medico-Legal Centre
    Watery Street •
    Sheffield
    S3 7ET




0     '

    I refer to your recent conversation with Superintendent
    Sleath concerning the release of the deceased persons from
    the Hillsborough incident to their respective next of kin,
    following the adjournment of the inquest.

    After consultation with Professor Usher, I have no objection
    to this course of action.




                                              ML
