                                                  ccs(j>/sj -i



DRAFT.



DRAFT PROVISIONAL OUTLINE OF LEGAL DIRECTION TO JURY.



I am now going to turn to giving you a number of directions

on issues of law.   As you will see in a moment, a majority

of the time will be occupied with aspects relating to a

possible verdict of Unlawfully Killed,     You are not to

construe this as meaning that I am directing you either

towards or away from that particular verdict, it is simply

that the legal concepts and aspects which have to be

considered are a.   numerous,   b.   complex   c. important and

d.   differ in certain respects from those applicable to

some of the other verdicts which may be open to you.

However, before I get down to that, I wish to draw your

attention to the provision of the Coroners Act 1988 Section

II (5) (b).




Furthermore, see Section 6 of that Act.




As an aside I should perhaps mention that this amendment

was introduced in 1977, prior to that it had been possible

for coroners' juries to name people who they thought had

been guilty of murder, manslaughter or infanticide.




BAEABL
                       2




In addition to the Act of Parliament, there are also Rules

which apply to coroners and the current rules are the 1984

coroners rules.




I therefore now draw your attention to Rule 36.    This rule

reads as follows




The effect of this rule is that neither you nor I are

allowed to put on to the inquisition what used to be known

as 'riders' i.e., advice or comments.




I am also required to draw to your attention Rule 42.



It is essential that the provisions of this rule together

with the provisions of Rule 36 (b) are strictly adhered to

by you and indeed by me.



SELF INCRIMINATION.



I also wish to draw your attention to Rule 22.    This reads

     1. "No witness at an inquest should be obliged to

         answer any question tending to incriminate

         himself.




BAEABL
                       3




     2.   Where it appears to the coroner that the witness

          has   been asked such a question, the coroner shall

          inform the witness that he may refuse to answer".

This is an exceedingly important rule and is fundemental to

the present system of Justice in the United Kingdom.




You may have noticed that some of the witnesses were told

of the rule and of the privilege to which they were

entitled and some exercised their rights.    Put another way,

a witness has a right of silence.



RIGHTS OF SILENCE.



It would be grossly unfair and quite contrary to the

intention of the rule and indeed to justice if you were to

construe a refusal to answer a question under the privilege

as an admission or an indication of guilt. To construe the

privilege in such a way would not only run contra to the

whole principle of the rule but would in effect place the

person who exercised the privilege in a far worse position

than if he had in fact answered the question.



The position is simply this:    That you may not construe

silence as constituting any part of the evidence on which

your deliberations are based.   You have to be satisfied

from the evidence which you have heard and not from




BAEABL
                                    4




 evidence which you have not heard nor may you draw any

 inferences from the exercise of the privilege. Under no

 circumstances must the privilege be turned into a noose.


 VERDICTS.



 I now remind you of the possible verdicts which you might

 be able to consider in respect of these inquests



         1.   Unlawfully killed.



         2.   Accidental Death or Misadventure (I will tell you

              now that in law, there is no difference between

              these two terms.     We will deal with this in a
              little more detail later on).



 ?       3.   A special verdict which again I will deal with a
              little later on.



     4.       What is known as an Open verdict.


STANDARD OF PROOF.



In considering the evidence, you obviously will have to be

satisfied that the necessary standard of proof has been

achieved in order to enable you to reach one or other of

the verdicts which I have mentioned.         Different standards




BAEABL
                        5




of proof are required for different verdicts.   If I may

summarise first of all, in respect of the verdict of

Unlawfully killed you have to be satisfied to the standard

which can be described as the criminal standard of proof.

In respect of Accidental death or Misadventure (or a

special verdict) the standard would be that of the balance

of probability.   In the case of an Open Verdict there is in

a sense no standard for the reasons which you /will see

later on.                                   /



CRIMINAL STANDARD.



Let us then deal in a little more detail with the standard

of proof required for Unlawfully Killed.   Before you are

able to bring in a verdict of Unlawfully killed, you have

to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt( or to put it in

slightly more modern language, you have to be satisfied so

that you are sure) that the evidence which you have heard

and which you are considering satisfies you that both the

act and necessary mental state of the criminal offence

which you are considering has been made out.



In respect of the other verdicts except of course an Open

verdict the standard of proof is the lower one normally

described as the balance of probability.   It will be

obvious to you therefore that a very much higher standard

of proof is required before you can bring in a verdict of

unlawfully killed.



BAEABL
                              6




    ORDER OF CONSIDERATION.



    As a direct consequence of this the order in which you

    consider the verdicts becomes important.     In considering

    the verdicts, you have to apply your mind to the verdict of

    Unlawfully killed first of all.     You have to consider the

    verdict in respect of each of the deceased.     You have to

    apply the facts within the context of the law as

    explained to you and you must apply it in respect of

    each of the parties whose conduct you are considering based

    as I have already said upon the evidence which you have

    heard.



    UNLAWFULLY KILLED - INTRODUCTION.

    What then are the legal parameters or requirements that

    have to be met in the context of these inquests before you

    are able to consider a verdict of Unlawfully killed.

/
    I do not propose to take you through the whole law of

    murder or manslaughter but for the purposes of these

    inquests the criminal equivalent of the verdict of

    Unlawfully killed is one of the forms of involuntary

    Manslaughter and by definition excludes what we know to be

    murder or any other aspects of deliberate killing.     The

    legal requirements for this type of manslaughter have been




    BAEABL
                              7




considered in various cases and in particular a case known

as R -v - West London Coroner Ex parte Gray.    In that case

which dealt with an alleged unlawful killing by a police

officer by neglect, Lord Justice Watkins set out the

matters which a jury have to be satisfied on beyond

reasonable doubt.




Before I go through the points I should add that although

in that particular case the issue related to neglect on the

part of the police, the fundamental principles of the

direction would apply in respect of anybody whom you might

be considering as falling within the purview of this

verdict.



You have to be satisfied of the following points in the

first instance



     1.    That the person whose conduct you are person whose

           conduct you are considering had a duty to have

           regard to the health and welfare, say safety of

           the deceased.



     2.    That in the circumstances, there was a failure to

           do what should have been done for the health and




BAEABL
UNLAWFULLY KILLED - INTRODUCTION.



          welfare,    say safety of the deceased.



     3.   That that failure amounted to a substantial cause

          of death.



     4.   That the failure amounted to recklessness.




     5.   Recklessness means that there was an obvious and

          serious risk to the health and welfare (safety)

          of the deceased and that the person whose conduct

          is being considered having regard to his duty was




          a.    Indifferent to such risk or




           b.   Recognising that risk could be present,

                deliberately chose to run that risk by doing

                nothing about it .



     6.   It must be clearly understood however that a

          failure to appreciate that there was such a risk

          would not by itself be sufficient to amount to

          amount to recklessness.




BAEABL
                              9




     7.   You can only return a verdict of Unlawfully killed

          if you can attribute these ingredients to a single

          individual whose conduct is being called

          in question.   Such an individial should on no

          account be named or otherwise identified.




CAUSATION.



The next point that I think I have to mention    is the

issue 'Causation'.   You have to be satisfied that the act

or ommission complained of has actually caused the injury

or the death in this particular case.   Not every causative

act would give rise to liability.   For example it could be

argued that no-body would have died if the game of football

were not played in the United Kingdom or, bringing it

slightly nearer home, if there was no F.A. Cup competition.

All of these in one sense are causes, but with none of

them I think would we have any difficulty in excluding them

as causing these deaths because they are obviously too

remote. In other words, you have to be satisfied that

the act or ommision which you are looking at is:-




BAEABL
                            -   10   -




  a.       sufficiently close, sufficiently related to the

           event as to be logically classifiable as causative

           of death and




    b.     is a substantial cause of death.




RISK AND RECKLESSNESS.

Recklessness is at the heart of a verdict of unlawful

killing.     In addition to what I have already told you

I think it might be helpful if I illustrated the legal

approach by reference to what was said in another leading

case which is known as R - v - Lawrence.      The details of

that case do not concern us but it may help to understand

what is meant by recklessness if I give you a couple

of quotes.



The first one is from Lord Hailsham.     He says when

speaking about the word reckless that



         "Unlike most english words it has been in the

         english language as a word in general use at least

         since the eighth century a.d. almost always with




BAEABL
                         11




         with the same meaning applied to

         personal conduct, as a state of mind stopping

         short of deliberate intention and going beyond

         mere inadvertence".




Lord Diplock comments "that the word has not acquired

a special meaning as a term of legal art but more

its popular or dictionary meaning of careless

regardless or heedless of possible harmful consequences

of ones act". He goes on to say




"One does not speak of a person acting recklessly even

though he has given no thought at all to the consequences

of his act ............................

unless the act is one that presents a real risk of harmful

consequences which anyone acting with reasonable prudence

would recognise and give heed to".    Lord Diplock also says

"recklessness on the part of the doer of an act does

presuppose that there is something in the circumstances

that would have drawn the attention of an ordinary prudent

individual to the possibility that his act was capable of

causing the kind of serious, harmful consequence that the

section which creates the offence was intended to prevent

and that the risk of those harmful consequences occurring




BAEABL
was not so slight that an ordinary prudent individual would

feel justified in treating them as negligible.   It is only

when this is so that the doer of the act is acting

recklessly if before doing the act he either fails to give

any thought to the possibility of there being any such risk

or having recognised that there was such a risk he

nevertheless goes on to do it".



Although as I say, the precise details are of no concern of

ours, you may be interested to know that it was a case

which dealt with the issue relating to reckless driving and

one of the aspects which the law lords were applying their

minds to was the distinction between an offence of reckless

driving and driving without due care and attention.



It seems to me that not every assumption of a risk can

therefore be described as being reckless for example,

every operation performed by a surgeon carries with it the

inevitable risk of injury as well as a risk of other

adverse consequences including in some cases, death.       This

risk in many cases is both obvious and serious and can

occur however competent the operation in in fact carried

out.

The assessment of whether or not a patient should proceed

to operation is made both by the surgeon and by the patient

by assessing this benefit, equation and trading off the

advantages and disadvantages of operating or not.     It




BAEABL
                              13




would however be somewhat surprising if say having

considered a risky operation and decided to proceed, the

surgeon having performed it competently were to be

prosecuted for manslaughter because in the events the

patient had died.



Summarising then again, recklessness is definied as



   1.        There has to be an obvious and serious risk to the

             health and welfare of the deceased.      If that has

             been established then,



   2.        That the person's conduct is called in question

             either



             a.    Was indifferent to such risk or



             b.    Recognising the risk has decided to go on

                    and take i t .

Before however coming to the definitiion of recklessness in

this type of case, as I have already indicated there are

three preliminary steps which you have to consider and

which we will look at in a little more detail now.



        1.        That there has to be a duty of care.   That in many

                  instances is not too difficult to determine.      As a

                  general rule if somebody undertakes to perform a

                  task e.g., stage a football match



BAEABL
                                   14




#
    or organise it or supervise it they can be

    assumed to have a duty of care towards the people with whom

    they come in contact.      Slightly more difficult, but I think still

    relatively straightforward is the issue of whether or not

    fans who attend also have a duty of care to each other.

    I can see no reason why if road users have a duty of care

    to others upon the road, pedestrians and fans attending do

    not also have a similar obligation towards each other.

            2.   Breach of duty, i.e.,



                 Failure to do what should have been done.    This

                 may require more thought.



                 Simply because something goes wrong does not mean

                 that there has been a breach of duty.



                 There are two major aspects which you need to

    think about.

    Profess- 1.

    ional        a.   You have to be satisfied that in

    person.           the case of a professional who is required to

                      excercise special skill, knowledge or

                      experience the standard of care which he is

                      expected to achieve is that of an ordinary

                      skilled member of that profession and which




    BAEABL
                                 15




                such ordinary skilled person would have

                exercised or professed

                to have had in respect of that special skill-

                We are not talking about some paragon of

                virtue nor of somebody who is particularly

                bad, it is an ordinary average member of    that

                profession or class-

Ordinary    (b) In respect of people who do not

Individuals. profess to have special skills you apply       the

                standard of an ordinary prudent person as

                examplified by yourselves.

                If when you apply this test you were to come

                to the conclusion that there has been no

                breach of duty in respect of the person who

                you are considering, then there is no need to

                consider the other points in respect of him.



           2.   The second aspect is what I would describe

                as a dilemma or a crisis situation. If

                a person is faced with an emergency then

                the degree of care may vary with the

                circumstances.    In an emergency the fact that

                in the events a wrong decision is taken need

                not constitute a breach of duty provided that

                the decision was not unreasonably taken in

                the circumstances relating which prevailed and




BAEABL
                         16




         taking all the aspects into account.




         If you come to the conclusion from the

         evidence that there was an emergency

         situation you then have to decide whether

         the response to that situation was not

         unreasonable.




         You may of course come to the conclusion that

         there was no emergency situation at all or

         alternatively the situation itself had been

         caused or precipitated by a breach of duty by

         the person whose conduct you are considering.

         You must have it clearly fixed in your minds

         that breach of duty has to be proved

         beyond reasonable doubt from the evidence,

         and as I have already mentioned.......   deal

         with in more detail, that it must be

         attributable to one individual and not       e

         assumation of the acts of different people.

         The third point is that the failure amounts to

         a substantial cause of death.   This is an

         important point because we have in the course

         of this inquest been looking at the activities

         of all kinds of people including some junior officers



BAEABL
                -   17 -


         or as has has been mentioned small cogs in a

         big machine.    There may well have been some

         failures by very many people but it should not

         take you very long to exclude the vast

         majority of the people from    your

         deliberation.



         The word substantial should be given its usual

         meaning.   It is an ordinary englilsh word and

         I am sure that you understand it.



         If the person whose conduct you are

         considering does not in    your view meet

         the criteria you do not have to perceive

         to consider the issue of recklessness in

         respect of him.    If it does meet the criteria

         the most that you have in fact established

         would be that he had been negligent.     It is

         even possible that you may feel that he was

         very negligent or grossly negligent but that

         is not as the law is at the moment, sufficient

         ground for you to bring in a verdict of

         unlawfully killed.    It simply seems to me

         to be in this particular type of unlawful

         killing, the opening of the door which enables

         you to consider the heart of the matter,

         namely whether or not there has been

         recklessness as defined by the judges.      I




BAEABL
         remind you again that you have to be

         satisfied on three basic matters in respect

         of recklessness.




         1. That there is an obvious and serious

            risk of injury.   I use the word 'injury'

            because that is the term that has been

            used by many of the judges but they use

            it in the same sense as I have used detriment

            to the health and welfare of the deceased or

BAEABL
the safety    of the deceased.     The definition

includes two words:-



a.    'obvious '



b.    'serious'



and you have to be satisfied on both.



In
considering this, you have to put yourself

into the position of the people with their

state of knowledge on the 15th of April

1989 and exclude the benefit of

hindsight.and you have to ask yourself the

question             whether on that day

there was an obvious

     and serious risk of injury.



In a recent

case in the Crown Court arising out of

the Zebruggen disaster, Mr. Justice Turner

in one place said "obviously we are

talking about a risk and no-body denies

there was a risk.    It is the application

of the word 'obvious' that is troubling

me and has been troubling me for a long

time.    Obvious if it operates that
                    -   20    -




         it will be a serious risk.        I quite follow

         but obvious that it will occur is the

         problem". If you think about it that is

         precisely the problem which you are faced

         You     may feel that the word 'obvious'

         means something like "perfectly evident,

         staring one in the face, immediately

         apparent" and indeed these terms were

         canvassed before Mr. Justice Turner.

         Mr. Justice also clearly distinguished

         the word 'obvious' and 'serious' upon

         being mere synonyms of reasonably

         foreseeable.        You may ask obvious to

         whom.     Clearly in the first instance

         the person whose conduct you are

         considering but in assessing that you

         apply the test of the ordinary skilled

         professional, as I have already described

         or if you were thinking of a non­

         professional person, an ordinary prudent

         individual as exemplified        by yourself and

         who might find himself in that position or

         condition on that day.        I also want to

         make it clear to you that obviousness

         on its own is not enough.        The definition

         clearly includes the word 'serious' and you

         have to give it appropriate weight, in

         other words there must be an obvious and



BAEABL
           -   21




         serious risk of injury.   If you were

         satisfied that there was an obvious and

         serious risk you are not yet home and

         dry because you have to ask the next

         question namely, was the person whose

         conduct you are calling in question

         indifferent to that risk or having

         recognised the risk did he decide to go

         ahead and take it.




         In the course of the ruling Mr. Justice

         Turner quotes the various comments on the

         use of the word 'obviously' and he quotes

         various Counsel who describe their

         understanding of the word 'obvious' as

         meaning perfectly evident, staring one in

         the face, immediately apparent.   He

         distinguishes the words 'obvious' and'




BAEABL
                  -   22




                   Lord Justice Watkins then adds

          "that mere failure to recognise the

          presence of such a risk is not sufficient".

          In other words, he is drawing the

          distinction, as I see it, between a person

          who may well be negligent and in that sense

          liable say to civil penalties or damages

          but whose state of mind does not meet

          the criteria required of recklessness

         which despite the reputation is either

         a recognition of the risk and decision

         to take it or an indifference to such risk.

         There are two further aspects to this.

         Firstly, in considering these aspects

         of recklessness there is a very interesting

         case which was decided by the Privy Council

             in which one of the Law Lords, known as

         Lord Ruskill gave the leading judgement (I

         explain that Privy Council judgements are

         not binding in English courts, but clearly

         have persuasive authority). This particular

         involved the collision of two hydrofoils

         in Hong Kong in bright clear daylight.

         Lord Ruskill having quoted extensively

         from Lord Diplock.   Lord Diplock goes on

         to say "Their Lordships emphasised that




BAEABL
            -   23   -




         in this passage Lord Diplock was speaking

         of an obvious and serious risk of causing

         physical injury created by the defendent.

         He was not there concerned to deal with

         cases where the conduct complained of

         was of a defendent's re-action or

         lack of re-action to such a risk created by

         another person".

         You will see that that passage in some way

         mirrors what I have already indicated to

         you regarding crisis situations and it

         seems to me that you would be entitled to

         take into account all the circumstances

         applicable.     This point is backed up

         to a certain extent by another Lord, Lord

         Edmund Davis in R - v - Cauldwell who says

         "in the absence of             factors, the

         defendents state of mind is therefore all

         important where recklessness is an element

         in the offence charged".     In other words,

         if there are no excuses which are

         legitimate and proper, then a state of mind

         is the all important factor.

         One of the interesting features of the

         Hillsborough disaster from a legal

         point of view is the difference between

         this and many of the other     disasters which




BAEABL
                     -   24




         have unfortunately        occurred in recent

         times.   For instance you think of the

         Zebruggen Disaster (passengers killed on a

         ship which sailed with open bow doors or

         the Kegworth Disaster when an engine

         caught fire and the wrong engine was

         switched off or the Lockerbie Disaster

         where a bomb was placed on an aircraft

         or some of the train accidents which

         have recently occured or the Manchester

         Air Disaster)-         In all of these the people

         who were killed were in a sense entirely

         helpless.       They had nothing whatever to

         do with the flying of the planes, running

         of the trains, the sailing of the ship,

         operation of the bow doors.         In the

         Hillsborough         Disaster the position is

         slightly different in that there is a

         very active interplay between all the

         parties involved, and not least the

         situation outside the turnstile area

         and possibly even the situation within or

         on the terraces.

         If you have got this far you are not

         entirely home and dry yet because you have

         to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt

         that the recklessness which you are




BAEABL
considering is attributable to one

single person.   What this means is that

you may not aggregate or add together the

acts of different people and then

attrribute what you perceive to be an

act of recklessness when taken all togethe

to one particular individual.   Each person

stands on his own and you have to be

satisfied on the evidence that the

ingredients and grounds of the offence

have been made out.

This is not to say that you cannot in fact

have more than one person who might be

liable to a charge of manslaughter or

indeed the finding of unlawfully killed.

For example if two or three people attack

one individual and they all individually

inflict wounds which are sufficiently

severe as to constitute a substantial

cause of death, the fact that there may

be three wounds, each one of which on

its own would have been sufficient to

kill the victim does not absolve two

of the assailants.    All three, for

their individual act may be held

responsible, because each one, taken

on its own would satisfy the
              definition of the offence of murder

              or manslaughter as the case may be

              Finally,   and   I do not need    to spend

              time on t h i s , if you were    to find

              the verdict of unlawfully killed under

              no circumstances must you name or identify

              the person and T have already previously

              dealt with this-



    AGGREGATION.



    Sometimes described as a rule against aggregation.

    What this means is simply that you are not allowed to

    add together the acts of different people which on

    their own would not satisfy the criteria of the

    offence and in particular recklessness, so for

    example, it would be quite improper to add together

    breaches by different people and then attribute

    to one    what you know          as an obvious and

    serious risk. This is a fundemental and vital

    point and you have to be absolutely clear in your mind

    that you may not do it .




BAEABL
         the verdict of unlawfully killed under

         no circumstances must you name or identify

         the person and I have already previously

         dealt with this -




BAEABL
acts or ommissions of these various parties in themselves

are such that you could find a verdict of Unlawfully killed

against them but rather whether their acts and ommissions

as they impinge or effect the acts and ommissions of others

so as to alter their legal effect-   Let us take one or two

examples.   You may feel that it is reasonably clear from

the evidence that the safety certificate was never altered

so as to take into account the penning of the terrace.



Similarly it seemed reasonably clear from the evidence of

Mr. Seaman, Mr. Bounds, Mr. Butler, that the risks which

seem in some respects so obvious to us now arising out of

the radial fencing were never really contemplated.    On the

contrary, the view which appears to have been taken was

that the installation of the radial fences would improve

crowd control and natural movement and would reduce the

risk of injury which had been exhibited in the 1981 match,

when the terrace itself was completely open.   Furthermore,

the arrangements at the turnstiles had that configuration

for many years and had apparently, certainly at the

turnstiles, worked without any particular problems, in 1987

and 88 subject only until the possibility that in 1988 some

filtering of ticketless fans had occurred possibly at a

distance though even that was not entirely consistent

because except for one witness who was not anywhere near

the filter, no-one actually claimed to have seen a

ticketless fan turned away.   This, quite apart from any




BAEABL
legal and policing difficulties have in fact successfully

turning the ticketless fans away.    The marking of the

turnstiles, the signing within the concourse area, were

exactly the same in those years as in 1989-     There was a

further difference in that Sgt.     Higgins apparently closed

off the tunnel in 1988 but unfortunately this action

appears not to have been known by any of the senior

officers, and certainly does not appear to have been

conveyed to Mr.   Duckenfield upon him taking command.    The

standard of care which is expected of a professional who is

required to exercise special skill, knowledge or experience

is that standard which an ordinary skilled member of his

profession would have exercised and professed to have in

respect of that special skill, so the question is would an

ordinary skilled member of the appropriate profession have

undertaken the tasks in the same manner or way which the

person whose conduct you are considering did or did not do

so?   If you come to a conclusion that they would, then you

cannot on the basis of the legal definition find a verdict

of Unlawfully Killed against that particular person.



This is looking at the question from a non-crisis situation

point of view.    In a situation where a crisis situation has

occurred or a person is faced with a dilemma, then provided

a reasonable decision as to a course of action is taken the

fact that in the events it turns out to be the wrong

decision does not necessarily mean that it was negligent




BAEABL
i.e., that there was a failure or breach of duty of care

which is owed.    In the particular example of Hillsborough,

we have this very well illustrated by the issue of the

opening of the gates and in particular, Gate C-      A

desperate appeal was being made by Supt Marshall on the

outside.   He made it quite clear that if immediate action

was not taken, he was anticipating serious injury and

possibly death.    People on the inside of the ground were

faced with a dilemma.    Did they acceed to that request to

open the gates or not?    The evidence which we have heard

seems to point to the fact that Mr.    Duckenfield

deliberated and when it was put to him that a decision had

to be reached, he decided to open the gates.    The fact that

it might have been perhaps better to postpone the match

(assuming that that could have been effectively conveyed to

the people outside) and that it would have been better to

have given at the same time instructions to seal off the

tunnel and to divert the crowd has to be judged by you in

the light of the circumstances which prevailed at the time.

Even if you come to the view that he did have time to put

alternative plans into effect, a miscalculation in such a

situation or an error of judgement may not necessarily

constitute negligence.    If you were to take that view, then

in respect of those people whose conduct you might wish to

call into question for this particular act or ommission,

you would have to conclude that the fundamental criteria

has not been paid out.    It is a matter of course entirely




BAEABL
for you whether on the facts and the evidence which you

have heard, the situation was such that what one might call

the normal rule of due care had been abbregated.    This

incidentally is of course usually dealt with on questions

of negligence but in a Privy Council decision where the

Privy Council were considering the application of the

definition of recklessness to a case where two hydrofoils

had collided in open water in bright daylight, Lord......

who gave the judgement of the Privy Council (perhaps I

ought to mention here ladies and gentlemen, strictly

speaking, Privy Council judgements are judgements of the

House of Lords but are not binding in English Courts, but

clearly they have some pursuasive authority).    Lord.......

quoted from the speech of Lord Diplock in the case of Lance

in which he deals with the issue of recklessness, he quotes

as follows Lord Diplock's words:-

"In my view an appropriate instruction to the jury on what

is meant by driving recklessly would be that they must be

satisfied of two things.   First that the defendent was in

fact driving the vehicle in such a manner as to create an

obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury to some

other person who might happen to be using the road or doing

substantial damage to property, and second, that in driving

in that manner, the defendent did so without having given

any thought to the possibility of there being any such risk

or having recognised that there was some risk involved had

nonetheless gone on to take it.     It is for the jury to




BAEABL
decide whether the risk created by the manner in which the

vehicle was being driven was both obvious and serious and

in deciding this they may apply the standard of the

ordinary prudent motorist as represented by themselves".

Lord.......then went on to say "The Lordship emphasise that

in this passage Lord Diplock was speaking of an obvious and

serious risk of causing physical injury created by the

defendant.   It was not their concern to deal with cases but

the conduct complained of was of a defendent's re-action or

lack of re-action to such a risk created by another

person".



If you therefore were for instance to take the view that a

risk having been created without the gates, by someone or

more persons, then the criteria for establishing

recklessness and as I have indicated, possibly even

negligence, may not be met.

Filially, on this point I want to turn to the heart of the

definition, namely, the fact of recklessness.

Recklessness, as you can see is defined as a state of mind,

either that the person, having regard to his duty was

indifferent to an obvious and serious risk or having

recognised the risk to be present, deliberately chose to

run that risk by doing nothing about it.   I want to draw

your attention to the fact that the definition both by

Lord Justice Watkins and Lord Diplock contained the words

'obvious' and 'serious'.   We have spent a lot of time in




BAEABL
these inquests considering the obviousness of various acts

or ommissions but in the final analysis it is your decision

as to whether or not an officer of normal skill at over

time would have recognised not only that there was an

obvious and serious risk of injury, but also having so

recognised it, deliberately went ahead and took that risk

or was indifferent to it.     Mere inadvertence (the

definition of that would be carelessness) or to stick with

Lord Justice Watkins, a failure to appreciate that there

was such a risk is insufficient to ground a finding of

recklessness.



You will see therefore that the issue before you is not a

simple one and I will try and summarise for you as

follows:-

     1.   The right of silence under the privilege of the

            rule against self-incrimination must not be used

            organisations e.g., engineer and police officers.

     3.   You have to be satisfied that the evidence

            establishes the requirements for the criminal

            offence which for this purpose you may take as

            being Manslaughter by neglect or Involuntary

            Manslaughter beyond reasonable doubt or phrased

            in a different form, that the evidence satisfies

            you so that you are sure that the person whose

            conduct you are considering is in fact guilty of

            the offence which you are contemplating.




BAEABL
     4.   That before you can bring in a verdict of

          Unlawfully killed you have to be satisfied that

          there is a duty or care, that there has been a

          breach of that duty and that the act or ommission

          is a substantial cause of a death.

     5.   Even if you are satisfied those four criteria have

          been met, you must satisfy yourself that the act

          or ommission was reckless i.e., that there was an

          obvious and serious risk of injury and that the

          person recognising that risk to be present

          deliberately chose to run it by doing nothing

          about it or was indifferent to it.

     6.   Finally that a failure to appreciate that there

          was such a risk was not by itself sufficient to

          amount to recklessness and to bring a person's

          act or ommission within that definition.

In connection with abbregation I have to remind you that

you may not aggregate the acts or ommissions of different

people.   This on the other hand does not mean that you

cannot have a situation where more than one person is not

liable in law for Manslaughter.   For example if three

people were to attack a person with knives and each one of

them were to inflict a wound which taken on its own would

be a substantial cause of his death, then provided one

could prove all the other necessary ingredients, it may

well be possible to convict all three of those people of

murder or manslaughter as the case may be.     What you have




BAEABL
to be satisfied with is that the alleged wound, using this

example, is in fact a substantial cause of death.    To take

a slightly ludicrous examaple, if three people attack

someone and one stabs the patient through the neck and the

other one through the lungs each one of those injuries

being sufficient to lead to his death and the third nicks

his finger, a trivial wound which by no stretch of

imagination would kill him, it probably doesn't take much

imagination to realise that although that third person may

well have intended harm, the injury which he inflicted is

so trivial that it cannot be classed as a substantial cause

of death.   If we have a look at the situation at

Hillsborough, taking the tunnel as an example, it may be

that you will take the view that the substantial cause of

death was the failure to see that (end of tape, turn over).

An alternative scenario might be that you take the view

that the substantial cause of death was the fact that

peoeple emerged on to the terraces at too fast a rate and

that it wasn't so much the overcrowding, but the pressure

generated by the movement on to the terrace.



A third scenario might be that it is a combination of an

excess number of people on the terrace, plus an excess

number of people entering the terrace, plus the movement of

those people on to the terrace which led to the increase in

pressure causing the crushing and which were in addition to

that in Pen 3 caused a break of the barrier, thus




BAEABL
compounding the pressure effects at the front and finally

that the opening of the gates together with the obvious

panic within the terrace had created a further forward

movement which had compounded the problem.   You might even




BAEABL
                          -   8   -

UNLAWFULLY KILLED - INTRODUCTION.




          That the failure amounted to recklessness




     5.   Tests for recklessness is set out by Lord Justice

          Watkins as follows




"The test for recklessness was whether the person

having regard to his duty, wa s :-


     I.   Indifferent to an obvious and serious risk to the

          health and welfare of the deceased.



     II. Recognising that the risk to be present,

          deliberately chose to run that risk by doing

          nothing about it.
     111. That a failure to appreciate that there was such a

          risk was not by itself sufficient to amount to

          recklessness.



    1111. You can only a verdict of Unlawfully killed if

          you can attribute the unlawful conduct to a

          single individual whose conduct is being called

           in question.



   11111. That on no account should such a person be named




 BAEABL
          or identified.



Before looking at these points of Lord Justice Watkins in

more detail I wish to mention the following:-



CAUSATION.



The next point that I think I have to mentioned is the

issue 'Causation'.   You have to be satisfied that the act

or ommission complained of has actually caused the injury

or the death in this particular case.   Not every causative

act would give rise to liability.   For example it could be

argued that no-body would have died if the game of football

were not played in the United Kingdom o r , bringing it

slightly nearer home, if there was no F.A. Cup competition.

All of these in one sense are causes, but with none of

them I think would we have any difficulty in exclusing them

as causing these deaths because they are obviously too

remote. In other words, you have to be satisfied that

the act or ommission which you looking at is

sufficiently close and sufficiently related to the event as

to be logically classifiable as causative of death.



RISK OR RECKLESSNESS.
As you will see in a moment recklessness is a part of this

type of manslaughter or unlawful killing, which we are

 considering and I have already illustrated this by




 BAEABL
                         -   10   -




reference to what Lord Justice Watkins has said.      I think

it might be helpful if I also gave you a quote from what is

probably the leading judgement on this topic and it comes

from a case known as R - v - Lawrence.     It is a case, the

details of which I am not concerned with but it may help us

to understand what is meant if 1 give you a couple of

quotes.   The first one is from Lord Hailsham who says when

speaking about the word reckless, recklessly or

recklessness, he says "Unlike most english words it has

been in the english language as a word in general use at

least since the eight century A.D. almost always with the

same meaning applied to a personal conduct,          as state of

mind, stopping short of deliberate intention and

going beyond mere inadvertence".      Lord Diplock

says in construing the word reckless in a

particular Act of Parliament, that that word had

"not required a special meaning as a term of legal art but

more its popular or dictionary meaning of careless

regardless or heedless of possible harmful

consequences of ones act".   He goes on to say

"one does not speak of a person acting recklessly even

though he has given no thought at all to the consequences

of his act unless the act is one that presents a real risk

of harmful concequences which anyone acting with reasonable

prudence would recognise and give heed to".      Lord Diplock

goes on "reckless on the part of the do of an act does

presuppose that there is something in the circumstances




 BAEABL
that would have drawn the attention of an ordinary produce

individual to the possibility that his act was capable of

causing the kind of serious, harmful consequences that the

section which creates the offence was intended to prevent

and that the risk of those harmful consequences occurring

was not so slight that an ordinary prudent individual would

feel justified in treating them as negligible.

It is only when this is so that the doer of the

act is acting recklessly if before doing the act

he either fails to give any thought to the

possiobility of there being any such risk or

having recognised that there was such a risk he

nevertheless goes on to do it.     In my view an

appropriate instruction to the jury on what is

meant by driving recklessly would be that they

must be satisfied of two things.     First that the

defendent was in fact driving the vehicle in such a manner

as to create an obvious and serious risk of

causing physical injury to some person who might

happen to be using the road, or doing substantial damage

to property and second, that in driving in the

manner the defendent did so without having given

any thought to the possibility of there being any such

risk, or having recognised that there was some risk

 involved, had none-the-less gone on to take it.      It is for

 the jury to decide whether the risk created by the manner

 in which the vehicle was bring driven was both obvious and




 BAEABL
                     12




serious, and in deciding this they may apply the standard

of the ordinary prudent motorist as represented by

themselves.   If satisfied that an obvious and serious risk

was created by the manner of the defendent's driving, the

jury are entitled to infer that he was in one or other of

the states of mind required to constitute the offence and

will probably do so but regard must be given to any

explanation he gives as to his state of mind which may

displace the intererence".     If you were to look only at

what Lord Diplock says as the instruction to the jury

namely that a person is reckless if he acts so as to create

an obvious and serious of risk of causing

physical injury and 2. that in so acting, he did

so without giving thought to the possibility of

there being any such risk or having recognised

that there was some risk, had nevertheless gone

on to take it, you might think that the

assumption of any risk must constitute

recklessness but thisis I think unlikely as an

example will perhaps illustrate and as indeed

some of the quotations which I have already given you

confirm.   Every operation performed by a surgeon carries

with it the inevitable risk of injury through the incision

but in addition to that it carries a risk of adverse

concequences and even death.     A risk which in many cases is

both obvious and serious and which can occur

however competent the operation is in fact




BAEABL
                      13




carried out.    The assessment of whether or not a

patient should proceed to operation is made both

by the surgeon and by the patient by assessing

this benefit equasion and trading off the

advantages and disadvantages of operating or not

operating.     It would however be somewhat

surprising if say having considered a risky

operation decided to proceed, the surgeon having

performed it entirely competently were to be

prosecuted for manslaughter because in the events the

patient had died.



If you now turn to the principles which I have

already enumerated to you from Lord Justice

Watkins, you will see that the core of his

definition is in fact the definition of

recklessness.     He uses slightly different words

but the crucial sense is the same, namely that

there has to be an obvious and serious risk of

injury and that if that has been establish, one

has also got to be satisfied beyond reasonable

doubt that the person whose conduct is called in

question either was indifferent to such risk or

recognising the risk, had decided to go on and

 take it.    However, he propounds three primary

 steps which you have to be satisfied on namely:—




 BAEABL
                            14




     1.   That there has to be a duty of care.     That in

          many instances is not too difficult to determine.

          As a general rule if somebody undertakes to

          perform a task e.g., stage a football match or

          organise it or supervise it, they can be

          assumed to have a duty of care towards the people

          with whom they come in contact. Slightly

          more difficult, but I think relatively

          straightforward is the issue of whether or not

          fans who attend also have duty of care to each

          other and I can see no reason why if road users

          have a duty of care to others upon the road,

          pedestrians and fans attending do not also have a

          similar obligation towards each other, against



     2.   Breach of duty, i.e., Lord Watkins puts it as a

          failure to do what should have been done.     This

          may require more thought when you

          consider the evidence as it does not follow that

          simply because something goes wrong that somebody

          else has been negligent as indeed has recently

           been said in a case.   I think there

          are two major aspects which need to be considered



          1.   By taking the person whom you are considering

               as a whole, you have to be satisfied that in

               the case of a professional who is required to




BAEABL
                     -   15   -




         excercise special skill, knowledge or

         experience the standard of care which he is

         expected to achieve is that of an ordinary

         skilled member of that profession and which

         that person who have exercised or professed

         to have had in respect of that special skill-

         We are not talking about some paragon of

         virtue nor of somebody who is particularly

         mad, it is an ordinary average member of that

         class.   In respect of people who do not have

         profess to have special skills you apply the

         standard of an ordinary prudent person as

         exemplified by yourselves.    If when you apply

         this test you come to the conclusion that

         there has been no breach of duty, in respect

         of that person, then you will no doubt also

         feel that it is impossible to consider in

         as crisis situation.     In such a situation

         where a person is faced with a dilemma then

         provided a reasonable decision as to a course

         of action is taken, that the fact that in the

         events it turns out that the wrong decision

         has been taken does not necessarily mean that

         that person was negligent i.e., that there was

         a failure or breach of duty of care.     In

         particular you will appreciate that as far as

         Hillsborough is concerned, the primary crisis




BAEABL
                    -    16   -




         situation was the appeal to open the gates

         because of the perceived risk of injury by

         the people outside-      If you come to the

         conclusion that there was a crisis situation

         whether that in fact was the case, you can

         then   decide whether the response to that

         situation was reasonable and whether the

         fact that there was a failure or appeared

         to be a failure to undertake various other

         steps which in the events might have

         alleviated the condition in a different way

         or avoided subsequent deaths or excuseable

         in the light of the circumstances and the

         other factors which prevailed at that time.

         You may of course come to the conclusion that

         there was no crisis situation at all or

         alternatively that the situation outside

         Leppings Lane had been caused or precipitated

         by the person whose conduct you are

         considering.    You have got to have clearly

         fixed in your mind that breach of duty

         has to be proved to your satisfaction by

         the evidence.



         The third point of Lord Justice Watkins is

          that damage must have occurred.      You have

          to be satisfied that as he put it, the




BAEABL
                  -    17 -




         failaure was a substantial cause of the

         death.       This is an important point because

         we have in the course of this inquest been

         looking at the activities of kings of people,

         some quite small cogs away from the ground but,

         who nevertheless may in your estimation have

         made mistakes for instance, you may feel that

         it might have been better if officers near

         Penistone Road roundabout in addition to

         checking for alcohol had also asked fans to

         produce their tickets and advised those that

         did'nt not to proceed.       Whether that would

         have made any difference or not is another

         question but whether it would or wouldn't

         the failure by some officer at Penistone

         Road to do this cannot constitute a

         substantial cause of death, so even if you

         it might be had been in breach of his duty

         you could not as a matter of law consider him

         as in any way being responsible for the

         tragedy which subsequently occurred.



          If the person whose conduct you are

         considering does not in your view qualify

          so to speak under these three heads, you

          do not have to proceed to consider the issue

          of recklessness.       On the other hand if you

          respect of him any possibility of recklessness

          The second aspect is that I have described as

BAEABL
         decide that there was in fact negligence

         substantial cause of death.   Even if you

         or even a high degree of negligence, that

         is not sufficient for you to bring in a

         verdict of unlawfully killed against a person

         whose conduct you are considering.    You have

         to go on to the heart of the matter which is

         the definition of recklessness.    The point

         about this definition is that y ou have to

         be satisfied on three things basically:-



         1. That there is an obvious and serious

            risk of injury.   The definition includes

            the word both obvious and serious and you

            have to be satisfied on both.     In

            considering thisd you have to put yourself

            into the position of the people with their

            1989 prior to the accounts of the disaster,

            and you have to ask yourself the question

            whether on that day there was an obvious

            and serious risk of injury. In a recent

            case in the Crown Court arising out of

            the Zebruggen disaster, Mr. Justice Turner

             in one place said "obviously we are

             talking about a risk and no-body denies

             there was a risk.   It is the application

             of the word 'obvious ' that is troubling




BAEABL
                       19




          me and has been troubling me for a long

           time.    Obvious        it operates that

           it will be a serious risk.    I quite follow

           but obvious that will occur is the

           problem". If you think about it that is

           in many respects precisely the problem

           which one is faced in this instance.

           In the course of the ruling Mr. Justice

           Turner quotes the various comments on the

           use of the word 'obviously' and he quotes

           various Counsel who describe their

           understanding of the word 'obvious' as

           meaning perfectly evident, staring one in

           the face, immediately apparent.     He

           distinguishes the words 'obvious' and'

           'serious' from being synonymes of

           reasonably foreseeable. Even if you are

           satisfied that there is an obvious and

           serious risk you are not yet home and

           dry because you have to ask the next

            question namely, did the defendent

           recognise the risk and decide to go

           ahead and take it, or was he indifferent

           to it.     In order to avoid any misunder

            standing Lord Justice Watkins then adds

            "that mere failure to recognise the

            presence of such a risk is not sufficient .

         were to take the view that that officer whoever



BAEABL
                 -   20   -




         In other words, he is drawing the

         distinction, as I see it, between a person

         who may well be negligent and in that sense

         liable say to civil penalties or damages

         but whose state of mind does not meet

         the criteria required of recklessness

         which despite the reputation is either

         a recognition of the risk and decision

         to take it or an indifference to such risk-

         There are two further aspects to this.

         Firstly, in considering these aspects

         of recklessness there is a very interesting

         case which was decided by the Privy Council

         and in which one of the Law Lords, known as

         Lord Ruskill gave the leading judgement (I

         explain that Privy Council judgements are

         not binding in English courts, but clearly

         have persuasive authority). This particular

         involved the collision of two hydrofoils

         in Hong Kong in bright clear daylight.

         Lord Ruskill having quoted extensively

         from Lord Diplock.   Lord Diplock goes on

         to say "Their Lordships emphasised that

         in this passage Lord Diplock was speaking

         of an obvious and serious risk of causing

         physical injury created by the defendent.

         He was not there concerned to deal with




BAEABL
            -   21   -


         state of knowledge of the 15th of April

         cases where the conduct complained of

         was of a defendent's re-action or

         lack of re-action to such a risk created by

         another person".
         You will see that that passage in some way

         mirrors what I have already indicated to

         you regarding crisis situations and it

         seems to me that you would be entitled to

         take into account all the circumstances

         applicable.     This point is backed up

         to a certain extent by another Lord, Lord

         Edmund Davis in R - v Cauldwell who says

         "in the absence of             factors, the

         defendents state of mind is therefore all

         important where recklessness is an element

         in the offence charged".     In other words,

         if there are no excuses which are

         legitimate and proper, then a state of mind

         is the all important factor.

         One of the interesting features of the

         Hillsborough disaster from a legal point

         point of view is the difference between

         this and many of the ot her disasters which

         have u n f ortunatgely occurred in recent

          times.     For instance you think of the

          Zebruggen Disaster (passengers killed on a

          ship which sailed with open bow doors or




BAEABL
                 -   22




         the Kegworth Disaster when an engine

         caught fire and the wrong engine was

         switched off or the Lockerbie Disaster

         where a bomb was placed on an aircraft

         or some of the train accidents which

         have recently occured or the Manchester

         Air Disaster)-    In all of these the people

         who were killed were in a sense entirely

         helpless.   They had nothing whatever to

         do with the flying of the planes, running

         of the trains, the sailing of the ship,

         operation of the bow doors.     In the

         Hillsborough     Disaster the position is

         slightly different in that there is a

         very active interplay between all the

         parties involved, and not least the

         situation outside the turnstile area

         and possibly even the situation within or

         on the terraces.

         If you have got this far you are not

         entirely home and dry yet because you have

         to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt

         that the recklessness which you are

         considering is attributable to one

         single person.     What this means is that

         you may not aggregate or add together the

         acts of different people and then




BAEABL
            -   23




         attrribute what you perceive to be an

         act of recklessness when taken all together

         to one particular individual.   Each person

         stands on his own and you have to be

         satisfied on the evidence that the

         ingredients and grounds of the offence

         have been made out.

         This is not to say that you cannot in fact

         have more than one person who might be

         liable to a charge of manslaughter or

         indeed the finding of unlawfully killed,

         For example if two or three people attack

         one individual and they all individually

         inflict wounds which are sufficiently

         severe as to constitute a substantial

         cause of death, the fact that they may

         be three wounds, each one of which on

         its own would have been sufficient to

         kill the victim does not absolve two

         of the assailants.    All three, for

         their individual act may be held

         responsible, because each one, taken

         on its own would satisfy the

         definition of the offence of murder

         or manslaughter as the case may be

         Finally, and I do not need to spend

         time on this, if you were to find




BAEABL
                   -   27




                                           Each person

         stands on his own and you have to be

         satisfied on the evidence that the

         ingredients have been made out-



         This is not to say that you cannot in fact

         have more than one person who might be

         liable to the finding of

         unlawfully killed.

         For example if two or three people attack

         one individual and they all individually

         inflict wounds which are sufficiently

         severe as to constitute a substantial

         cause of death, the fact that there may

         be three wounds, each one of which on

         its own would have been sufficient to

         kill the victim does not absolve two

         of the assailants.   All three, for

         their individual act may be held

         responsible, because each one, taken

         on its own would satisfy the

         definition of the offence of murder

         or manslaughter as the case may be

         Finally, and I do not need to spend

         time on this, if you were to find

         the verdict of unlawfully killed under




BAEABL
                   - 29   -


         the same way as if the company were an

         individual.   It follows that the only

         issue which you have to decide is what or

         who is the directing mind of the company.

         The position seems to be that not every

         employee of the company would fulfil that

         term but that a director or senior manager

         who has the running of the affairs of the

         company would fulfil those criteria.

         As it happens in this particular inquest,

         we have different forms of companies which

         I do not think you need to be too concerned

         about but by way of example you might be

         prepared to take the view for instance

         that Dr. Eastwood whose company is known

         as Eastwood & Partner would constitute

         such a person in respect of his company,

         probably Mr. Mackrell in respect of

         Sheffield Wednesday.

         I am very mcuh more doubtful as to whether

         it would be possible for you to reach the

         conclusion that Mr. Bounds was sufficiently

         elevated to constitute a directing mind and

         will of Sheffield City Council and you

         should also remember that all the rules

         which I have outlined here apply including

         the rules against aggregating.

         If you come to the conclusion that




BAEABL
