                                                                                        M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised   ^^    ^   ^ ^       _____     Number


T itle                                                 < X ) ^ iQ   .               T r t O V iA 'S

?(I rfclude source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                      Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                               Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                      Indexer
 Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                          O /M         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                  Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


             DAVID LEONARD THOMAS




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                       On

               23rd April,    1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.'L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                    ISDEX
                                                                Page

                    B                                              1
                        OPEWING STATEHEriT BY THE CORONER


                        DR. J. C. CLARK Called

                           By The Coroner


                        PET. SGT. G. J. ticCOMBIS Called

                           By The Coroner


                        PET. IUS P.   LAYTQH Called

                    D      By The Coroner                          6
                           Cross-exaatiined b y Mr. Catchpole      7




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        23rd January, 1990


                           INOUEST INTO THE DEATH OF DAVID LEONARD THOMAS


                             MR FRASER:    Sir, the final Inquest for you to
                        deal with today relates to David Thomas.   itis family
                        have instructed solicitors and they are a member of my
                        group and therefore I represent them tnrougn the agency
                    B   of the Steering Committee. iir. and Mrs. Thomas are not
                        present in Court, nor I understand, sir, is any member
                        of David's family.   I am here to assist in any way I
                        can.
                             THE CORONER:   They are part of tne group, is that
                        right, did you say?
                    C        HR FRASER:      They are sir, yes.

                             TilE CORO HER:   Well I am not going to repeat what
                        I have already said for all the families who are not
                        here but that, of course, goes for this family as well.
                        I don't want anybody to feel pressurised into coining or
                        that they are not doing their duty, so to speak, or the
                    D   right thing.    It is entirely for everybody, now they
                        can cope v/ith situations.

                             This then, is the resumed Inquest which was opened
                        on 19th April, 1989, and on that occasion Mail Anthony
                        Parkin, the Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                             “The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
                    E        been identified to PC 700 Helliwell of the South
                             Yorksnire Police as that of David Leonard Thomas,
                             by Henry Ormond Thomas, his father.  He was 23
                             years of age, having been born on 14th ilay, 1965,
                             at Birkenhead.  He was a single man and he lived
                             at                                    Birkenhead.
                             He was a joiner by occupation.
                    F        He died at the Northern General Hospital following
                             an incident at the Hillsborough Football Ground on
                             Saturday 15th April, 1989.    PC Helliwell caused
                             the body to be reiTioved to the Hedico-Legal Centre
                             and there he identified it to Detective Constable
                             Simon Weigold, who subsequently identified the
                             same body to Prof. Usher and Dr. Clark.    It is the
                             family wish that the body should be cremated."
                    G
                        and the Inquest was then adjourned.I did not write     it
                        on this particular sheet of paper but that is what
                        happened, and I heard from Henry Thomas, the father, on
                        30tn April, 1989, and in effect he confirmed that the
                        particulars were right, 14 5 65 being the date of
                        birth.  The only thing -- yes, joiner.    We put self-
                    H
                                                -   1 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       DR.   J.   C.   CLARK



                             es'fvployed joiner but I think we will just stick to
                             joiner.
                                  The alcohols were measured in this case in the
                             usual way and the level was 48 rag. per 100 ml.

                                        DR. JOHN CHALMERS CLARK Called:

                                                 By THE CORONER:
                    B             THE WITNESS:   Dr. Joiin Clark, Forensic
                             Pathologist, University of Glasgow.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   flow you did the post mortem on this
                             young man, who was identified to you as David Leonard
                             Thomas} and I think he was case number 90, is that
                             right? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

                        0. And you are quite satisfied that the examination which
                           you are now going to recount to ;ae relates to this
                           young raan? - A. Yes.

                        0. And you did this, in fact, on the Monday rooming? - A.
                           On the iionday, that is right, yes, the 17th.

                    D   0. Dr. Clark, in the way that you are getting used to, I
                           suppose, would you tell me about this post mortem? - A.
                           The cause of death was, as with the others, crusn
                           asphyxia.   lie had moderate signs of asphyxia - sorry,
                           fairly marked signs of asphyxia in his face, and also
                           internally.    The usual congestion and blueness of the
                           face and petechial haemorrhages, and this was
                           consistent with his chest having been crushed
                    E      preventing him f r o m breathing.

                                  There were a number of cninor injuries on his face,
                             saall grazes, and one on nis right foot, but no
                             internal damage whatsoever, and no other injuries, and
                             he was not suffering from any natural disease which
                             could have played any part in his death.

                        Q. I can't remember whether you said it, but there was
                           quite a bit of regurgitated foodstuff, I think, in this
                           particular case? - A. Yes, sorry, he did have vomit in
                           the airways and this had caused sosae haesnorrhage into
                           the lungs, so clearly the inhalation had occurred prior
                           to death.

                                  THE CORONER:     Are there any questions?

                                  Hi! FRASER:    The family have no questions, sir,
                             thank you.
                                  THE CORONER:   As this is the last Inquest today
                             is there any reason why Dr. Clark cannot leave us? You
                             don't want to see him again, do you, this afternoon?
                H
                                                    -   2 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                     Pit. J. C. CLARK
                                                                      G. J. HcCOiiBIE


                        Q. Or. Clack you are welcome to say. - A. I will wait
                           until the end.

                                 THE CORONER:    Okay.

                                         GRAHAti JOHN HcCOMBIE Called:

                                                3y THE CORONER:
                    B             THE WITNESS:   Graham John HcCombie, Detective
                             Sergeant, West Midlands Police.  I have already taken
                             the oatn, sir.
                        0.        THE CORONER:   Yes, can you take us through the
                             summary, please? - A. Sir, at about 1030 a.m. on
                             Saturday 15th April, 1989, Oavid Leonard Thomas
                             travelled from Liverpool to Sheffield witn some
                             friends, Christopher Traynor, Martin Traynor, Stephen
                             Edwards and Pavid Ledsom, also Albert Ledsom. Of this
                             party Christopher and Martin Traynor also lost their
                             lives. They travelled together in a vehicle that they
                             had hired.  It was their intention to watch the FA Cup
                             Semi Final at Hillsborough.

                    D             The party arrived in Sheffield at about 1430
                             having stopped en route at a public house where they
                             had a couple of pints of beer to drink.

                                   After parking the vehicle a short distance away
                             from the ground Oavid, Martin and Christopher Traynor
                             made their way to the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.
                             They each iiad a ticket for the Leppings Lane terrace,
                    E        whilst the remainder of the party had stand tickets.
                             They were last seen in Leppings Lane at about quarter-
                             to-3.
                                  As a result of the severe crushing in the Leppings
                             Lane terrace Ambulancemen Anthony Boyington and Graham
                             Smith were directed to the Hillsborough Stadium.   they
                             made their way to the Penistone Road entrance to the
                             ground near to the gymnasium.  Upon arrival
                             Ambulanceman Boyington saw a man, who he believes to be
                             the deceased Oavid Thomas, being carried on an
                             advertising hoarding by persons who have not been
                             identified.  David was placed into the rear of the
                             ambulance where he was examined by Ambulanceman
                             Boyington who unsuccessfully attempted to resuscitate
                             him. Ambulanceman Boyington formed the opinion that
                             Pavid was dead.  A second casualty who was unconscious
                             by still breathing was also placed in the rear of the
                             ambulance and as a result the crew went directly to the
                             Northern General Hospital.

                                  Upon arrival at the hospital the ambulance crew
                             were met by a number of hospital staff, including a
                             Consultant, Or. James W'ardrope, who was attempting to
                H
                                                  -   3 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    G.   J.   HcCOMBI E


                          triage the casualties.  The live casualty was taken to
                          the resuscitation room and Mr. Thomas was taken to the
                          orthopaedic plaster room which was being used as a
                          temporary mortuary.

                               At about 1600 hours Dr. Janet Doore examined Mr.
                          Thomas in tha temporary mortuary at the Northern
                          General Hospital and certified life extinct.

                               At about 1945 hours Police Constable 700 ilelliwell
                    B     attended at the Northern General Hospital where he
                          assumed responsibility for the body of David Thomas.
                          PC Ilelliwell accompanied the body from the hospital to
                          the gymnasium at the Hillsborough Stadium, where the
                          temporary mortuary had been set up.

                               At 0255 hours on Sunday 16th April Hr. Henry
                          Ormond Thomas identified the body of his son to PC
                          Helliwell.  The identification was done in the
                          temporary mortuary.

                                PC Helliwell later escorted the body to the
                           Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                           DC Ueigold.
                    D           On Monday 17th April, following identification by
                           DC Ueigold, Dr. Clark carried out an autopsy and
                           submitted a report giving the cause of deatii.

                                Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                           blood sample from the deceased where the presence of
                           ethanol was detected. The witnesses providing
                           continuity of the blood sample are DC Thomas Bardell,
                    E      DS John Turner, DS James Fletcher. The analysis was
                           carried out by Dr. Forrest.

                                Found in the personal effects of David Thomas was
                           a full ticket for the semi final match but in the
                           circumstances it cannot be established exactly how or
                           when he entered the stadium.

                        Q. I think in the summary which you have presented you say
                           they were last seen at 1445? - A. That is correct, sir.
                           That time is actually mentioned in tyo statements and
                           the critical time would appear to be 2.40, 2.45.

                        Q. And in fact in one of them, David Ledsora's, page 4 ....
                           - A. Yes, sir.

                        0. He says, "Christopher, Martin and David decided to go
                           to a nearby chip shop and we went to our seated areas
                           and that was the last occasion that we saw them. That
                           must have been at about 2.45"? - A. That is correct,
                           sir.
                        0. So at that point they were intending to get something
                           to eat? - A. Yes, sir.
                    H
                                                -   4
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    G.   J.   M cCO ildlE


                        Q. Chips, I presume.  You don't, of course, know whether
                           that was ever achieved? - A. No, sir.

                        0. Or indeed whether they persisted with that intention? -
                           A. Correct.
                        Q. And in fact, if you turn to page 30 for a moment, that
                           is Sir. Uardrope1s ~ I think you called him Doctor ,
                           but in fact I think he is actually a "Mister", not that
                           it patters very much ....
                    B
                                THE CORONER:   When you are young, and you go to
                           medical school the one thing that you long for is to
                           become a doctor, or indeed even if you are old or
                           older, and then as soon as you become a doctor, if you
                           take up surgery you long to become a mister again, so
                           it is just convention in the medical profession.
                           Surgeons are listers and doctors are doctors,
                    C      physicians are doctors, and he is a mister actually.

                        0. But page 30, he refers to David Thomas, doesn't he? -
                           A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. Humber 63, and he says that there was no evidence of
                           any resuscitative attempts in respect of this young
                    D      man? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        0. And on page 11, that is Anthony Boyington's evidence,
                           paragraph 13, that seems to be borne out because he
                           says they were told by somebody to take tne patient to
                           the orthopaedic clinic, which was the temporary
                           mortuary? - A. That is correct, sir.

                    E           THE CORONER:   Did you understand the word
                           "triage"? Do you know what it means? If not I will
                           explain it in a moment.

                        0. Because you used it, didn't you? - A. That is right.

                        0. Are you able to explain it or shall I do it? - A. I can
                           put it in layman's terms, sir.
                    F
                        0. yell go on, do that, because it will be easier to
                           understand. - A. fly interpretation of it is Mr.
                           Uardrope was present at the front doors as the
                           ambulances were arriving and was trying to sort those
                           out who most seriously needed medical attention, i.e.,
                           if you turned up there with a broken arm you were put
                           to the back of the queue.   If you turned up there and
                    G      you were not breathing then obviously you went to tne
                           front of the queue.

                                THE CORONER:   Actually you divide into three
                           basically.  Those who need treatment but who are not
                           urgent; those who are on the face of it beyond help,
                           you don't treat those either; and then you have got the
                           group in the middle who are serious and where you think
                    H
                                                -   5 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                 11.   LAYTON


you can do some good, and that is where you concentrate
the effort. Of course, if you have got thousands of
doctors you don't need to be so particular about
triaging, but the bigger the disaster the more
important your triaging becomes because you want to
save the saveable people, but you might, of course,
sacrifice somebody in the process.    It happens in
battle, that is where it cosies from.

     I have got no further questions, but what about
you, iir- Fraser, any questions?

     MR FRASER:   No, sir, David's family have no
questions, thank you.

     Tllli CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed.

          PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTOK Called:

                      By THE CORONER;

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector, West Midlands Police.   Sir, an examination
has been made of visual evidence in respect of David
and there is an unconfirtned identification of David in
the enclosure referred to as number 3. Two friends of
David, Christopher Traynor and Martin Traynor, who also
were amongst those that died, have been identified as
being in enclosure 3 as well.

     Ambulanceman Anthony Boyington has viewed visual
evidence, and from photographs of the deceased and his
clothing ha believes that David is the person tnat ne
transported to the Northern General Hospital. The
Ambulanceman has signed a plan of the rear of the North
Stand, indicating the approximate location at which he
first came into contact with David, and that is
reference AB1.
     At this stage the family have declined to actually
view visual evidence.

     THE CORONER:   And that, incidentally, is also
perfectly fair because not everybody wants to look.        I
quite understand that too.

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, can I refer you to a plan
which I have given the reference number ;iWJL125 to,
which is a plan of the terraces and indicates the
possible location of David on the terraces?

     THE CORONER:   Can I just give you the "C" number,
C64. - A. And then a further plan, sir, which is
referenced MWJL141. This is based on a handwritten
plan of Mr. Boyington's, so it is not to scale.  Sir,
the position identified is approximate in terms of at
the rear of the stand.
                                                                            M.   LAYTON


                        0. Yes, and this is Co5. On this plan Mr. Boyington was
                           trying to snow the location of his ambulance, wasn t
                           he, basically? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

                                (Tha witness referred to the large scale plan)

                             Sir, if we can refer to HWJL125, this is enclosure
                             number 3 and tha approximate location for the
                             unconfirmed identification is in that location there.
                             Sir, in respect of MWJL141, the position approximately
                    B        at which Mr. Boyington's ambulance is located is in
                             this area here. He actually describes in nis statement
                             a process of coming, I believe, tnrough tnis entrance,
                             but the point which he has marked on his plan is in
                             this area here.

                        0. Yes, I suppose it is conceivable that he has marked it
                           wrongly and that he is a little bit higher up nearer to
                    C      the gymnasium? - A. I think that is quite possible,
                           sir, but that is the point that we have referred to in
                           relation to this plan.

                        0. From our point of view what we are trying to prove is
                           that the ambulance was in that area? - A. It was, sir,
                           yes.
                    D
                        q. Show again where you think he has marked it on his
                             drawing? - A. This area here, sir.

                        q. That is right, thank you.    That is sort of adjacent to
                             the North Stand so they are in between the North Stand
                             and the Spion Kop? - A. Yes, sir.

                    E             THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser, any questions?

                                  MR FRASER:     No, thank you, sir.

                                       Cross-examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

                        q. Uas the unconfirmed identification by video or on a
                             photograph? - A. It was on a photograph, sir, and it
                    F        was a Daily Hirror photograph, which as you are aware
                             is not timed.

                        0.        THE CORONER:   This is on the terraces? - A. On
                             the terraces, yes, sir.
                        0.         HR. CATCHPOLE:   And it is the same photograph,
                             the one where Christopher and Martin Traynor are
                    G        identified?, or wera they identified on other material?
                             - a . Ho, it is different material.

                        q. Is that timed by any chance? - A. Certainly in respect
                             of one case.  In fact, as you are aware, they are
                             brothers.  In respect of one case, from memory, there
                             is visual material which I believe is timed.  In
                    H
                                                    -   7 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                               M.   LAYTOil



respect of the other brother I think we will be relying
on plans.  That is from memory.

     THE CORONER:   Well if you make a note of it, you
can cross-link it when we get to the Traynors, if it is
linkable, that is. Is there anything else?   (Ho
response)
      Now that is all the evidence we are going to take
in this case.   It is another youngster, isn't it, and
it is very, very sad that this should have happened to
hi,n and to the family, that they should have suffered
this very grievous loss.

     Now, we have actually done well from a time point
of view, but no pro/nises, as I said last week. Things
may not always go like this.   It depends entirely upon
what coaes up. So we are going to rise ina minute or
two andthen we are going to start again at 9.30.

      (The Coroner addressed a Member of the Jury.) Now
you, when you know what is happening, if you make sure
you let    ray Officers know. Give us as much notice as
you can    so that we can try and see what we can do to
facilitate your personal problem, but also of course to
avoid upsetting the families, the lawyers and everybody
else.   tie will" do what we can.  Please remember uie to
your wife.
     Ladies and gentlemen, before we rise, are you
content, happy with things, how they are? Okay. Then
let us adjourn until tomorrow morning at 9.30. Thank
you all for coming.


 (The Inquest into the death of DAVID LEONARD THOMAS
        was adjourned to a date to be fixed)
