                                                                                       M I R . 15



                                                                        6L
                                                                                                                )W
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised                               Number


T itle                            >                                                                          &3.C^QD
 Include source and any document number if relevant)


^Receiv/er's instructions - urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                  Receiver




                                                                                                                    Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                                         -



                                                                                                              Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                    Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                         O/M         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)



      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

   VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



          INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                 BARRY GLOVER




                     Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B .M E D .Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

           (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

          The Medico-Legal Centre,
               Watery Street,
                 Sheffield.

                       On

                3rd May, 1990.




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER             Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                          Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH              Medical and Dental Union of
                          Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                          Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN          Trent Regional Health Authority and
                          South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                          Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS             Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                               INDEX TO TRATTSCRIPT

                                                                               P a^e N o»



                             TW TTTP C O R O N E R .........................

                    B   OFFICII GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called

                             B-v THE CORONER .............................        b

                             B y MR. FRASER ..............................        7

                             Bv MR.

                        police   xtjci*CCTOR   MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                             By THE CORONER                                       9
                             Bv I-'R. LIMB ........ ........................     10



                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




J. L. Harpham Ltd
3 rd Nay,    1990


             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF BARRY GLOVER

      MR. FRASER:   Sir, you will now hear evidence relating
to Ba.rry Glover#   Sir, Barry’s wife, Steplmnie, a.nd his
mother and step-father are in Court behind me.     Sir,
the practice \-;hich represents them is a. member of my
Group and I, therefore, appear on behalf of that practice
as an agent through the Steering Committee in the usual
way .

      TEE CORONER:      Good afternoon.   It is Stephanie, is
it?

      MRS. S. GLOVER:      Yes.

      THE CORONER:   Let me just explain to you the format,
the shape, in which the Inquest is going to be conducted
so that you can follow it more easily.   First of all, I
am going" to read to you what happened on the 18th April,
1989 which was when I sat in this chair, in fact, and I
dealt with the position about releasing the body so that
you could have the funeral when you were able to arrange
it. Then I am going to tell you about any corrections
that need to be made and then I will tell you what Dr.
Forrest said with regard to the blood alcohol levels.
TJhen that has been completed Prof. Usher xirill be here,
hopefully, and he will give evidence about the pathology.
Then we are going to turn to the West Midlands Police
Officers and they will take me through a summary - one
Officer through the statements, so to speak, and then
Inspector Layton will deal with the visual evidence.
He will describe it and he will refer to plans and give
numbers and things. It is a bit confusing when that
happens but sit tight because in a moment or two he
then comes round here and he shows us on these big plans
what he is talking about and it all becomes very much
clearer. When that is finished, we will terminate the
evidence at that stage.

     This is the resumed Inquest which was opened on the
18th April, 1 9 8 9 * On that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin
Acting Coroner1s Officer, said:

            "The body which is the subject of this
            Inquest has been identified to PC I7 S5
            Cheetham of the South Yorkshire Police
            as that of Barry Glover by George Glover,
            his father. He was 2 7 years of age having
            been born on the 30tli March, 1962 at Bury
            in Lancashire. lie was a married man and
            he lived at
            Bury, Lancashire. He was a greengrocer
            by occupation. He died at Hillsborough
            Football Ground following an incident



                             -1 -
                                                                         PROF. A. USHER



                                     there on Saturday, 1 5 th April, 1989*
                                     PC 1785 Cheetham caused the body to
                                     be removed to the Medico Legal Centre
                                     and there he identified it to Detective
                                     Constable Simon Ueigold who subsequently
                                     identified the same body to Prof. Usher.
                                     It is the family wish that the body
                                     should be cremated."
                    B
                               And then, Stephanie, I wrote to you - I do not
                          know if you can remember but I did - on the 26th
                          April and you signed the form which I had sent to you
                          because I was asking you to check that everything was
                          right and, in fact, I think we did get it right but I
                          am^told that I have said it is in Lancashire and
                          apparently it is in Greater Manchester. TJliere is
                          Bury?
                                  I'IRS. S. GLOVER:      It is debateable really.    We
                          are on the border.
                                  THE CORONER:        Well, are you happy with Lancashire?

                    D             MRS. S. GLOVER:        Yes.
                               THE CORONER:   What about you, Mr. Fraser? Are
                          you going to advise me differently about the ....

                                MR. FRASER:        I could not care less where it is.
                           (Laughter)
                    E           THE CORONER:   It is just Barry, no other names,
                           that is right, is it not?

                                  MRS. S. GLOVER:        Yes.

                               THE CORONER:   Dr. Forrest measured the blood
                          alcohol levels, including those of Barry, and he told
                          us all about them on the first day when we resumed,
                          that is, two weeks and a day ago now, and as far as
                          your husband was concerned the result was 138 mg/100 ml
                          of blood.

                                                 PROF. ALAN USHER Called:

                                                       By THE CORONER:
                        Q. Prof. Usher, when you are ready, we are ready.
                                TI-IE CORONER: Prof. Usher has   already takenthe
                           oath so he I can tell you that it is Prof. Alan Usher:
                        Q. That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.
                        Q. Home Office Pathologist and Prof. of Forensic Medicine
                H          here in Sheffield? - A. Yes.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
Prof. TJsher, let me jrist turn to the page. You are
going to talk to me now, and to us, aborit the young
man by the name of Barry Glover, is that right? -
A. Yes, he was identified by the number 62.
Can you tell me what }rour findings were, please? -
A. The bod}?- I examined was that of a slim, fairly
muscularly-fouilt young white male, 169 eras in height
and weighing 68 kgs. lie bore a number of tatoos on
his arms. There were several minor scratches and
grases and the body had the typical appearance of a
case of traumatic asphyxia both internall}?- and
externally and again there was a little right-sided
dilatation of the heart.
            In my view he was normall}?- developed and
reasonably healthy. I found no natural disease which
would have caused or contributed to his death
significantly and I believe he had a normal expectation
of life for his age. He died from traumatic asphyxia
which means that he was placed in a position where he
was unable to move the walls of his chest because he
was, in fact, so hemmed in and, when that happens,
people, once the chest is fixed, lose consciousness
after a matter of seconds, somewhere between 10 and
20 seconds, though he would not die for several
minutes, probably between four and six minutes, once
the chest had become fixed.

But he would not know what was going on? - A. No, he
would be unconscious.
                                                      PROP. A. USKBR
                                                      G.    SVAUS




     THIS CORONER:  The only other thing which interests
me, forgive me, on this - in this peLrticular instance
it is right-sided dilatation. In the previous case we
had loft-sided. Does it make any difference to the ....
A. I think we had both, sir.

Perhaps I had forgotten. - A. But the heart was the
normal weight.

               IIR. ERASER:     Ho que stions, sir.

               MR. LIMB:      No, thank you.

               MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, thank you.

     THE CORONER:    Prof. Usher, thanlc you very much.
I think yoti arc in one more this afternoon, are you not? -
i \x •   j. y"'
            O-\ CoT* #


So we will see you again in a few minutes? - A. Thanlc you.

               OFFICER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called:

                              B y THE CORONER:

Yes? - A. Geraldine Elizabeth Evans, Officer of the
Uest Midlands Police.

Yes, when you are ready? - A. At about 1030 hours on
Saturday,. 15"fch April, 1989* Mrs. Stephanie Margaret
Glover saw her husband, Barry Glover, leave their
family home. It was his intention to meet his father,
George Glover, and then travel to Sheffield to watch
the FA Cup Semi Final football match at the
Hillsborough Stadium.

At 1100 hours Mr. George Glover met his son, Barry,
and a number of friends, Jeffrey Lee Collinge, Peter
Rodgers and Ian Arthur Tyson. The five of them
travelled together to Sheffield in Mr. Tyson*s motor
vehicle, stopping en route for refreshments.
                        The party arrived in Sheffield sometime between 1400
                        hours and 1 ^ 3 0 liours and, after parking the vehicle
                        approximately one and a half miles          from the
                        Hillsborough Stadium started to walk to the ground.
                        Upon arrival at the Leppings Lane entrance to the
                        stadium they joined the mass of people waiting to
                        enter. Within a short time Gate C was opened and all
                        five persons entered the football ground through Gate
                    B   C. Shortly prior to this Mr. George Glover had become
                        separated from Barry and that was the last time that
                        he saw him alive.

                        Jeffrey Collinge, Peter Rodgers and Barry entered the
                        tunnel together but, as they emerged onto the
                        terracing, there was a terrific surge from behind and
                        all three of them became separated. This surge was
                    C   about 15 0 0 hours.

                        A John Lawrence Peter Simons is a Liverpool supporter
                        and also attend the Cup Semi Final football match at
                        Hillsborough that day. After entering the ground
                        through Gate C he took up his position in Enclosure 3
                        011 the terrace. Following the severe crushing in the
                        terracing John Simons found himself on the pitch after
                    D   assisting to pass a number of apparently dead persons
                        from Enclosure 3 onto the pitch. There he saw a man
                        who he now knows to be Barry Glover lying to the
                        right side of the Leppings Lane goal when facing the
                        Uest Stand. Barry appeared to be, at that stage,
                        dead. Hr. Simons placed Barry onto a hoarding and
                        then covered his face with his sweater. Together with
                        a number of persons Mr. Simons carried Barry to the
                    E   Spion Kop end of the ground where they placed him
                        on the pitch next to a number of other casualties.
                        Mr. Simons then went to assist other persons.

                        Shortly after 1506 hours Police Constable Cheetham
                        made his way onto the pitch where he saw a Dr. William
                        Purcell, who is known to him, attempting to resuscitate
                    F   a man who he now knows to be Barry. The doctor gave
                        Barry mouth to mouth for what appeared to be about
                        five minutes but then stopped and informed PC Cheetham
                        that Barry was dead, Barry was lying on the pitch
                        towards the Spion Ifop end of the ground.  PC Cheetham,
                        together with others who have not been identified,
                        carried Barry into the gymnasium where a. temporary
                        mortuary had been set up.
                    G
                        Dr. William Purcell attended on the pitch and assisted
                        a number of casualties. However, he is unable to
                        identify these persons. He was assisted by Mr. David
                        Edward Evans, a Charge Nurse, who recalls that they
                        did treat a male, without success, near to the Spion
                        Kop. Mr, Evans believes this may have been about
                        1    hours.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                              -5 -
                                                                   r*
                                                                   vt#   t? #   n'^rAivTC
                                                                                -U v - o




                          At 1600 hours Dr. Colin David Welsh examined Barry
                          in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                          At about 0330 hours on Sunday, 16 th April, 19 & 9 1
                          Mr. George Glover and his sister-in-law, Patricia
                          Glover, identified the body of Barry to Police
                          Constable Cheetham in the temporary mortuary at the
                          gymnasium.
                    B
                           PC Cheetham later escorted the body of Bari’y to the
                           Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification
                           to DC WeigoId.

                          On Monday, 17 th April, 1 9 8 9 , following identification
                          by DC Weigold, Prof. Alan Usher carried out an autopsy
                          and submitted a report giving the cause of death.

                          Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                          blood sample from Barry where the presence of ethanol
                          was detected. The witnesses providing continuity of
                          the blood sample are Detective Constable Winfield,
                          Detective Sergeants Turner and Fletcher, and Dr.
                          Alexander Robert Forrest carried out the analysis on
                          the blood sample.
                    D
                           Found in the personal effects of Barry was a full
                           ticket for the semi final football match which is
                           consistent with his entry to the stadium via Gate C.

                                This concludes niy summary, sir.

                    E      I just want to check ---- I think it is this point in
                           paragraph 6 about PC Chcetham shortly after 1 5 0 6 , I
                           think that is right probably as far as it goes but,
                           because of the way the summary has been written, it
                           implies that ho saw Dr. Purcell straightaway. That,
                           in fact, 1 think is wrong, is it not? There were
                           quite a lot of things happened inbetween? - A. Yes,
                           sir.

                        Q. On page 36 he says,

                                "I eventually came to a man lying on the
                                pitch being tended by Dr. Purcell."

                           That is right, is it not? - A. Yes, sir, that is correct,

                        Q. And, in fact, the 1506 I cannot find.         I found him
                           saying,

                                "A short time after 3 o'clock we were
                                informed we had to go to Leppings Lane"

                           but is the space perhaps from his description of the
                           game having finished somewhere? - A. I think possibly,
                H          sir, the sequence of events and possibly casualties
                           that he dealt with inbetween at that time has been
                           arrived.
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                 -6 -
                                                                                          (




                                                                     G. E. EVA-NG


                                  THE CORONER:     Yes, I do not think it is too
                             serious a point.

                                                 3v UR. FRASER:

                        Q. Can you just go back to paragraph 3 about halfway down?
                           The sentence reads:

                                     "Upon arrival at the Leppings Lane
                    B                entrance to the stadium they joined
                                     the mass of people waiting to enter.
                                     Within a short time Gate C was opened ....”

                             Is it possible to put, with any degree of accuracy, what
                             time they arrived and joined that mass? I appreciate
                             they arrived in Sheffield between 2 and 2.30 but is
                             the time they arrived outside the ground available?

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Can I help you? Have a look at page
                             h t George Glover's evidence,second paragraph, last line.
                             That iswhere he talks about    parking. Thiswas about
                             2.30. He parked in a school, I think? - A.Yes, sir,
                             a school car park.

                        Q. And then they had to walk to the ground.        I think that
                    D      is right? - A. That is correct, yes.

                        Q. And I do not think he mentions another time but let us
                           have a look at page 13? - A. There is no time there,
                           sir. Page 16, sir, if you refer to the bottom paragraph.

                        Q. Yes, this is Peter Rodgers, is it not? - A. That is
                    E      correct. It says,

                                     "We a.rrived at about 2,30 p.m. in a
                                     school yard that was set aside for
                                     parking. This was about one mile
                                     from the ground. The five of us
                                     walked to the football ground arriving
                                     at about 2.45 p.m."

                        Q.    He does not then give any further times, does he? -
                             A. No, sir.

                        Q. On page 22, I think, there is another statement by Ian
                           Arthur Tyson? - A. Yes, he further states that they
                           arrived in Sheffield at that time ** *.

                        Q.    He says 2.1 5 ? - A. 2.1 5 and the school wasabout 15
                             minutes* walk from the ground.

                        Q. And he actually did not go with them, did he? lie
                           fell behind? - A. He was held up for about ten minutes.

                        Q. And lie did not see them again so he will not be able
                           to say what time it was. ~ A. No.
                    H
                                  THE CORONER:     This is as much as we are going

J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                      -7 -
                                                                     G. E. EVANS



                              to find, 1 think.

                                   MR. FRASER:   It was just to get an impression
                              of how long it took to walk from where the car had
                              been parked until they reached outside the ground
                              and I have that, sir, thank you.

                                                  By MU. LIMB:
                    B
                         Q.        MR. LIMB:   Sir, I do not want to persist unduly
                              with paragraph 3 of* the summary, is there though any­
                              thing in the statements that have been taken which
                              givos an indication as to which opening of Gate C
                              afforded entry to Bari^ and his friends that went
                              with him?

                                   TITS CORONER:  I suspect that is what Mr. Fraser
                              was trying to find out as well.

                                   MR. FRASER:     No, I was not, sir.

                                   MR. LIMB:    His enquiries seemed to be more
                              directed to the t ime of arrival at the outside of
                    J)        the ground.

                                   THE CORONER:    We will just have a look and see.
                              Page 17, we- will try that. He does not give a time
                              but wo know that already. He says,

                                      "These ga.tes were opened. I do not
                                      know who by and I was more-or-less
                    E                 carried in by the rush."

                              And page 13 ---- that is Peter Rodgers so that you
                              know who said that ... *

                                   THE WITNESS:     There is page 2j as well, sir,
                              third paragraph.

                                   THE CORONER: Page 1 3 , Jeffrey Colling   says
                              that after about five minutes,

                                      " .... the large metal   ite : ,
                                                                     rere­
                                      opened by the Police and I went
                                      into a yard and into the ground"

                              so an open metal gate, not the turnstiles, but he
                              does not describe anything else.

                         Q. What page did you say? - A. 23, which is very much
                            the same.

                              Well, Tyson really is not any good because he was not
                              with them so there Is no point in saying what lie says.
                H             There is page 5 which might help us. This is, 1 think,
                              dad, George Glover, who is speaking. He says,


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                  "Barry, my son, was at my side. The
                  other lads wore all with us. Me wore
                  talking back and forwards to each other.
                  At the approach to the large metal
                  barred entry gates on thinking back this
                  was the last occasion I saw my son, Barry
                  Glover."

How, that -sounds like the perimeter gates.

                  "These metal gates were closed by
                  stewards.1'

     TIPS CORONER:            It is very difficult to work out
anything there.

           IZl. LIMB:     I appreciate that*

     TEDS CORONER:  He says the gates were already
opened, obviously, because otherwise he would, not have
got in, and then he was carried through in a paraphrase
They are not particularly his words.

     ITTi. LII-IBs It may have been there was a
description of how he went through the gate. Thank you

     Tim CCRONEHs            That is what I was trying to find
for you.

     Sometimes you may be able to, when one analyses
the various openings, one can sometimes work out which
one it is likely to be from - poorish descriptions
because, of course, the people who were giving their
statements were not really thinking about us sitting
here today.

           MR. LIMB:       Sir, that is right.

                   POLICE INSPECTOR MXCIIABL LAYTON Called:

                               By THE CORONER:

Yes? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
¥est Midlands Police.   Sir, an examination of video
film and photographic evidence has been made and
Barry lias been identified alive in Enclosure Ho. 3
and apparently deceased being carried across the
pitch on a hoarding, sir.

Sir, Peter Rodgers has viewed visual evidence and
has identified Barry alive in Enclosure No. 3 on a
photograph which has been given the reference number
TiT rrr>   o /n
                            John Simons lias viewed visual ovidence e-nd identified
                            himself carrying Barry on a hoarding across the pitch
                            on a x-hotograph which has been given the reference
                            DMIR 1/16, He has also signed a plan of the pitch
                            indicating the approximate loce~tion at which he first
                            camo into contact with Barry and the approximate
                            location at which he placed him on the pitch having
                            carried him from the Lappings Lane end of the ground.
                    B
                            Sir, PC Cheetham has viewed visual evidence but has
                            not been able to identify himself actually dealing
                            with Barry on the pitch. However, the officer lias
                            signed a plan of the pitch indicating the approximate
                            location at which he first came into contact with Barry.
                            That plan, sir, is referenced ALC/1.
                            Mr. George Glover, as you have heard,- the father of
                            Barry, has viewed the photographic identification
                            previously referred to in respect of the Enclosure
                            and he has confirmed that, sir. Perhaps I should
                            point out that he is the only person in the family
                            that, up to the present date, we have 'actually seen
                            in respect of visual evidence. I do understand from
                            Barry's-wife that perhaps she may be in possession of
                    D       further visual evidence which we will be able to look
                            at at a later date.
                        Q. Yes, I think we have got to just take what we have
                           got at the moment. - A . Can L refer you to a plan
                           which has been given the reference number Mr,rJ L 83?

                    E Q. C231. - A. And also, sir, a plan of the pitch which
                         is JLPS/1. It is upside down actually?-, sir, but it
                            is Mr0 Simons' plan.
                        o   Yes, C232. - A. And PC Cheetham's plan, sir, ALC/1.
                            That will be C2 3 3 . - A. Sir, in respect of the
                            identification made on the terraces, this is Enclosure
                            number 3 and the identification that has been made
                            locates Barry in this position here in Enclosure number
                            3. In respect of the plan by Mr. Simons, on the pitch
                            plan he refers to a location here at the Leppings Lane
                            end of the pitch and a second location here, which is
                            at the Spion Kop end of the pitch which, again, as
                            you have heard, sir, is what took place in many cases,
                            Sir, PC Cheetham's plan, ALC/1, refers to a position
                            here and I think that is the first point at which he,
                            as it were, came into contact with Barry,
                                 ME. FRASER:     No questions, sir, thanlc you,

                                                 Bv MR. LIMB:

                        Q. Am I right in assuming that the p h o t o g r i iphs referenced
                H          DMIR are un-timed photographs? -■ A . Y e s       it is an


J, L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    -1 0 -
                                                                          II. LAYTON



                                 un~tir.ied>photograph, sir, and certainly my perception
                                 of the photograph is that, at that time., Barry is
                                 still alive but I cannot say at what stage of the
                                 medical process that you have heard about he has
                                 actually reached,

                            0.        THE CORONER:   It is a. paper photograph? - A. It
                                 is a newspaper photograph, yes.
                        B
                            Q, And they did not have any timings on their cameras? -
                               A. No, sir.

                                      MR. LIMB:    Thank you, sir.

                                      THE CORONER:     That is what we are going to listen
                                 to this afternoon.
                        C
                                      Now, Stephanie and everybody else in the family,
                                 can I just say two things: first of all, when we
                                 started we laughed, did we not? Do you remember?
                                 And in a way it was nice because we have had very few
                                 Inquests where we have actually laughed so I think that
                                 is good and I am pleased that that was possible.
                        D                The second thing is that we have spent quite a
                                 bit of time looking for timings and so on and I hope
                                 you do not feel that that is the only thing we are
                                 interested in because the purpose of this Inquest -
                                 there are several purposes — but one of them, of course,
                                 is to establish the facts at least to get them recorded
                                 so we have to look at the detail otherwise there is
                        E        hardly any point in doing it but that does not alter
                                 the fact, and it does not detract from the fact, that
!                                we are dealing with your husband and I know from your
                                 statement that you were only married for quite a short
                                 time and so it must be a big blow for you and, of
                                 course, for all the other people, mum and dad, and
                                 everybody else in the family, and I would like you to
                                 k n o w that we feel for you in this situation. I am
                        F        very, very sorry indeed that Barry lost his life in
                                 this traged}'-. Thank you for being here this afternoon.

                                      1/e will rise for a moment-or-two and then we will
                                 proceed. I believe that you are busy?

                                      MISS ADDLEMAN:     Yes, for a short time, sir.
                        G             THE CORONER:   Yes, that is p e r f e c t ^ all right.
                                 Thank you for letting me know.




                    H

    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                         -1 1-
