HER MAJESTY *S COROWER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)



     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
            STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before
. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP
          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At
             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.
                   On
           6th December, 1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  Fro* the Notes of J.L. Harphaa, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                       Page

     G. SYKES Recalled

             Further By The Coroner                      1
             Cross-Examined by   M r .Payne              7
             Cross-Examined by  Mr. Manning              9
             Cross-Examined by  Mr. King                11
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. Catchpole          14
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King         15
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole    16
             Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien             18
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell              21
             Further by The Coroner                     23

     R. PURDY Sworn

             By The Coroner                             23
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Payne              38
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Manning            44
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. King               47
             Further by The   Coroner                   56
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Catchpole          56
             Cross-Examined   by Mrs. McBrien           57
             Cross-Examined   by Miss Addelmann         60
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Russell            61

     B.R. HUCKSTEPP Sworn

             By The Coroner                             63
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                72
             Cross-Examined by Mr. King                 72
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole            79
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King         81
             Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien             81
             Cross-Examined by Miss Addelmann           82
             Further by The Coroner                     82

     K.E. HORSFIELD Sworn

             By The Coroner                             84
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                91
             Cross-Examined by Mr. King                 93
             Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien             96
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr.King          98

     J. KILLOCH Called

             By The Coroner                             99

DISCUSSION                                             100
                                                             1



               • *FOURTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                  THURSDAY,    6th DECEMBER 1990

         THE CORONER:     Good morning.   Please sit down.


                        GORDON SYKES Recalled

                    Further By THE CORONER:

Q. Mr. Sykes, if I can just briefly summarise what you told
   me yesterday and it gives me an opportunity to make sure
   I have understood what you have said and if I summarise
   something incorrect make sure you draw it to my attention.

         What you said was that you were one of the Inspectors
   responsible to Chief Inspector Creaser.  You had three
   serials, four serials but three which I am concerned about
   and your task was all outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.

        You mentioned that there had been a briefing and that
  you had then gene to your position having briefed your own
  serials.  You placed them outside their respective turn­
  stiles and their task was by sight and searching to exclude
  people who it was deemed should not be present or articles
  which were deemed not to be present.     You instructed them
  that although initially they would be able to search virtually
  everybody, in due course this would have to become selective
  because of volume and also you told them that the normal
  rules of exclusion would have to be relaxed.   You explained
  that to me saying that normally speaking you would exclude
  people who were not in control of themselves, I think was
  the word that you used, and I asked you what that meant,
  whether that meant staggering or slurring, whether it
  meant being boisterous, and with regard to the latter you
  said:  "Not necessarily, it depends if the person might
  create a problem in the ground by his behaviour in which
  case he might be excluded".

        You then explained to me that exclusion, you could
  either send the person away or if the Officer deemed it
  necessary the person could be arrested but the problem
  was with arresting people that it was so demanding of
  manpower and with your strength on the ground the absolute
  maximum you could have arrested at any one time would
  have been 15.

        Things were basically normal till about 2 o'clock.
  At that time you had occasion to go in and there were one
  or two problems inside with people coming through the
  turnstile and I asked you whether it was. unauthorised
  entry through the turnstile, and I asked you whether it
  was as early as that and you thought it was.  You also
  had to sort out a problem with Liverpool Steward passes
                                 G. SYKES



and then you came back out at about 2.15 I think you said,
about, walked towards Leppings Lane at which point you
noticed that the crowds were substantially in excess of
what you had expected.  You had a word with you thought
Mr. Hand-Davis, certainly a mounted Officer, and decided
to place a cordon across the mouth of Leppings Lane.
I asked you whether you thought this was the same cordon
as Mr. Creaser's and you thought not though you could
not actually remember Mr. Creaser's cordon because it
was so hectic at that time.
      We then discussed for a few moments the gates.
I think these are the three perimeter gates outside
turnstile A and in the end I think you said that the left-
hand gate was open throughout and you did not actually
think that the gates could be shut at that time b e c a u s e _
they open the wrong way and as far as you were concerned
you were trying to control the crowd with a cordon of
horses, not with the gates.  That is right, isn't it?
- A. Yes.
You then reassessed the situation and decided that the
road ought to be closed; discussed it with Mr. Marshall.
This was for two reasons:  one because you thought people
were in danger from traffic and (b) because you wanted
to use Leppings Lane as a holding area in effect.  You
then continued to observe from outside the turnstiles.

      The position   was you described the problem as
twofold.  The main   problem was sheer volume, I think,
and you said there   had been some who had obviously
been drinking but    by no means all? - A. Yes sir.

You then could see Inspector Bennett in the distance
and although you could not see what was actually
happening you deduced from the events that there was
problems at the front.  I tried to pin you down to
time and you said "between half-past-2 and quarter-to-3
we are talking about".

       Then I asked you some questions about the state
 of the fans and you instanced some occasions where
 people asked you for Gate 0 and I am afraid that is
 where I totally misheard you or didn't understand.
 Anyway, we fortunately got it corrected, and what I
 think you were saying was the people who were asking
 you where Gate 0 was, which was in fact down Penistone
 Road, they appeared not to go when you told them they
 just went to the nearest turnstile.

       You did say a gate opened, that was Gate A, and
 we finished more or less when I was talking to you
 about public address announcements and you mentioned
 that you had noticed a Land Rover and you heard an
                                                            3

                                       G. SYKES




     announcement.  I asked you specifically whether you heard
     one from a mounted Officer and I think you said no to that.
     Then I think we stopped more or less.

           Is that a reasonable summary of how far we have got?
     - A. Yes sir, that is correct.

Q. I just want to go on for a moment or two with the public
   address announcement.  I asked you whether you heard that
   particular announcement.  Can you remember, and I am not
   asking you to remember verbatim, word for word, but can
   you remember what the gist of the announcements were that
   you heard and if you can't remember just say "I can't
   remember"? - A. The gist of the announcement from the
   Police Land Rover was to the effect:  "Stop pushing".
   They were pleading with supporters to stop pushing that
   people were getting crushed at the front.

Q. Did you notice whether this had any effect on the people
   whom you were observing? - A. No sir, the loud speaker
   was pointing towards the turnstiles and the people were
   coming from behind and still on Leppings Lane and it
   was having no effect whatsoever.

Q. Which side of the loud speakers were you standing? - A.
   I was standing just to the right of the Police Land Rover.

Q. Was it pointing towards you or away from you, that is what
   I am trying to find out, as far as you remember? - A- It
   was pointing towards the turnstiles.

Q.    But in relation to you?  - A. Yes, I was stood at the
     right-hand side of the   vehicle so I would be at the side
     of it.

Q.    Quite close in fact? - A. Yes.

Q.   Apart from that you heard no other public address
     announcement? - A. Not  that I can recollect.

Q.   You having seen Gate A open rushed over because you
     thought it had been opened in an unauthorised manner
     initially? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Because you could not see what was going on? - A. That
   is correct.

Q. But when you got there you discovered that it had been
   deliberately opened I think by a Sergeant who felt that
   he had to do it for the safety of the people around that
   gate.   Is that correct? - A. Yes sir.

Q. It didn't stay open very long? - A. No, just a few minutes,
   the surge went through and then we managed to close it
   again.
                               G. SYKES



Gate A, of course, is a totally different area from Gate C
so you could not see Gate C at all? - A. I could not see
Gate B or C and Gate A would lead to the North Stand.

And you didn't see any of the other gates open? - A. No
sir.

Did you come back to the area in relation to turnstile
A-G or did you then remain in the Gate A area? - A. It was
at that stage when we just got the gate closed and trying
to assess the crowd again that the announcement - shortly
after that - the announcement for all Officers to go inside
the ground and that is what  I did.

I see, so you then heard a radio message? - A. I think
it was Superintendent Marshall who said:  "Come on Gordon,
everybody has got to go inside".

I see, it was not a radio message it was a verbal? - A.
No, my radio was completely ....

You did leave this out because I think you said that
more men would be helpful but you could not get them
because your radio wasn't working? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

Or at least apparently not? - A. Yes.

So you gat a verbal message:  "All people inside" and at
that time was any explanation given as to why you were
required inside? - A. Not to me.  That is all I knew
that all Police Officers inside.

They didn't say it was a pitch invasion, trouble on the
pitch, people spilling over or anything like that or
injuries? - A. No.

None of those? - A. None whatsoever, no.

You went inside into the ground? - A. Yes sir.

We will deal with this fairly briefly.  Did you go round
the front first of all or did you go straight down the
tunnel? - A. No, I went towards the Police Control Box
which is on the right-hand side as I went in.

And what happened when you got there did you see ....
A. I could see that all the crowd were coming over the
perimeter fence and it appeared that people were in fact
injured.


                    Q. Can you just
                                                            5

                                                   G. SYKES




Q. Can you just remember whether at that point the game
   was' still in play? You may not be able to remember. -
   A. To the best of my recollection it wasn't in play at
   that stage.

Q. At that point, and you I think decided not to go onto
   the pitch you decided to go back in through the tunnel?
   - A. Yes, sir.  When I looked over there I could see
   that the crowd at the back were still pushing and
   couldn't see what was happening at the front, so I went
   back to the back of the West Stand, saw all these
   Police Officers who were there, and we went round the
   central tunnel to relieve the pressure at the back.

Q. So what you are saying is you collected any Officers
   who were in the concourse area? - A. Yes.

Q. And you went down the tunnel with them? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. ‘
   W ere you, do you think, one of the first group to go
   down there, Police wise?   Did you see any other
   Officers, that would be a fairer way of asking you? -
   A. I didn't see any other Officers until I got down the
   terracing, so I don't know if those Officers had gone
   before me or worked their way from the front.

Q. When you got into the tunnel, was the tunnel itself
   blocked with spectators, or were you able to get right
   up to the exit point? - A. No, there were still quite a
   number of supporters in the tunnel, and they had
   absolutely no idea what was happening down at the
   front.

Q. Did you ask them to leave? - A. I was asking them, and
   in fact I had to shove some of then back.

Q. You have already very fairly said they had no idea what
   was going on? - A. Yes.

Q. So there is no criticism of them, but was it that they
   were reluctant to go because they thought they were
   going to miss the match, or what? - A. I would imagine
   so.  At that stage they would not know that the game
   had been abandoned or stopped, and what was happening
   at the front.  Their prime concern was to get in to get
   a view of the football game.

Q. So you are saying that you had to move them back,
   sometimes with a little bit of assistance,’ so to speak?
   - A. Yes, sir.

0. In fact, you did manage eventually to make a passage
   through onto the terraces? - A. Yes.
                                                            6

                                                  G. SYKES




Q. And you went down and I think you attempted to help
   with the rescue, is that right? - A. Yes, we brought
   people out, gave them artificial respiration and so
   forth.

Q. I think I am right in saying all the people whom you
   helped, you brought back out through the tunnel into
   the concourse area? - A. Into the concourse area.

Q. You didn't go forward towards the pitch? - A. No.

Q. One more question - please don't answer it if you
   cannot remember - when you exited out of the tunnel,
   you have told me what the position was with regard to
   the people within, the people right at the back on the
   terracing, what were they doing at that point? - A. At
   that stage the ones who were actually on the terracing
   at the back, near to the tunnel, they were just stood
   there looking.

Q. You, of course, had the benefit of having seen it from
   the front. - A. Yes.

Q. So you knew that something had to be done, but can you
   recollect whether it was visible that something was
   going wrong, if I can use that word in a very loose
   sense, from the position at the back? - A. I doubt it
   very much.  The only thing that they would see is
   people coming over the fence.  They wouldn't actually
   see the people right down at the bottom who were
   actually stood on the terracing.

Q. So they would not necessarily know what was happening?
   - A. No.

Q. One final question, you probably know that there are
   gates at the back of the radial fences on the
   terracing? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. So that people can either come from the perimeter in or
   from the centre out? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you, and if you didn't notice it please again,
   don't answer, did you notice whether anybody who was
   close to those gates was using them to exit at all? -
   A. I never looked at that part of the ground.

Q. Thank you very siuch.

        THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, I think we can take this
   witness a lot shorter than we did with Mr. Creaser
   because obviously we have covered a great deal of
   ground.
                                               G. SYKES




            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
   /


Inspector Sykes, you mentioned in the course of your
evidence yesterday that you, of course, attended the
briefing in the stadium on the morning of the match? -
A. Yes, sir.

And also you mentioned that you were responsible for
several serials who were posted outside the turnstiles?
- A. That is correct.

And each of those serials was under the command of a
Sergeant? - A. Yes, sir.

There were instructions in the Operational Order, which
the Jury has seen, as to what the duties of those
various serials were? - A. Yes, that is correct.

You briefed your own detail as to what their particular
functions were? - A. Yes, sir, about 11 o*clock that
morning.

You also told the Jury that as far as you were
concerned this was expected to be a repeat of the 1988
carbon copy match? - A. Yes, virtually.

And that broadly speaking the same procedures were
going to be used? - A. Exactly the same.

And 1988 had gone off, had been a successful event? -
A. Yes, no problems.

You were expecting that the 1989 event would follow the
same pattern? - A. That was my intention, or my
anticipation.

Quite, therefore at the time of these briefings did it
even cross your mind that later on that afternoon,
shortly before the match was due to kick off, there was
any risk that such a large crowd would assemble outside
the turnstiles that it would cause a risk of crushing
to people outside the turnstiles?  Did it even cross
your mind that there was such a .... - A. No, sir, I
had no information and no intelligence that they would
descend at the time and in the manner that they did.

No, and I suppose it follows from that it certainly was
not obvious to you that there was a risk that such an
overcrowding event would occur, as did actually happen?
- A. No.

You didn't actually, from the position you were in you
saw Gate A opened and went over to see what had
happened? - A. Yes, that is correct.
                                                                 8
                                                      G. SYKES




     . But you didn't actually see Gate C opened, did you? -
       A. No.

    Q. So I can t ask you about that, but I can ask you about
       Gate A.  When you approached the gate and spoke to the
B      Sergeant who was there you found out that it had been
       opened on purpose? - A. Yes.

       To relieve the pressure? - A. Yes, that was the reason
       for the gates opening.

       ^ight, and at the time that seemed to be a sensible
       thing to do? - A. It was a sensible thing to do, to
       relieve the pressure outside and prevent people being
       killed or injured at that location.

    Q. Quite, and at that time, as far as the opening of Gate
       A was concerned, did it ever cross your mind that the
       opening of Gate A might cause a risk of injury to
       anybody inside the ground? - A. No, not at that
       particular time, no.

    Q. No, it certainly wasn't obvious to you that letting
D      people in through these outside gates would cause a
       risk of injury to people inside the ground? - A. No.

    Q. One last matter of fact, as far as the 1988 event is
       concerned, you have told the Court that the policy was
       broadly the same, the instructions and order were
       broadly the same as in 1989, and just to amplify that
       point, can you confirm please that in 1988 there was no
       system of filtering the crowd down Leppings Lane, i.e.,
       by stopping the crowd at some particular point and then
       allowing them down in batches?  There was no such
       system? - A. To my knowledge there was absolutely no
       system of that.  There was nothing to that effect in
       the vicinity of Leppings Lane terraces and I did not
       put any system into operation.

      Quite, and in fact the same system was used as in 1989?
      - A. Yes.

      Thank you very much.




               Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING




H
                                                              9




                                                        G. SYKES


                  Cross-Examined bv MR. M A N NI NG :

    Q. Inspector, can you assist us please with regard to
D      people you were aware of who did not have tickets for
       this match? You have mentioned in your evidence the
       congregation of people around what you suspected to
       be a ticket tout.   Perhaps you can just develop that
       a little bit around the two o'clock time? - A. Yes,
       sir.   I received information that ticket touts were
       believed to be operating in Leppings Lane.   I looked
       down the road and I saw a large crowd of people
       gathered.   Prom the way they were behaving and
       congregating I suspected that that was where the
       ticket touts were.   I saw two, I think it was two,
       CID Officers who were near to the Leppings Lane
       terraces.   I asked them to go down the road and
       investigate it for me and report back.   This they
       did.   They said that there were two ticket touts
       there and so I caused, I think it was PC Roberts,
       but Officers anyway to go down there and identify the
       touts.   In fact they were arrested.

D   Q. Were you yourself approached by anybody with regard
       to wanting tickets? - A. Yes, throughout the day.   I
       mean starting from eleven o'clock when I went out
       there people were repeatedly coming and saying, "Do
       you know where we can get some tickets from?".  What
       was your instruction to your Officers to people you
       had identified who did not have tickets? - A. At the
       early stages they were moved away from the Leppings
       Lane turnstiles.

    Q. Because it was the early stages did you have some
       memory of who those people were? - A. Yes, I got
       Serial 19, which was in effect a spare serial, to
       assist me and deployed them whenever I thought
       necessary.

    Q. Did you satisfy yourself that people had in fact
       moved away or did there come a time when you could
       recognise that the same people were still hanging
       around? - A. You could only move them away
       approximately twenty to thirty yards from the actual
       turnstile entrances.  It was a case then that you
       trusted they did not come back.

    Q. You have talked about the build-up of the crowd.   At
       that time as well, and this is round about the two
       o ’clock time, 2.30 time, you remarked upon the
       disposition of the crowd, that it appeared there was
       more drink involved with that crowd, with the parts




H
                                                            10




                                                    G. SYKES


     of the crowd? - A. Yes, sir.  People were in fact
     coming who had been drinking far in excess than what
     we would normally expect.

Q. The numbers of people were in excess or the amount
   that they had been drinking was in excess or both? -
   A. A bit of both.

Q. Was there necessity for you and other Officers to try
   and speak to people about their demeanour, about
   tickets, about their general attitude? - A. At that
   stage the build-up was getting to such a pitch it was
   impossible, unless somebody was actually anticipating
   they would be likely to cause trouble, to do much
   about i t .

Q. You have talked about having to give instructions
   with regard to fans who were climbing over the wall
   above Gate B to try to gain access to the ground? -
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was that something that had happened in the previous
   year? - A. No, I had never seen that before at
   Leppings Lane turnstiles.

Q. Was there any other instance that you had drawn to
   your attention at the turnstiles of people trying to
   gain entry without paying? - A. When I was inside I
   did.

Q. Tell us about that? - A. One of the gatemen shouted,
   "They are getting in without paying".   That is when I
   saw people coming in underneath the revolving
   turnstile and also coming over the top.

     THE CORONER:   We have dealt with that already.      He
told me that in chief.

       MR. MANNING:     I am just trying to put the picture.

       THE CORONER:    Yes.

Q.      MR. MANNING:   You went outside the gate then? - A.
     Yes.

Q. The queuing situation round about 2.30, how would you
   describe that? - A. Obviously when I went outside the
   turnstiles nearest to Gate C, the people were there.
   There were large numbers but it wasn't a bad
   situation for pushing and shoving at that stage.
                                                              11




                                                        Q. gYKES

    Q. Round about 2.30 the situation was still in hand? -
       A. It was still controllable at that stage.

    Q. You said in one specific instance I put to you, the
B      climbing over, that you had never seen anything like
       that before.  You, of course, Inspector, are in a
       situation to make a direct comparison with the year
       before because you had identical duties the year
       before? - A. Yes, I worked down there for the last
       ten years and I have never seen anyone in that time
       climb over the outer wall.

    Q.   In more general terms of that   crowd, of that build­
         up, of the people arriving at that sort of time, of
         their demeanour? - A. Yes, sir.    They all seemed to
         come at once.  Normally we get a steady build-up of
         people coming.   I can't remember what time the gates
         open but eleven o'clock, twelve o'clock, even at that
         stage people are going into the ground to try and get
         a good location.   Prom that time you get a steady
         build-up and a nice steady flow of fans into the
         ground.  That didn't happen on this occasion.
D
    Q. Would you say so far as those aspects of your ten
       years of duty down there are concerned that you have
       never seen anything like that before? - A. No, never.

    Q.   It is not something that you could have reasonably
         expected? - A. No, I never anticipated that.  It was
         just unforeseeable with the information that I had to
         hand.

                      Prngg-Examined bv MR. K I N G :

    Q. Inspector, if you had been given information in
       advance that there was a risk a lot of people might
       come at the same time near to kick-off, what
       difference would that have made in your experience as
       to how you would have planned for that? - A. At the
       turnstiles obviously I could have asked for more
       manpower and more horses if they were available.   I
       do not know how many horses there were, spare or
       whatever.  I had no idea what was happening at the
       other side of the ground or other parts of the
       vicinity of the ground.  I only had the turnstiles to
       deal with.

    Q. I was really trying to direct your mind.at the
       briefing, at that stage, because you have told us at
       the briefing it was not contemplated that a large
       group of people would arrive at the same time in the




H
                                                            12




                                                   G. SYKES

      ✓
     circumstances as we know happened in 1989.   What I am
     asking you about from your experience of crowds at
     this end of the ground, if you had known there was a
     risk of that, and I accept you did not, what
     difference would it have made to your planning? - A.
     Quite obviously if I had had that information early,
     especially in the planning stages, then I could have
     discussed that with the Ground Commanders and other
     senior Officers and we could have put alternative
     planning into operation.

Q. What alternative planning was involved? - A. There
   was the possibility of cordons and filters, more
   horses, but that is only hypothetical, of course.

Q. Yes, but that would be designed to control the
   numbers coming down Leppings Lane before they reached
   the turnstile area? - A. Yes, if we had that
   information to hand.

Q. As I understand it, because of the circumstances you
   have described, there being no problem the previous
   year, you were not aware of any planning for that
   particular contingency in 1989.  That is right, is it
   not? - A. Not on that scale.  Obviously I briefed my
   men to what I expected and they knew what to do.

Q. You were not aware, therefore, of any planning for
   that sort of contingency in 1989? - A. I wasn't
   aware, n o .

Q. You were not aware of any contingency planning for a
   situation where the entrance at the Leppings Lane end
   becomes insufficient for the number of people who
   have arrived? - A. Personally I was not aware.

       THE CORONER:   He has answered that now.

Q.       MR. KING:  The way in which you get information
     as to how many people are still to come obviously in
     part is what you can see with your own eyes because
     you have told us what you could see with your own
     eyes outside? - A. Yes.

Q. For example you said at 2.15 there were more people
   then than you had expected? - A. There was more
   people outside the turnstiles and I could see quite a
   lot of people coming down Leppings Lane.   So there
   was a big build-up occurring at that time.
                                                                  13



                                                              G. SYKES



    Q. Yes.   What you didn't know was how many more had yet
       still to come? - A. No.

    Q. Would you agree with    me that one way of knowing or
B      working out how many    people are still to come is to know
       how many people have    already got into the ground? - A.
       Yes, I think that's a    logical conclusion.

    Q. Because this was an all-ticket match? - A. Yes.

    Q. If one knows, for example, at 2.15 how many people are
       already in the ground, one can work out how many people
       roughly one should expect still to come? - A. Yes.

       You know, don't you, that the Leppings Lane terrace had a
       fixed number of tickets sold for the Leppings Lane
       terracing? - A. Yes.

    Q. We know that that was some 10,000? - A. I must accept
       that figure you give.

    Q. We know for the whole of the West Stand and the North
D      Stand, which were the Liverpool seating areas, together
       with the terraces there were some 24,000 people
       approximately expected?   Did you know that? - A. For
       Leppings Lane?

    Q. Yes. - A. People who use those turnstiles?      Yes.

    Q. You knew that 24,000 people were to be expected through
       all those turnstiles? - A. Approximately, yes.

    0. Were you at any time aware of any information coming to,
       for example, at 2.15, as to how many people had already
       got into the ground at the Leppings Lane end? - A. No, I
       can't remember receiving that information.

       Would it be fair to say that that wasn't part of the
       arrangement which you understood was in existence, that
       you would be given such information? - A. That is the
       sort of information that is passed over the air quite
       frequently, upon request from the outside Commanders.

       You yourself didn't hear any such request? - A. No, my
       radio was acting up so I wasn't aware whether or not that
       information had been passed out.

    Q. Were there times when your radio wasn't acting up? - A.
       Only early on and at that stage it wasn't' critical.

    Q. What was the last time your radio wasn't acting up? - A.
       Possibly prior to two o clock.




H
                                                 G. SYKES


Can I ask you about the Leppings Lane turnstiles
themselves, the turnstile area outside the turnstiles,
because you have got experience of that? - A. Yes, sir.

Specifically A to G, and if we can just look at A to G
where Detective Sergeant Griffiths is, I want to deal
with the area between A to G and we got past that little
side barrier and then to the perimeter gates, that area.
- A. Yes.

That was the are which under the Operational Order, for
example, serial 16, that the duty of the serial was to
maintain order and ensure orderly queues are formed.
That was in the Operational Order. - A. That is the
terminology used in the order.

Is it possible, in your experience, to form queues when
you have a maximum gate using that turnstile area? - A.
With the layout of the turnstiles and the configuration
and the number of fans expected, then no, it is
completely open to interpretation what one means by
queues.

I am not sure what that answer means.  Can I try again?
Isn't the reality that it is impossible to have
individual queues outside those seven turnstiles if you
have a maximum gate at those turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Although it may be in the Operational Order, that was in
fact quite an impossible Order? - A. Yes, interpretation.

Can I just ask you to confirm this, that from your
knowledge of the Operational Order for your serials,
there was no specific deployment of officers to man the
perimeter gates, as such, was there? - A. No, their prime
role was to assist at the turnstiles.

There was no specific order for somebody to be at the
gates to control the numbers going into the turnstile
area, that is correct? - A. That is correct.

You have also confirmed in view of your earlier answers
there was no specific order dealing with the control of
people as they came down Leppings Lane? - A. No.

           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Can I deal with the question of queues outside turnstiles
A to G?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am awfully sorry, there were two
matters which I completely forgot which is the next stage
of the ground.   It is my fault entirely.
                                                              15



                                                         G. SYKES


          THE CORONER:      I am sure Mr. Catchpole won't mind.

          MR. KING:      Sir, I do it straight away because
     otherwise...

          THE CORONER:     Yes, it is more sensible.

          MR. KING:   It was really dealing with the cross-
     examination of my learned friend Mr. Payne and I was so
     anxious to deal with the matters I had in mind in any
     event.

              Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. After the disaster had apparently happened and you went
   into the ground, you saw what had happened and you
   decided to go back down the tunnel to relieve pressure at
   the back? - A. Yes.

Q. Was that done of your own initiative? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Not done because you had received a specific order? - A.
   No.

Q. Secondly, you were asked whether it ever crossed your
   mind that the opening of Gate A might lead to people
   being injured inside when they were allowed into the
   ground?   You were asked that question that question by
   my learned friend Mr. Payne. - A. Yes.

Q. Were you conscious of the fact that a large number of
   people were going to be allowed in through G a t e A ? -
   A. No, I had no prior knowledge the gate was going to be
   opened.

Q.   When you saw Gate A opened was it obvious to you that a
     large number of people were going through? - A. Yes.

Q. If you know a large number of people are going to go into
   a ground, not through turnstiles but in one block, can I
   just ask you this question: if you have turnstiles they
   go in individually, don't they? - A. Yes.

Q.   The function of turnstiles is what?   Why do we have
     people going in individually? - A. I would assume to
     collect the money off them.   To ensure that people who
     gain access to the ground have paid the appropriate fee.

Q. Would you not consider that also a function of turnstiles
   is to direct people to a specific part of the ground?
   For example, whether you have got a standing ticket or a
   seating ticket, or what have you? - A. That would be the
   ideal situation.   That is not the situation at Leppings
   Lane.
                                                               16



                                                           G. SYKES


    Q.   At Leppings Lane, according to whether you had a seat or
         you were going to stand up, you went through different
         turnstiles? - A. But it all goes into the same concourse
         behind the stand.

B   Q. As you understood it, everybody went in the same
       concourse? - A. Yes.

    Q. And then what?   They just went wherever they wanted to
       go then? - A. If they had got a ticket for the stand they
       showed that ticket to the stewards on the entrances of
       the stand and they went in the stand.   The people who
       hadn't got tickets for the stand made their way to the
       three entrances to the terraces.

    Q. They would have to know where those entrances were,
       wouldn't they? - A. Yes.

    Q.   If there was a risk that everybody might go into the same
         part of the terrace - could you see there was a risk that
         too many people might go in one part as opposed to
         another part?

D             THE CORONER:   I don't think...   This Officer was
         outside.

              MR. KING:   Sir, I only investigate it because my
         learned friend raised it.

              THE CORONER:   I don't think he can make an answer.
         I mean, he can express his own personal opinion, but we
         couldn t extrapolate from that.

              MR. KING:   So be it, sir.   I didn't ask the
         question in the first place along that line.

                Further Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

    Q. Just to clarify that.   Did I understand you correctly to
       say you weren't aware there were separate turnstiles for
       seating or stand and terrace? - A. No, there were
       separate turnstiles, but they all lead into the concourse
       in the same area, so really at the end of the day it is
       pointless.

         Are you saying that turnstiles A to G served more than
         one part of the ground?   Are you saying they served, for
         example the West Stand seats as well as terraces, or^are
         you saying they served just the terraces? - A. I don t
         know...   I mean, you can probably help me.   If I can
         explain, the turnstiles in Leppings Lane serviced...
         Where Gate A is. and that is on the left hand side as you
         look, and I don't know the numbers from memory, people




H
                                                           17



                                                       G. SYKES


     would go into the North Stand.   The other sections would
     service the West Stand and the Leppings Lane terraces.

Q. There were three distinct batches of turnstiles? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Just to make it absolutely plain, if you look at C.257 in
   front of you.

          THE CORONER:   I don't think this witness is
     disputing that turnstiles were allocated.   What he is
     saying is that once you got through them you were in a
     concourse area which actually gave you access to either
     stand or terracing.

          THE WITNESS:   Yes, sir.    The effect of this is, in
     effect, whichever gate they went through, whether it was
     stand or terracing, it led to the same area.

          THE CORONER:   The only ones which would not apply,
     of course, are the ones which served the North Stand
     because there were some railings there:

Q. I have correctly summarised what you were saying,
   haven't I? - A. Yes, sir.   The people entering Leppings
   Lane stand or the West Stand and the terraces,
   irrespective of which entrance or turnstile they went
   through, went into the concourse.

Q. Then they had to be re-distributed? - A. Then they either
   produced the ticket to the steward and went into the
   stand or made their way on     to the     terrace by thethree
   entrances

Q.        MR. CATCHPOLE:   Just in relation to queuing outside
     the turnstiles that led on to the terraces, we have the
     photograph there, is it right to say that police horses
     were used to go from the perimeter gates down towards the
     turnstiles and then back up again in a line to ensure
     that the people going towards those turnstiles kept in a
     line towards one particular turnstile? - A. As much as
     possible that is what happened.

Q. Would you mind looking at C.305?   Can you describe in
   your own words what the people on the other side of that
   blue barrier are doing in that photograph? - A. Waiting
   to go through the appropriate turnstile.

Q. How would you describe it?     Do you see the police horse
   there? - A. Yes.

Q. The gentleman in the red jacket with the flat cap and the
   gap in front of him.   Is that a queue? - A. It is a
                                                            18



                                                      G. SYKES


   quyeue at those turnstiles which is normal for a semi­
   final day.

Q. There is enough space there for a police horse to go up
   and down? - A. At that time.

Q. I am not saying it wasn't different later on but that is
   a large crowd queuing to get into those turnstiles? - A.
   Yes.

               Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Inspector, you said yesterday that the safety of the
   public was paramount, so did you make sure that serial 16
   under Sergeant Payne, which was responsible for
   turnstiles A to G, never had an impossible task to
   fulfil?   By that I mean did you make sure that only a
   limited number were ever in front of those turnstiles at
   any time? - A. That was the initial intention and that is
   where I briefed the men to and if the problem got too bad
   then I would use the police horses.   That is what we
   attempted to do.

Q. Can you say when it started to fill up too much? - A. At
   what time?

Q. Yes. - Possibly quarter past two, half past two, when I
   saw the build-up at the turnstiles and then I observed
   the vast number of people still coming down Leppings
   Lane, from both sides.

Q. I wonder if you would turn to page 32 of the Operational
   Orders?   Would you read the first part please? - A. Is
   that in relation to serial 16?

Q. Yes, please. - A. "Phase 1 (Before match) This serial
   will be responsible for turnstiles A-G.   They will
   ensure that persons entering do not possess items
   prohibited by the ground rules (banners, e tc . , weapons
   missiles or alcohol).   They will maintain order and
   ensure orderly queues are formed."

Q. Do you think it is wise to become complacent about
   checking for those things at any time? - A. No, it is
   never wise.   You are right in what you are saying, we
   shouldn't become complacent on that duty.

Q. You do agree that it is unwise to relax security at any
   time? - A. It is a case of what is humanly possible with
   the resources we have.   That is why I told my serials
   earlier that if people were drunk, then unless they were
   absolutely unable to look after themselves or liable to
   cause trouble, then they would not be arrested.  We are
                                                             19



                                                        G. SYKES


     not complacent about it.   It is just purely facts of
     life and these circumstances that evolve.

Q. Do you think it was because too many people were getting
   into that area that you naturally became complacent?
   You know, you couldn't deal with the numbers? - A. I was
   never complacent.

Q. What I mean is the numbers became too great for you to
   deal with them? - A. Yes.  We were overcome by the
   numbers.   To physically search every person entering
   that area it was a total impossibility.

Q.   Should it have been stopped?   Should there have been a
     restriction on the numbers coming in at the main
     perimeter gate? - A. We attempted to do that, or slow the
     flow down, with the police horses.   With the resources I
     had available to me it proved impossible.

Q. When you found fans were climbing over the walls etc.,
   did you think a time had come when control was actually
   lost?   You said people don't normally do that so this
   was a completely different situation that day. - A. There
   were two situations about people climbing over the wall.
   The first one was people climbing over the wall to gain
   access, which one can only presume they hadn't got
   tickets and after that when I realised Inspector Bennett
   was on top of the wall pulling people up, then that is a
   different thing.   That is when I realised people at the
   front were in fact being crushed.

Q.   You would certainly not expect to see   that, would you? -
     A. I have never seen it before, no.

Q. Did you inform a more senior officer about this
   situation, as it was so serious? - A. Yes, I discussed
   the matter with Superintendent Marshall.

Q. You said you suggested to Superintendent Marshall that
   the road be closed? - A. Yes.   Obviously at that stage I
   was concerned people would in fact be killed or injured
   by vehicular traffic.

Q. You didn't think by doing that it would have the effect
   of causing crowding immediately outside the main
   entrance? - A. No.   Obviously that is a theory and 1^
   have considered it afterwards, but at the time I didn t
   consider that that was likely to happen, that we were in
   fact going to use the big expanse of Leppings Lane
   roadway as a holding area to prevent people crushing into
   the confined spaces of the turnstiles.

Q. When your radio didn't work, did you send somebody on
   foot to make the request that you needed? - A. No.    By
                                                 G. SYKES


t^iat stage when my radio first went down all the radios
had gone down, so obviously it was a technical fault on
the system as opposed to my radio.    It was only when the
other radios came back live, mine didn't, and by that
stage it was too late to send someone.




                  Q. What time was that
                                                           21


                                    G. SYKES


Q. What time was that please? - A. Probably half-past-2
   tigae, 2.30.

Q. From all the evidence I have been hearing in this Court
   the main problem that day seemed to be the sheer volume
   of people not the behaviour of the individuals.  Would
   you agree with that? - A. No, it was a combination.
   Obviously the sheer volume at that time had a major part
   but people had in fact been drinking; people were arriving
   without tickets; people were arriving with children and
   they had only got one ticket so obviously they were
   expecting to take children through the turnstiles and
   generally the behaviour and pushing of people at that
   stage.

Q. You didn't think the numbers were so large that some
   people should not have been there at all? - A. Yes, but
   at that stage it was impossible to filter them out.

Q. So the situation had become impossible altogether would
   you say? - A. From half-past-2 onwards, yes.

Q. So would you say you had an emergency situation then
   well before 3 o'clock? - A. Outside, yes.

Q. So what was done about that? - A. Well quite ....

            THE CORONER:  He has already told us that several
     times.   I mean if you want to ask him a specific question
     but we are not going to get him to tell us the whole
     story over again as far as he is concerned.   That was
     the point of my questioning to try and find out what
     his account was as to what was done.and he told us.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:  Was an announcement made to tell
     everyone in the Stadium what was happening when you were
     in the tunnel.  Did you hear anybody announcing anything?

           THE CORONER:   It is not a relevant question.  It
     is after the event whatever was said.   He told us what
     time he went into the tunnel approximately.   It is not
     a relevant question.   It is not going to help us to
     decide how any of these people came by their deaths.
     It was not the failure of an announcement at that time,
     even if there was one and I am not saying there was a
     failure.  It made no difference to the cause of death.

           MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you. Inspector.


                  Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Q. Inspector, you told us that your immediate superior was
   Chief Inspector Creaser who gave evidence to this
   Inquest yesterday and the day before? - A. Yes.
                                                         22

                                  G. SYKES


Q. And you, as appears from page 16 of the Operational Order
   of which I don't think there is any need to turn at this
   stdge, you were one of his Inspectors having control of
   Serials 16-19 inclusive? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. The primary role for those Serials during Phase 1 of the
   operation was at or outside the turnstiles? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Would it be fair to say although you were notionally
   under Superintendent Greenwood according to the Operational
   Order, the Superintendent with whom you had contact and
   communication for relevant purposes during Phase 1 was
   Superintendent Marshall? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. At the outset of your evidence you described there being
   a chain of command from you through Chief Inspector Creaser
   to Ground Control? - A. By radio I had a direct ....

Q. To "Ground Control" I presume you mean the Police Control
   Box? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And it is right, isn't it, that after you were told to
   proceed to the ground it was to the Police Control Box
   that you initially set off in order to obtain instructions?
   - A. Is that when the emergency call went up?

Q. When you were asked to go into the ground by Superintendent
   Marshall? - A. Yes.

Q. As an Inspector a considerable amount of responsibility
   is placed upon you and considerable initiative is expected
   from you.  Is that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. For example we have heard, to pursue this example once
   more, that in Sheffield each night there is no Officer
   higher than an Inspector on duty? - A. That is correct.

Q. And in those instances an Inspector is expected to display
   initiative? - A. Yes, he has got to deal with any incident
   that comes in from violent public disorder to murders,
   everything that comes in.

Q. Was it initiative that spurred you to turn round from the
   top of the Police Control Box steps and go round to the
   back of the tunnel? - A. Yes, I had looked at the situation,
   saw there was a problem there and I reacted to it.

Q. Do you regard that as a typical way in which you displayed
   your initiative? - A. Yes.

Q. You didn't feel it necessary, did you, to' go on into the
   Control Box and get clarification or authorisation of
   that procedure that you were intending to follow? — A. No,
   I saw the situation; I assessed what the problems were
                                  G. SYKES



and that is what I reacted to.   I could imagine what the
scene in the Control Box would in fact be once I had seen
thfe situation so I used my initiative and that is what
I did.

Now briefly when you got inside the terrace via the
tunnel you told us that you found other Officers already
on the terrace? - A. When I got down the terrace to where
people were ....

There were already other Officers in there? - A. Yes.

And as I understand your evidence you don't know whether
those were Officers who had gone down the tunnel before
you or whether they had come in onto the terrace via the
gates? - A. No, I don't know that.

      MR. RUSSELL:   Thank you.


                 Further by THE CORO NE R;

The jury have asked me to ask you a question and if you
don't know perhaps you could tell me.  Ticket touts in
1989, was it against the law for a ticket tout to operate?
- A. There is no specific law of being a ticket tout.   The
law is concerned with obstruction of the highway so
obviously a ticket tout selling tickets on the pavement
attracting a crowd of 200 people is an unlawful obstruction
of the highway.  That is in fact what he would be arrested
for.

So you in fact approach the problem indirectly, if there
is an obstruction you can intervene.  If he manages to
sell without obstructing the highway he is okay or he was
in 1989? - A. Yes.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you very much.


                     (Short adjournment)


       THE CORONER:  Inspector Sykes I think has gone.
The jury have asked me two supplementals on the ticket
touts.   We will see whether we can get these questions
out of Mr. Purdy.   If not we will try and remember them
and we will get somebody else who might be able to help
us.  I will ask these questions as and when appropriate.


                     ROBERT PURDY Sworn

                      By THE CORONER:

Good morning. - A. Good morning sir.
rae*                                                                24

                                             R. PURDY


           Q. You are Robert Purdy and you are a Police Inspector? - A.
              That is correct sir.
                /


           Q. On the 15th April 1989 you I think jointly or with Inspector
              Sykes were looking after the serials outside the turnstiles?
              - A. That is correct sir, all in tandem on 16-19 serials.
       B
           Q. I think, this is not a duty you had done before? - A. No,
              the previous year I had been in charge of the mobile units
              to the north of the city.

           Q. So you can't say anything at all about comparisons? - A. Not
              in that area, no sir.

           Q. It is right that you attended the briefing at about 10 o'clock
              in the morning addressed by various people including
              Chief Superintendent Duckenfield? - A. That is correct sir.

           Q. And in one or two sentences just tell us the substance of
              that briefing as far as you remember it? - A. The briefing
              was in general terms regarding public order, public disorder
              and the safety of the public attending.   The profile that
              the match was to take that it was to be enjoyed by all who
              attended and that was the intention for the match to
       D      take place and carry on in that vein.   There were several
              other speakers from the Ground Commander who identified
              each Serials' Commander and there were separate briefings
              after that.

           Q. There was what I would call minor briefings for each, you
              with your own serials and Inspector Sykes.  Is. that right?
              - A. That is correct.  The Sergeants would go through the
              responsibilities with the P.C.s on the team and Inspector
              Sykes briefed all four serials at the rear of the West
              Stand.  I thought that most applicable as he had worked
              that area before so he carried out that briefing.

           Q. You then I think, together with all the other Officers
              involved, went outside the turnstiles? - A. That is
              correct sir, yes.

           Q. Did you meet up with any mounted Officers at that stage
              or subsequently? - A. Subsequently yes.  There were
              mounted Officers deployed in that area and Liverpool
              mounted Officers as well.

           Q. What time did you meet them, about? - A. I can't recall.
              They were in the area shortly after we went out there
              and I certainly spoke to them several times while I was
              patrolling the area outside in Leppings Lane.




                                    Q. Did you ask the»u.




       H
f
                                                                    25

                                                          R. PURDY




         . Did you ask them to perform any specific tasks with
           regard to non-ticket holders? - A. That is correct,
           yes.  I had identified they were in two locations
           initially where they seemed to group.   One was near to
           the shop in Leppings Lane.  They were sitting there,
    2      they were sitting on the windowsills of the premises in
           that area, on the pavement, and the other, a little
           later I believe, was on the riverside of the area I
           have described at the side of t?ie funnel bar, and I
           also had them dispersed from there.

        Q. What did you actually to be done, again very briefly.
           This is peripheral, I am just interested. - A. I asked
           the mounted men to assist them in leaving the area and
           disperse further along Leppings Lane or towards Catch
           Bar, to take them away from the actual vicinity of the
           entrance.

        Q. Again, in very round terms, how many people are we
           talking about? - A. I think it is most difficult to
           recall actual numbers.  They were certainly in groups
           and to be tasked with a number, perhaps 50, perhaps a
           little bit more at any one time, but that varied of
           course.
    D
         . That sort of numbers, fifties we are talking about? -
           A. Yes.  Obviously you would go and see people and
           speak to them but I wouldn't be held to specific size.

         . No, I am not asking you that.  What was it like until
           about 2 o'clock? - A. The build up was quite normal, as
           I expected.  There were a number of people attending.
           You were dealing with them, a lot of questions being
           asked, they were talking to you in general:  what time
           could they get in; where could they get in; directions,
           which gates, and the role outside the turnstiles became
           one of assisting people.  The turnstiles were working
           quite normally at that stage and I visited each of the
           serials, Ur. Sykes being mainly concerned with the area
           on the roadway, and I visited the serial Sergeants on
           the turnstile duties.

         . So you stayed closer to the turnstiles? - A. That is
           correct.  Originally I had to go in and out because of
           the wall and the configuration but initially I went
           round all the turnstile serials.

         . Is it right that initially the serials outside the
           turnstiles were searching virtually everybody? - A.
           Yes, certainly.  When we originally went out there
           there were very few coming in and ....

         . It was relatively easy? - A. Yes, and I think the fans
           accepted it.  There was some joviality - they would




    H
                                                                   26

                                                            R. PURDY




         walk up with their   hands in the air as if   they knew
         they were going to   be searched.

    Q. No problems? - A. No problem at all.

B   Q. In fact, good humoured, everything was fine? - A.
       Certainly, yes.  Obviously I spoke to different groups
       and certainly the atmosphere was very good at that
       time.

    Q. You, in fact, in the event located yourself near
       turnstiles A-G? - A. That is correct, sir, I did, yes.

    Q. At that stage, after 2 o'clock, outer perimeter gates
       were open or shut, can you remember? - A. I think when
       I actually arrived there it would be sometime after
       that, when I actually stopped there for the duration of
       the time, and they were open to ray mind.

    Q.    What time was that? I have misunderstood the answer. -
         A. Sorry, I would think when I actually stayed at A-G
         turnstiles it was somewhat later than 2 o'clock.   I
         would have thought it was nearer to 2.25, 2.30 perhaps.
         It was certainly later on.
D
    0.   At that point you think they were open, did you say, or
         shut?- A. The perimeter gates to my mind were open,
         sir.

    Q. You are talking about the perimeter gates outside
       turnstiles A-G at this stage? - A. That is correct,
       sir.

    Q. The three of them, three sets? - A. I saw the photo -
       that is right, sir.

    Q. And as far as you remember at that point they were
       open? - A. Yes.  It is very difficult obviously to put
       your mind back.  The only gate I can remember being
       closed to my mind at any time, was the one nearest the
       river, that singular one, or half of that singular one,
       I believe.

    Q. That is the only one that impinges on your memory? - A.
       I believe so, yes, sir.

    Q. Okay.  Did anything change after 2 o'clock? - A. Yes,
       the crowd obviously built up.  As I say, it was
       probably nearer 2.30.  I think the entry to the
       turnstiles themselves had moved from one where people
       could walk up in ease to really what we, or what I had
       personally anticipated would be a number of people
       using that funnel area to gain access to the
       turnstiles.  The Officers there were coping but far




H
                                                                   27

                                                            R. PURDY




          busier than they had been earlier,    I think that is the
          best way to describe it.

      . Would it be fair to say that at that time it was still
        acceptable, as far as you were concerned? - A.
JJ      Certainly, yes, sir.

      . And you are saying about 25-past, 2.30, is that what
        you are saying? - A. That is correct.  I think one of
        your learned colleagues has shown a photograph at 2.30
        of that gentleman stood there, and that would be my
        recollection equally, that it was a good, sizable
        crowd, but manageable.

     Q.   Yes.   It is C305 - is that the one   you are talking
          about? - A. That is correct, yes.

     Q.    And that is how you remember it as well at about 2.30?
          - A. That is correct, sir.    Obviously the situation is
          of itself dynamic but that is how I recall it, busy but
          steady.

      . Yes, and what happened then, if anything? - A. From
        that stage the area began to fill more rapidly.  The
        crowd to the rear coming through the gates was more,
        perhaps volatile is the word, they were more
        boisterous, and the pressure on those at the front
        became greater.  There came a point following that,
        that the pressure became so great at the front that the
        function of the Officers for searching became futile,
        to my mind.

      . Because they were being compressed, are you saying, and
        they just could not select out people to search? - A.
        Both of those, sir.   Number one, they were very close
        to the wall at that stage.   They had started originally
        perhaps a yard out from the turnstiles, as a natural
        filter.   As time progressed obviously they got closer
        and closer as the build up came, but still managing to
        search, and then at that time there came a point where
        they could not achieve their objective of searching or
        queueing.

      . In other words, you are saying that the point came when
        whatever queues there might have been disappeared into
        a large mass of people? - A. That is correct, sir.

      . You, of course, were near the turnstiles at this point?
        - A. I was, yes.  I was at the edge of the wall and the
        funnel bar where it commences there, looking over ....

      . When you say the funnel bar, do you mean ...? - A. I
        referred to that in ray statement, sir, as the bar that




H
                                                 R. PURDY




runs at waist/chest high,   that funnels people towards
those turnstiles.

It is a blue bar? - A. That is correct, sir.

Did you form an assessment as to the behaviour of the
crowd at that stage? - A. I would suggest the crowd was
mixed.   There were people, certainly against the
turnstile gates where I was, who were of mixed age and
appearance, some children, some elderly, some young
men.   The impression I gained of those to the rear
coming through, as I have said earlier, was of a more
volatile crowd.   There were certainly more young men
comprised of in that crowd.

In your statement you mentioned there was a smell in
the air.  What was that? - A. That was of alcohol, sir.

You could actually smell that? - A. You could, yes.       I
worked alongside that funnel bar in that area ....

Of course there were a lot of people there? - A. A lot
of people there and you could smell it on their breath.

That is right.  If I had not asked you that question
about the smell, and if you ignore that, apart from the
numbers were you concerned about the crowd at that
time? - A. Yes, certainly I was concerned.

What was concerning you? - A. I was concerned that the
actions of those to the rear were pushing the others
who my specific concern was for at the turnstiles, into
the wall of the turnstiles and the buttresses, so I was
concerned about the behaviour of those to the rear.

What did you do to try and alleviate it? - A. At
various stages I liaised with the horsemen, to use
those at the rear of the bar.   Obviously that was a
most difficult task, certainly easier, I think as the
photograph showed, at 2.30 it was possible for the
horses to come down there.  As that became more tightly
packed then that equally did not become feasible.    They
were able to work in the very small area between the
rear of the funnel and the perimeter gates only, and
they could not get into that area.
                  i
What were you hoping that they would do? - A. I was
hoping that they could form, if you want, although very
brief sterile area behind them to alleviate the
crushing on those at the front.

Do you know whether they actually succeeded in
achieving that?  Can you remember from your knowledge,
not from what you have heard afterwards, or seen
VPs
                                                                         29


                                                              R. PURDY




               afterwards? - A. I would think there would be limited
               success.  The mounted Officers, certainly I recall P.C.
               Gunhill I think they call him - the lad with the big,
               black moustache - working extremely hard in that area
               to achieve that.
      B   Q. I think people in the crowd were actually speaking to
             you and you could see that they were distressed with
             your own eyes, is that right? - A. That is correct,
             sir.  As time moved on the crushing at the turnstiles
             became progressively worse.  It certainly was not an
             easily manageable situation.  People were pleading with
             me for action.

          Q.    What were they asking you to do? - A. Let them in, "Get
               me in” , "Get me out” , various cries from the crowd and
               actually screaming and crying from the crowd.

          Q. So it was quite a serious situation as far as you were
             concerned? - A. That is correct, sir.

          Q. In fact, I think the child was passed to you? - A. That
             is correct, sir.  At a point around that time I
             positioned myself on top of that bar to gain a vantage
      D      point over the area, to attempt, although I think in a
             way it was futile now looking back on it, to address
             the crowd and ask them to go back and relieve the
             pressure, although that was limited in effect.

          Q. You mean you shouted? - A. I shouted to them to get
             back, to hold position, to move back.

          Q. I assume it was very noisy? - A. Yes, that is right.
             There was a lot of noise from the crowd.

          Q. You would expect it to be noisy? - A. Yes, that is
             correct, sir.

          Q. Of course, you had to shout above that noise? - A. That
             is right, sir,or attempt to.

          Q. Attempt to, and it may well be that people close by
             might have heard but they, of course, were the ones who
             could not move presumably because .... - A. Of the
             pressure from the rear, sir, yes.

          Q. Yes.  This child which was passed to you, it was limp,
             I think you have said? - A. That is right.   I recall
             leaning over, I think with one hand because I had one
             hand on the wall or somewhere, and pulling- the child
             somewhere at waist, and he was just limp in ray hands.
             I passed him back behind me to Officers who were stood
             at the side of the bar, to their assistance.




      H
                                               R. PURDY




You actually ascertained later on that this particular
child recovered and was fine? - A. That is correct,
sir.

Did you hear any announcements over any loudspeakers
during this period we are talking about? - A. I think I
heard an announcement to stop pushing.  In fairness to
the Court I am not sure where I heard that from or
where it came from.

Or to where it was directed? - A. No, because 1 was
dealing with that situation myself, in fact, telling
them, but 1 was aware that someone else was doing that
sane function.

You did not see the landrover, I don't suppose? - A.
No, I didn't, sir.

Did you come to realise something would have to be done
about getting this crowd out of this area? - A. That is
certainly correct, sir, yes.

And what in fact did you do, or what happened? - A.
Obviously as things became progressively worse it was
obvious that we could not accomplish getting these
people through the turnstiles.

Yes. - A. I formed the opinion at that stage, and I
might add that 1 have discussed that it was dynamic, it
was progressively getting worse but much quicker, I
thought that action must be taken to alleviate that,
and I saw Superintendent Marshall, who had taken a
vantage point on the buttresses of the bridge, near to
that perimeter gate, I went to him, informed him of my
opinions, the position at the turnstiles in relation to
what I considered was an area and people in there would
certainly be injured, and I perceived would die in
there if it continued at that rate.




               /Q. What did Mr. Marshall .
6-1
                                                                    31




                                                           R. PURDY


          Q. What did Mr. Marshall tell you to do, if anything? -
             A. He discussed the matter.  I can't recall the
             conversation verbatim.
      B   Q. I am not asking you to tell me the words but the
             sense? - A. He considered the application that I had
             made to him, that things had to be done, and
             ultimately he said to me, "Open the gates".

          Q. You went towards Gate C, is that right? - A.
             Subsequently, yes, sir.  In the interim period from
             coming back from that buttress I made arrangements
             with the mounted Officers.  I spoke to several of the
             mounted Officers there to attempt to seal off the
             perimeter gates on the inside and I also spoke to the
             foot Officers I had got in that area to assist the
             mounted.

          Q. Did they do that? - A. They attempted to do that,
             yes, sir.  I think the gates to some extent were
             closed at that point.

      D   Q. You do not remember seeing them closed.  You just
             think that they were closed? - A. That is right.
             Certainly the mounted Officers and the foot men I
             deployed went to that area.  That was my intention,
             that they would seal that off.

          Q. What you were trying to do, Inspector, was that you
             wanted to get rid of people, if I can use that word,
             from the front of the gate and you wanted to have a
             gap at the back as well so as to clear the area?
             That was your plan? - A. That is correct, sir.   It
             was very difficult and the problem we faced was
             getting people under the bar because of its height.
             My view was that if I could have taken them from the
             back of that funnel but within the perimeter gates
             then they could have moved back and we could have
             relieved the congestion.

          Q . In other w ords, you made arrangements with the
              mounted people to do that? - A. That is correct.

          Q. Can you just point to that bar on the model? What
             you are saying is that it does not go all the way up
             to the perimeter gates? - A. That is right.

          Q. What you were trying to do is that you wanted to take
             them from between the perimeter gates and the start
             of that bar.  You wanted to take people out from
             there in through the gate and relieve the pressure? -
                                                          32




                                                  R . PURDY


  A. That is correct.  Obviously the other thing to do
  was to put them under the bar which was also the
  intention for those trapped immediately there.

Q. Did you then go towards the perimeter gate? - A. That
   is correct.

Q. Not the perimeter gate, Gate C? - A. Yes.

Q. Just tell me what you did because you were going
   there to give an order to open it, were you not? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. What actually happened? - A. I attended there with
   other Officers in the vicinity of the gate.   I
   informed them of the order to open the gates.   As I
   neared the centre of the gates, the gates opened.

Q. The gates can only be opened from the inside? - A.
   That is correct, sir.  It is in my statement that I
   caused the gates to open and I accept that
   responsibility at that time.  It is obvious they
   opened from the inside and I considered that they had
   been done then on my instructions but I believe since
   that the timing of that was perhaps at the time of
   the ejection of a fan.

Q. That is what I am trying to find out. Was   this
   opening coincidental with an event which was
   occurring on the inside so far as you know? - A. So
   far as I know the initial occasion when I went to
   those gates would appear to be the one where the fan
   was ejected from the inside because they were closed
   relatively quickly afterwards which I know occurred.

Q. I do not know if you remember but did the gate open
   fully or not? - A. I think it opened partially and I
   moved to the left with the pressure of the people
   behind me.

Q. You were encouraging people to go in through that
   gate at that point? - A.   There were people behind me
   who had come up there, who had spilled out from the
   bar.  My opinion at that time was that if we could
   alleviate that with the space we created we could
   move the injured and the people who were trapped in
   there out into the open area between the bar and the
   river.

Q. Your intention was not to clear the whole of the area
   but just to clear a space to give more room for the
                                                          33




                                                 R. PURDY

   ✓
  people behind the bar, as you call it? - A. That is
  correct, sir.

Q. As far as you know, were the only people who entered
   people you authorised or not? - A. I would believe
   the majority, if not all, would be people with
   tickets because on several occasions, as I have
   already stated, I had that area down the side of the
   river swept with horsemen for non-ticket holders.

Q. You were satisfied at that point that the people who
   were entering were ticket holders in the main? - A.
   That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. The gate was then closed? - A. Correct.

Q. Was there a reason for that?   On the video it looks
   as if there is a horseman who comes to bar entry.
   Can you recollect that at all? - A. No, sir.  I have
   briefly seen the video.  I have watched very little
   of it.  I am aware that the crowd was stopped at that
   point and then I exited via that gate and went back
   down to the funnel bar and attempted to relieve the
   pressure in there again with other Officers.

Q. Did you cause the gate to be closed or did it
   close? - A. I can't recall.  I would have closed it
   at that time because it seemed to me that people had
   stopped coming in. When I turned round there was an
   initial surge.  I was pushed to the left.  I turned
   round.  From what you have said, sir, the fact that
   the mounted Officer came to that point may be the
   reason people stopped coming in.  So one would be
   indicative of the other.

Q. By this time you were on the inside? - A. I was on
   the inside then.

Q. So you then came out again? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. And took up your position again? - A. Outside at the
   turnstiles again, sir.

Q. Then what happened after that so far as you can
   remember? - A. What we attempted to do then, myself
   and other Officers, was pull people under the bar and
   encourage them to come in under the bar .into the area
   that I have described previously at the side.
   Ultimately they were filtered down to that gate by
   the horsemen.
                                                                34




                                                        R. PURDY



    Q. Was the gate open again to your knowledge? - A .   It
       was, sir, yes.
B   Q. You saw it open? - A. No, sir, but I am aware it was
       opened because people were filtering down there.

    Q. Did anything else happen at the far end, at the
       perimeter gates? - A. The perimeter gates opened
       again some time later.  Perhaps they were open
       already with the pressure from outside but certainly
       the middle gates opened and ultimately - and again I
       am unsure as to the time - I saw the concertina Gate
       B opened.

    Q. You did see it? - A. That is correct, yes.  That left
       the area that I was trying to clear myself from that
       side, it then emptied.  To be quite fair, I was quite
       relieved it had for the people in there.

    Q. Then I think you heard a message asking for people to
_      go on to the pitch, is that right? - A. That is
D      correct, sir, and I think it was "all Officers on to
        the pitch".

    Q. That came through your radio, did it? - A. That again
       with the noise I am not exactly sure.  It seemed to
       be very loud that and I am not sure whether it was
       the tannoy or the radio but it seemed very loud that
       message.

    Q. That is what you did, you went on to the pitch? - A.
       That is correct, sir.   I went in through Gate C.
       There were Officers in that area, a Sergeant and
       certainly a number of men.   I took them round
       altogether in one block and we ran round through the
       concourse to the right into the South Stand, down the
       steps and on to the pitch at the Leppings Lane end of
       the terracing.

    Q. Can you remember whether the match was in play
        then? - A. No, sir, I can't.

    Q. You cannot remember? - A. No, I can't remember.    To
        hazard a guess I would say not.   I don't think I saw
        players on the pitch.   I would say there were too
        many Officers or people on the pitch to facilitate
        play.

    Q. Did you see Superintendent Greenwood? - A. I did,
       sir.




H
                                                          35




                                                   R. PURDY



Q. At that time or later? - A. What I did I brought the
   serial on to the pitch and until I had established
   what had occurred I lined them up as they arrived on
   to the pitch.  I then went to the centre near to Pen
   3.  I saw what had obviously occurred and I saw Mr.
   Greenwood in the centre at that time when I neared
   the middle.

Q. When you say the centre, you do not mean the centre
   of the pitch? - A. No, sorry, my apologies.  I mean
   the centre of the terracing, Pen 3, behind the
   goalmouth.

Q. Between the goalmouth and the terracing? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. At the centre section? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Then I think you took up a position close by Gate 2,
   is that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Very briefly what did you in fact attempt to do? - A.
   As I looked at the terracing it was apparent that Mr.
   Greenwood was in the centre together with a number of
   Officers.   I couldn't see anything that I could
   personally do in that area.   I looked at the
   situation and I thought there were a number of ways
   to alleviate the pressure there.   One was to the
   front which Mr. Greenwood and his Officers appeared
   to be dealing with.   One was to the rear and to the
   right and the left.   Because I was at that side of
   the pitch I think, I chose to go to the left.    I went
   near to Gate 2, which gives access to the south pen
   of the Leppings Lane terracing.   At that point some
   Officers were in the terracing already and what I
   tried to d o ....

Q. Terracing in Pen 2 or Pen 3? - A. Pen 2.  I stood
   again to attempt to get a vantage point on the
   fencing and requested verbally and with arm movements
   for the supporters in that area to move to the left
   and to the back.  There was some compliance with that
   and a space was created towards the front which I
   hoped to achieve.  I brought Officers into the pen
   and then we attempted to remove people from Pen 3
   over the radial fencing physically into Pen 2 and
   then remove them from Gate 2.

Q. If you did not see what I am now going to ask you
   then you must say so. At the back of the radial
                                                           36




                                                     R. PURDY


     fence there is a gate, is there not? You know
     that? - A. I did know that, sir, yes.

Q. Did you see whether people were using that gate to
   get out of Pen 3 into Pen 2? - A.  No, sir.

Q.   You did not see it or you did not see anybody doing
     it? - A. I didn't pay any attention to that, sir.

Q. You do not know? - A. My concern was for the area at
   the very front of that.

Q.   That is fair enough.  I will just  ask you but I think
     you are not likely to be able to help me on this.   We
     heard from Inspector Sykes that he saw a group of
     about 200 odd, 150, around what he took to be
     possible ticket touts and he sent people there.   Did
     you see that incident? - A. I was made aware from
     Officers that there were ticket touts in the area.

Q. You did not see that? - A. I didn't that particular
   crowd.

Q. Had you policed Leppings Lane end at all before? - A.
   I had not policed that end at a Semi Final.  I had
   policed the stands as a Sergeant.  I have policed
   Hillsborough as a PC.  I have policed it in all three
   ranks.

Q. You know the concourse area? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. This is one of the Jury questions and I put it to you
   because I think you will be able to deal with it.
   Once people had come through the turnstiles into that
   concourse area? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it right that they could have gone either down the
   tunnel or right or left, if they knew where to go on
   to the terracing, is that right? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. Or up some staircases to the stand? - A. That is
   right, sir.

Q. You cannot tell me about 1989 but normally speaking
   there would be stewards on the stairs to stop
   standing people going up to the seated area, is that
   right? - A. That is correct, sir.  So far as I am
   aware, sir, there are stewards there to view the
                                                    37




                                              R. PURDY

/


tickets and allow them to the stairs to take them
into the West Stand.




                               /Q. There would be
                                                                 38



                                                          R. PURDY



Q. But there would be nothing to stop a person who had a
   seat ticket, who should have been up there, deciding they
   didn't want to sit, they would much rather stand, and
   just go into the terracing?   Physically it would have
   been possible? - A. I believe so, yes, sir.   It is very
   rare that would be desirable I would have thought.

Q. Pardon? - A. I wonder consider that would be very rare
   that would be desirable.   Most people want to sit, of
   course.

Q. The tickets are more expensive? - A. Yes, and the viewing
     IS • • •

Q. But technically they could have done it? - A. I believe
   so, yes, sir.

Q. Not "technically", that's the wrong word.   Physically
   they could have done it? - A. Yes, to my knowledge I
   would think an official from the ground would be...

Q. You would be surprised if people did that? - A. Yes.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. Inspector, these Inquests, of course, are concerned with
   how the crushing occurred in the pens and in that context
   I want to ask you questions about how the crushing
   occurred outside the turnstiles.   It is convenient that
   photograph 305 is displayed at the moment and I would
   like to start with that.   Does that help you to
   illustrate to the jury whereabouts you were standing on
   the rail when you got up to address the crowd, or to^
   shout at the crowd? - A. I think if you see the man in
   the road coat and if you move two or three to his right,
   I would be at that position.

Q.   To his right? - A.   Or in front of him as he is   facing
     forward.

Q. So just off the edge of the photograph? - A. That is
   correct, or perhaps behind the man you can see in the
   front, behind his head.

Q.   Immediately to the right, off the edge of the photograph,
     that is where the turnstiles are? - A. That is correct,
     sir.

Q. Which way did you face when you stood on the rail?

          MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, I don't know whether it assists,
     but I have a slightly wider framed photograph of this
     one.   I think this Inspector is in that photograph.
                                                             39



                                                         R. PURDY


           THE CORONER:     Have we got it yet as an exhibit, or
     is' it a new one?

          MR. RUSSELL:   It is C.305, but it has been printed
     more fully on the copy I have and I believe that he was
     in shot in C.305.   I am quite happy to hand that over
     and he can confirm or deny that.

          THE CORONER:       Mr. Griffiths, just collect it from
     Mr. Russell?

             MR. RUSSELL:   He is not standing on the railing.

          MR. PAYNE:   This photograph is at 2.30, which is
     before the crushing occurred.

          THE CORONER:    Yes, it is in fact exactly the same
     photograph except the framing or the reproduction has cut
     a little bit off it.    Show it to Inspector Purdy first
     of all and see whether he identifies himself on it.

          THE WITNESS:   Yes, that certainly appears to be the
     position I was indicating to you, sir.

          THE CORONER:   Show it to Mr. Payne and then we will
     pass it around the jury.   (Photograph C.305 was passed
     round the jury)

             THE CORONER:   Is it the same as in your bundle, Mr.
     King?

          MR. CATCHPOLE:     Sir, it is certainly the same in my
     bundle.

          THE CORONER:   I think we ought to try and reprint
     this one on the acetate and see whether we can get a
     little bit more on to it.    If we can we will substitute
     the re-print as the exhibit.    Thank you, Mr. Russell.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:   Inspector Purdy, we have got you
     standing on the rail, facing which way please? - A.
     Towards the crowd and it would be to my left towards
     Leppings Lane, at an angle at any time.   If you took a
     direct line on that photograph to the horseman, that
     general direction I would face.

Q. The horseman just in front of the brick wall you mean? -
   A. That's correct.

Q. Can you give a time approximately for this? - A. When I
   stood on the wall, sir?

Q. Yes. - A. I have said in my statement I think it is very
   difficult to assess that.   I believe if that was the
                                                   R. PURDY


view at 2.30, it would be something like 2.40, perhaps,
or a little bit later than that.

What did you do when you were standing there? - A. I
attempted to address the crowd to move back, to stop
pushing, to hold their ground, to alleviate the pressure
at the front of the turnstiles.

Suppose we had been in the crowd there, we would have
looked forward and we would have seen you standing u p o n
the railing, what would we have heard and seen you doing?
- A. I was gesticulating with my arms.

Can you show us? - A. I was waving them back, saying,
"Hold back.  Stop pushing.   You'll get in," and waving
back to them in an attempt for those in there capable of
doing so to hold ground to alleviate the pressure on
those at the front.

It sounds a silly question, but could the crowd see you?
- A. Certainly, yes.   Obviously the bar comes waist to
chest high and I was stood in a precarious position
attempting to do that.

Did this have any obvious effect on the crowd? - A. I
think it did to some extent with those very close and a
lot of the larger men in that area very near to the
turnstiles were attempt to help others, the women and the
children, in that area.

They were the ones who were being crushed? - A. That's
correct, so there was to some extent self-preservation
there, as well as helping others.

Did it have any effect on the people who mattered further
back? - A. I think it had very little effect.   My
attempt was there to do that but the crowd persisted.
It moved.   It kept filling that area and it became a
point that we could not stop that.

I want you to look at another photograph, C.255.   Now
the jury has heard from a number of witnesses about the
presence of a police Land Rover with a loud hailer system
which was parked to the left hand side of the perimeter
gate area.

     THE CORONER:     This witness has said he didn't see
that Land Rover.

     MR. PAYNE:     Quite.   I want to just ask a question
about that:

At about this same time, just after quarter to three,
some time ago now the Inquest has heard from a witness
                                                   R. PURDY


Mr. Bartholemew who was in fact on the other side of
Leppings Lane and standing on what we know is a little
hill which can be seen in the bottom right hand corner of
this photograph, the other side of the road, and
Mr. Bartholemew from that position was able to hear the
Land Rover, the loud hailer, calling to the crowd.   I
want to find out whether this was at the same time as you
were standing on the railing or not? - A. That I cannot
discern, sir, with all due fairness.   There were
certainly other calls for people to stop pushing at
approximately that time, but I am not sure whether that
was by tannoy, loud hailer, or what it was.

Thank you.    We cannot take that photograph any further.
It was just shortly after that, and I appreciate you
can't be exact about times, that you reported to
Superintendent Marshall, including the report that unless
something was done people would die? - A. That is
correct, sir.




                    Q. Did you actually say that
                                                           42

                                  R. PURDY




Q. Did you actually say that? - A. I did sir.
     /



Q. Now you have told the Court that you have experience although
   not at the previous year's semi-final, but you do have
   experience at other football matches? - A. I think I have
   worked every ground in the Force except Rotherham.  I have
   worked Hillsborough as a P.C., Sergeant and Inspector.
   I worked Bramall Lane, Doncaster.  I have policed Doncaster
   at race meetings, the Leger, and other large crowds, yes
   sir.

Q. Over what period of time? - A. Come the turn of the year
   I shall have 16 years' service so over a long time.

Q. Do you mean over that 16 years you have had these crowd
   duties from time to time? - A. That is correct sir, as a
   P.C., as a Sergeant, as an Inspector.

Q. Right.  Have you ever been in a situation like this before
   where people were at risk of dying because of the pressure
   of the crowd? - A. No sir.

Q. Well now at these other football matches anybody who goes
   to big events and football matches knows that quite often
   large crowds do assemble going into the ground and also
   on coming out of the ground, a lot of people are crowded
   together? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. Well from your experience then of these other events when
   there is a large crowd together does it automatically
   happen that people at the front of that crowd are in any
   danger from being crushed from people at the back? - A.
   It is obviously a concern of mine when I am policing that
   for the safety of those queueing.   The fact is that with
   limited resources we police any sporting evert or large
   crowd event with the consent of the public and with the
   consent of the masses who attend.

Q. The "consent"? - A. That is correct, as we police the
   community.

Q. Quite.  Do you normally get a good degree of co-operation
   from crowds? - A. I would think yes.  We have to because
   of the success in the past, it is self-evident.

Q. Well now what from your observation then made this
   situation different from all the other crowd situations
   that you have been involved in over the years? - A. The
   sheer fact of the volume, the density of the supporters
   in that area and their behaviour.  I mean I can only
   speculate.  If you want me to do that ....

Q. No, you don't need to speculate, you can. describe what
   you saw.  What do you mean by "the behaviour"? - A. Well
rt/3-   2-
                                                                           43

                                                    R. PURDY



                   there was an aim that they wanted to get into that football
                   match.  That was the aim of the supporters that they wanted
                   to attend the match and they attempted to achieve that aim.

                 Q. Particularly by doing what? - A. By pushing to the turnstiles
                    to get to the turnstiles.
             B
                 Q. Now then Inspector Purdy just one or two other matters.
                    You have told the jury that you attended the briefing
                    in the morning and then there was a sub-briefing which
                    was principally carried out by Inspector Sykes? - A. That
                    is correct, sir.

                 Q. Because of his experience the previous year? - A. Yes sir.

                 Q. Now at that time when those briefings were taking place
                    were you aware that an Operational Order had been drawn up
                    as to the deployment and functions of the various Serials?
                    - A. Yes sir.

                 Q. Did it occur to you at the    time that these briefings were
                    taking place that there was any risk of such a huge crowd
                    assembling shortly before the kick-off causing this
                    crushing situation? - A. No sir, I think I have told the
             D      Court that the situation at 2.30 and just beyond I expected
                    to continue in a manageable fashion but we would be
                    extremely busy as you would expect to be on a match day
                    and    that it would function like that.

                 Q. Did  you think for a moment that anything like this was
                    going to happen? - A. No sir.

                 Q. If you had not taken the action that you did to instigate
                    the opening of Gate C what, from your observation, would
                    have been the consequence? - A. I can just say I have had
                    some 18 months to think about that and I can say.at the time
                    and I will still say now that if I had not taken that
                    action then people would have been injured and I believe
                    killed at those turnstile gates.

                 Q. So the gate was opened to cope - I am putting words into
                    your mouth but I think this is obvious - that it was
                    opened to cope with the dreadful emergency which had arisen?
                    - A. That is correct sir.

                 Q. Now   at that time when you were coping with that emergency
                    did   it occur to you for a moment that by opening the gate
                    and   letting people in this would cause any problem or danger
                    for   people inside the ground?

                          THE CORONER:  The Officer was not inside the ground.
                    He can say what he thought but it won't actually help us
                    because it does not actually matter what he thought on
                    that aspect.




             H
                                                           44


                                     R. PURDY



         MR. PAYNE:     Quite.

         THE CORONER:     You should not pursue that, I don't
   think.

        MR. PAYNE:    Sir, I do have in mind the question of
  what   was obvious sir because as you will have in mind in
  due course the question of what is obvious is something
  which may have to be addressed fairly and squarely.

         THE CORONER:  Well if you could just put it to him
   exceedingly shortly, was it obvious to him that opening
   the gate ....

         MR. PAYNEj     Perhaps I may put it that way.

Q. You have got the question, Inspector Purdy. Was it obvious
   to you that by opening the gate any crushing would occur
   to people inside the ground? - A. No.

         MR. PAYNE:     Thank you very much.


                Cross-Examined by MR. MANNI NG:

Q. Inspector, obviously it was a known fact as to how many
   Liverpool people were issued or how many people indeed
   were issued with tickets for the Liverpool end of the
   ground.  You knew how many were to come through the
   turnstiles? - A. That is correct sir.

Q. And you have described a scenario of a build-up, a little
   smaller than you thought originally, but the photograph
   at 2.30 showing the extent of the queueing and a situation
   that you knew was busy but one which was in your mind's
   eye the sort of situation that you would have to deal with
   when people turned up to go in? - A. That is correct sir.

Q. And of course it is no secret talking in non-emotional
   terms that they had of course all come with a common
   purpose, namely to go and see a match and to get into
   the ground for that purpose? - A. Certainly sir, yes.

Q. But what you are saying different from that is a deter­
   mination beyond the wish to get in that there is an intent
   to get in? - A. You are asking me really to answer what
   is in the minds of others who are at the rear pushing
   forward.

Q. I am asking you to interpret the movement that you saw,
   the pressure forward, what you were describing as the
   continuing pressure forward? - A. There was a continuing
   pressure forward from the rear which seemed to me at the
   front without regard for those at the front.
                               R. PURDY


And we have had from another witness but perhaps you would
address your mind to it the logical attitude that people
who stand still and move forward in an orderly fashion
get into gates much more quickly? - A. That is certainly
correct sir.

You have spoken about the efforts that you made to clear
people away who it appeared to you didn't have tickets?
- A. Yes sir.

Do you believe that those efforts were successful or not?
- A. They were successful in the fact that I cleared them
away from that area.  I doubt very much they were successful
in deterring them from entering or attempting to enter.

      THE CORONER:  Could you repeat that, I just did not
hear? - A. They were successful in the fact that the
horsemen had them swept away from the area, i.e. the
river side of the funnel bar, the pavement in front of
the shops, but as to the successfulness of barring them
from coming back then it would be limited because we have
no legal power to arrefct them or anything else with people
walking in the street.

      MR. MANNING:  Some time after 2.30 you could see that
the numbers of people who were there and the numbers of
people who were still coming was going to create a mass
which might be difficult to deal with? - A. As they approached
the situation I was dealing with as I have said before was
a dynamic one and it was not a steady "Here we are, let's
make a decision" it was the fact that it was upon me by
that time.

And you had a brother Officer, an experienced Inspector
who was if you like your equivalent but at the roadside
as opposed to you at the turnstiles? - A. That is correct
sir.

So you took the view at that moment in time that there
were a couple of things that you could usefully do from
your position to try and relieve the pressure.  One was
to send horses to the rear and hope they could work the
crowd back a bit? - A. That is correct sir.

And the second was to relieve the pressure from the side?
- A. That is correct sir.

And under a controlled situation filter some of those
people into the ground? - A. Ultimately, yes.

You were frustrated in the first of those intentions
because the horses and their Officers who were riding
them became unable to move as they became engulfed in
the crowd? - A. Correct sir.
1 s
                                                                     46

                                              R. PURDY



          Q. And what other attitude did you see so far as that part
             of/the crowd was concerned to those Officers on horseback.
             What can you tell us about the way they behaved? - A.
             There was disregard to their instructions and abuse towards
             them.
      B   Q. Put that into more common parlance. Inspector, what was
             happening? - A. They were shouting at the horsemen and
             I saw missiles projected at them.

          Q. As a result of that behaviour were the objects of that
             particular exercise the Officers on horseback trying to
             ease the pressure, were those frustrated by that behaviour?
             - A. By that and by the sheer volume of people I would
             suggest sir.

          Q. So despite your efforts as the Officer if you like in
             immediate charge in front of the turnstiles you then
             perceived that you had what you called a "life threatening
             situation" in front of you? - A. That is correct sir.

          Q. Indeed you graphically described the child that you thought
             might very well have been seriously injured or worse being
             passed out? - A. That is correct sir.
      D
                      THE CORONER:  I think the Officer has made this
               point.   I am trying to "become a little further" I think
               is the saying.

          Q.         MR. MANNING:  You then went through the chain of
               command and discussed the options open to you which
               included the opening of the gates? - A. That is correct
               sir.




      F




                                   Q. One more question




      H
                                                  R. PURDY




One more question, Inspector, please.    You have, in the
witness box today, described your efforts in standing
on this barrier and the efforts that you made both to
shout and to wave, gesticulate, to the crowd.      We are,
of course, in a Coroner's Court as opposed to there,
but would it be fair to suggest to you that rather than
the action you have shown of doing that, that there was
some urgency in the actual movement o f y o u r arm towards
the crowd?  In other words, making it clear to them,
very firmly, that there was a necessity for them to
move back? - A. I would suggest that is correct, sir,
and I would anticipate there would have been some sound
of urgency in my voice when I was doing that as well.

There could have been no doubt to anyone who had seen
you that there was a need, a desperate need, for people
to move back? - A. I would believe so yes, sir.  That
was the opinion I held, that there was a desperate need
for them to hold back.

And that was what you were conveying with your action?
- A. Attempting to, yes, sir.

Thank you very much, Mr. Purdy.

              Cross-Examined by MR. KIHG

Inspector, you were asked   about what was obvious.  Is
it obvious that if people   are let into a ground they
are going to go somewhere   onto the seating or the
terraces? They are going    to go somewhere? - A.
Correct, sir.

Is it obvious that they need to know how to get onto a
particular part of a ground in order to get there?
They need to know where the entrance is? - A. Yes, sir.

It is obvious that they can know it if it is visible in
front of their eyes? That is obvious, isn't it? - A.
Yes, sir.

If the way onto a particular part of a terrace is not
obvious because it is not before their very eyes, they
have to be shown the way in some way don't they? That
is obvious? - A. Yes.

And they can be shown the way either by someone
directing them? - A. Yes.

Or possibly a big sign showing them where? - A. Yes,
sir.

It is obvious, isn't it, that if you cannot see what is
the state of a terrace before you get onto it, that you
                                               8. PURDY




have no knowledge of that state before you get onto it?
That is obvious, if you can't see it? - A. Yes.

Is it obvious that if you are going to prevent people
from entering a terrace which they cannot see the state
of when they go to the entrance, that you need to stop
them going in? That is obvious, if you want to prevent
them going in? - A. Can you just repeat that, please?

Yes.  If you want to prevent people entering a terrace
which they cannot see the state of, so in other words
you can't rely on their own eyes to see what it is
like, if you want to stop that it is obvious that you
have got to take some positive steps to stop it, isn't
it? - A. Or they have.

Or they have, if they know the state, but I am
postulating if they cannot see the state of the
terrace, all right, and they are going to enter a
terrace, but they don't know the state of it, all
right, because they can't see it? - A. Right.

If you want to stop them doing that, it is obvious that
you have got to take some positive steps to stop them,
isn't it? - A. As I have just said, they would have to
make that decision themselves.

If they knew of the state of the terraces? - A. Yes.
There are a number of ways - I am not trying to negate
that, but what we are saying is there are a number of
ways onto the terracing.

I agree. - A. From the concourse, that at any point if
they arrive at point A, B or C, they have to make that
decision.

Sorry, I want to talk about what is obvious.  If you
were going through turnstiles A-G, if Detective
Sergeant Griffiths shows us ....

     THE CORONER:   I am not going to let you go on at
great length with this.  I didn't allow Mr. Payne to
develop this point with this witness.

     MR. KING:   I accept that, but my learned friend
chose to raise it, sir.  I understood your stopping
him, but sir you also asked questions, very properly
through the Jury, as to how people would get onto a
terrace.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.
                                                 R. PURDY




     MR. KING:   And what is crucial is what is obvious
and/what isn't obvious but, sir, I won't pursue it any
further ....

     THE COROWER:   No, Mr. King, I didn't say don't
pursue it, I said I won't allow you to pursue it at
great length.  I want you to make the point that you
wanted to make, which is obvious to me if I may put it
like that, but as quickly and as directly as you can.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, this is a serious matter.  Sir,
I was permitted, and I am not complaining about this
because I accept your ruling, I was permitted to ask
one question.   There are quite a number of other
questions I would like to ask, for example, about
whether it was obvious to the crowd arriving at the
back of those already at the turnstiles that the area
was very seriously congested, but I did not take the
matter further.   My friend has asked seven questions on
this point so far.

     THE CORONER:    That is why I intervened.

     MR. KING:   Sir, with respect, it is not the
number of questions it is to what they are directed.
My learned friend was asking questions about what was
obvious from the point of view of those entering the
ground at the opening of Gate C. That is to what ....

     MR. PAYNE:   No, no.   That is not the point at
all.  I asked this witness, that is all.   I asked him
whether it was obvious to him, that's all, not a
general question - I asa not allowed to do that, tnat is
making a speech.

     MR. KING:   Officer, I won't take it any further
than this.  You are a spectator going through
turnstiles A-G, all right? - A. Yes, sir.

You have in front of you a tunnel? - A. No, sir.

     MR. PAYNE:     He is not a spectator.   This is a
hypothesis, sir.

     MR. KING:   with all due respect, my learned
friend knows quite well that the way I put that
question was in a hypothesis.  The Officer may not have
done, but certainly my learned friend did.

     THE WITNESS:     Do you want rae to answer that, Mr.
Popper?

     THE CORONER:   Assume that you were a spectator,
this is what Mr. King was asking you.
                                                                50

                                                       R. PURDY




             HR. KING:  Sir, I can take this with other
       Officers and I will do so.  It is not going to achieve
       anything to take this any further now.  The point is
       made.

J   Q* I want to deal with what is obvious in a different
       context now, not to do with people having gone through
       the turnstiles.  You described how the numbers became
       so large in the turnstile area, between the perimeter
       gates and the turnstile area, that your raen could not
       function efficiently or properly at the front, that is
       right, isn't it? - A. Correct.

       It was obvious to you at that stage when you withdrew
       them that the sheer volume of people who were at the
       turnstiles was such that they were not going through
       efficiently, were they, at the turnstiles at that
       stage, because of the volume? - A. The numbers would
       obviously be limited by the pressure, because some were
       pressed against the buttresses of the wall.

       At that stage the numbers who were between the
       perimeter gates and the turnstile were too many for
       efficient entry into the ground, that is obvious, isn't
D      it? - A. Correct, sir.

       What time was that, when you made the decision to
       withdraw your men, roughly? - A. I think I have
       estimated, and that is all I can do - as you will
       accept, we are not watching watches at this tine -
       2.40, 2.45, somewhere in that region.

    Q. Did you yourself have a radio? - A. I did, sir, yes.

    Q. Was it working at that time? - A. I don't think so, no,
       sir.   I can't recall, there was a lot of noise from the
       crowd, there was a lot of other noise, and the only
       message I can recall clearly receiving, and again I
       have outlined to the Court I am not sure whether it was
       on the radio or the tannoy, was the one to go onto the
       pitch.

     , So was it the point that your radio just wasn't
       functioning properly? - A. I have been informed since
       that there was a technical fault with radios, and I
       presume one and two are linked.

     , But there was nothing to stop a message - I am not
       saying you should have done any of this - but there was
       nothing to stop a message getting from where you were
       in the turnstile area, for example, to the control box
       inside the ground - if not by radio, for example, by
       somebody running in to give a message?  That was
       possible? - A. I have discussed this matter at a




H
                                                                 51
                                                      R. PURDY




       previous Inquiry and the answer hypothetically is no.
       The/fact is that I was dealing with a situation there
       and then that required my men, and the assistance of
       those men, to save injury.  I didn't do it.

g   Q. I am not saying you did it, I am just asking now what
       were the means of communication, Officer, that's all? -
       A. The means of communication I chose was to see Mr.
       Marshall when things had deteriorated to that length.

     , You went to see him physically but there was nothing to
       prevent messages getting from where you were to, for
       example, the control room inside the ground, either by
       radio if it was working - that was possible if they
       were working? - A. Correct.

     . If they weren't working it was possible if you had
       wanted - I am not saying you had to, I am just saying
       this was possible, it was possible for messages to be
       got to the control room via sending another Officer in
       on foot? - A. Yes.

     . When you look at the configuration of the Leppings Lane
       turnstiles, it is obvious just looking at it that if
D      too many people get into that area and the turnstiles
       are not operating efficiently, that there will be a
       safety problem? That is obvious, isn't it? - A. Yes.

    Q. At your briefing you said that there was mention of
       safety? - A. That is correct.

    Q. What was actually said about safety at the briefing? -
       A. I think Mr. Duckenfield said the words, "Safety is
       paramount".

       I understand, but were any specific directions given as
       to safety measures, things to look out for, things to
       do? - A. I can't recall specifics of that briefing.   It
       is some 18 months ago now, sir.

     , We know, for example, looking through the Operational
       Order, that specifics were on occasion used, for
       example, checking people for alcohol, checking people
       for weapons, those sort of specifics.  Can you remember
       any specifics directed to crowd safety? - A. The
       specific one I can recall and I have outlined, is that
       he briefed the men and said quite clearly that safety
       was paramount.  It is also the duty, as we are all
       aware, of every Officer to prevent (sic) life etc.  It
       is a natural thing that Officers are concerned with
       safety, as I was for my men, and for the people in that
       crowd.




H
                                                                52

                                                        R. PURDY




    Q. I understand that.  I was just asking about specifics
       and/as I understand your answer there was no specific
       direction given of any particular aspect of crowd
       safety. - A. So, there was nothing I recalled
       specifically.
B           THE CORONER:   That is not what he said.  He said
       that he didn't remember any specifics, he couldn't
       recall.

            MR. KING:    I am sorry.   I will preface my summary
       by saying:

    Q. As far as you recall there were no specific directions
       given, that is correct? - A. As far as I can recall,
       no.

    0.. It follows from that, that you cannot recall any
        specific briefing directed to ensuring that the numbers
        of people who got into the turnstile area would never
        exceed a safe number, that is correct too, isn't it? -
        A. Certainly those words were not spoken, no, but we
        have talked about obvious, and that is an obvious, I
        would suggest, that we don't want too many people in
D       that area.

    Q. It is obvious that you should not allow the build up of
       fans in the turnstile area to get so great that the
       turnstile ceased to operate efficiently? That is
       obvious? - A.   Not that 1^ should  not allow, ifyou ....

    Q. No, _it saould   not be allowed? - A. Correct.

    Q. That being the case, to your knowledge, how many
       serials had a specific duty of manning the perimeter
       gates which allowed access into the turnstile area -
       any?- A. Serial 19.

    Q. Had a specific duty of of manning the perimeter gates?
       - A. Well, it had the roving duty, I believe, on the
       roadside.  16, 17 and 18 were detailed to the
       turnstiles I think, if I am correct.

    Q. This is important and I want to know.   It is not meant
       to be a trap,I am just asking you to tell me  what you
       knew.  Your serials were looking after the turnstiles
       at the front of the turnstile area, weren't they? - A.
       That is correct, sir.

    Q. Your turnstiles (sic) had no specific duties directed
       to manning the perimeter gates, that is right, isn't
       it? - A. Correct.




H
                                                               53

                                                      R. PURDY
A

    Q. Are you saying that Serial 19 had a specific duty of
       manning the perimeter gates? - A. No.

    Q. Is it the case that there was no specific order for
       men, Police Officers, to man the perimeter gates - no
B      specific order? - A. No.

    Q. That is correct, is it? - A. That is correct, yes.

    Q. So the situation which had arisen before you caused
       your attempt, and I don't blame you for this because
       you were faced with a very difficult situation, but
       when you had caused your attempt with the horses, to
       try and control what was going on in the turnstile
       area, it had already got to a point that there were too
       many people there, that is obvious, isn't it? - A. No,
       I would suggest that that situation had been ongoing
       throughout, that I had used the horsemen, as I had
       described earlier at 2.30 they were being used, and it
       was an ongoing situation.   It was only when we
       attempted to seal off with them at the very end, that
       we attempted to seal the perimeter gates with them.

    Q. I am sorry, you only attempted to seal the perimeter
D      gates at the end? - A. When I had left Mr. Marshall
       that was the attempt I made, as I outlined to the
       Court.




E




F



                          /Q. Before that there .»




H
                                                   R. PURDY


Q. Before that there had not been an attempt to seal the
   perimeter gates? - A. No, but I had used the mounted
   men in that area between the perimeter gates and the
   funnel.
Q. I understand that but at the point you decided to
   withdraw your manpower the situation had already
   arisen that there were too many people in the
   turnstile area, that is right, is it not? You have
   agreed with me? - A. Yes.
Q. It was after that that the attempt was made to seal
   the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.
Q. Did you know that there were any standby serials
   available? - A. Yes, I was aware of that.
Q. Did you know how, if you needed standby serials and
   their help, you could get it? - A. They were deployed
   from central control.
Q. How would you, if you had wanted further help, go
   about getting it? What would you have to do? - A.
   There were a number of options as you have described
   earlier, the radio, a senior Officer, verbally to
   him, walk to him, whatever.
Q. So if you had required in your mind more manpower
   there was a measure you could have taken?
     THE CORONER:  Yes, that is all right.     Go ahead and
answer that. I am sorry.
     MR. KING:   Let me put it more broadly because I think
I know what you have in mind.
       THE CORONER:   Yes.
Q.      MR. KING: You went to Superintendent Marshall
     when the stage came when you thought that Gate C
     ought to be opened because of the pressure. Can I
     take you to that stage? - A. Yes.
Q.    By that time you had already withdrawn yourmen? - A.
     Yes.
Q. By that time you had already tried to deploy your men
   at the end of the funnel area? - A. Yes.
Q. Then you went to Superintendent Marshall? - A.
   Correct.
                                                          55




                                                 R. PURDY



Q. At any stage during that period there was the means,
   not merely available to you, available to any Officer
   to call for extra manpower to come to the scene. The
   means were there? - A. Correct.
Q. Did you yourselfhear any message asking for extra
   manpower to come to the area? - A. No.
Q. When you went to Superintendent Marshalland
   suggested that Gate C be opened, all right? - A. Yes.
Q. At that stagedid you see orhear whatSuperintendent
   Marshall did? - A. He obviouslyconversed with me
   about that procedure, sir.
Q. Did he make any radio message in your presence? - A.
   That I am not aware, sir, no. I can't recall that.
Q. Gate C was opened, we know, a second time after the
   time you saw? - A. Yes.
Q. We know that?- A. Yes.
Q. You were aware on the day, after your initial opening
   of Gate C and the closing of it, that it was opened a
   second time. Did you witness that? - A. I was down
   the side of the funnel bar I think when that opened
   and pulling people under there.
Q. When it opened at that stage did you see people
   entering through Gate C? - A. I was passing people
   under the funnel bar and towards Gate C, yes.
Q. It was at that stage that a great mass of people went
   through? - A. No, I think I referred to that as Gate
   B, sir, when it opened. When I had got alongside the
   funnel bar, after that initial occasion, looking
   straight forward, I think mention has been made of
   Inspector Bennett sat on the wall earlier. It was
   the gate directly beneath him that opened, Gate B,
   when it all emptied.
Q. Inspector, were you aware that the road had been
   closed, that is, Leppings Lane? - A. No.
Q. Do I take it from that, Inspector, you did not even
   hear any messages on your radio about it being
   closed? - A. No, sir.
                                                               56




                                                             R- HTOf


    Q. At 2.30 do you think your radio was working? - A. I
       can't recall that, sir.  I think I have said inmy
       statement and I have repeated in this Court that I
       can't recall.  You remember certain things.   I don't
B      say that in any way to be evasive but I can't
       honestly recall those things, the minor details of
       that radio message.

                        Further bv THE CORONER:

    Q. Can you just look at this and see if it is yourself
       on that photograph? - A. That is correct.

    Q.   It is you, is it? - A. Yes.

    Q.   This is not a photograph we have used before
         (MWL10/35A) and it will be C.313.  The timing is very
         difficult to read on this but you can see yourself on
         it can you? - A. Yes.

    Q. You are facing towards us, is that correct? - A. Yes,
       sir.
D
    Q. Gate C is just off the picture, as it always is? - A.
       Correct, sir.

    Q. Does that scene remind you of when it might have
       been? - A. I would consider, if I was to hazard a
       guess, that would be later on the second time the
       gate was opened.

    Q. The second time the gate was opened? - A. It was
       certainly not the first.  I would think it would be
       after I had come out, gone down the side of the
       funnel bar to ease people under that bar.  It was
       after that some time.

    Q. After that? - A. After that.  The recollection I
       think I made in my statement and the one I believe
       then was that we were filtering under and they were
       trickling down but you can see the greater numbers
       than that having looked at that photograph.

    Q. Pardon? - A. You can see there are greater numbers
       than I originally thought when you look back at that
       photograph.

                    Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE:
    Q. I have not got any real questions but that photograph
       was taken at five minutes to three.  I think if you




H
                                                             57




                                                           R. HHY

      /
     look at C . 295 which was taken at six minutes to
     three, a minute earlier, we can actually see a group
     of Officers and I think you are with them pushing
     people under the funnel bar? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Then to the right there is a group of Officers just
   about where the barrier would be? - A. That is right,
   sir.

Q. Is that you that we see there? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. So that is when you are pushing people under the bar?
   - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   That is six minutes to three? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   We have actually found someone    in a
photograph.  There is always the first success.

                Cross-Examined bv MRS. McB R IE N :

Q.   Inspector, when the Police Officers were unable to
     achieve their objective of searching and ensuring
     that queues were formed, did you think at that time
     that some drastic action should be taken? - A. I
     thought that when we arrived at that point in time
     that it was my decision then to redeploy those
     Officers which I did.

Q. By doing what? - A. By utilising them on the outside,
   the side of the funnel bar to alleviate the pressure
   and help get people from under that funnel bar where
   they were queuing.

Q. Could you have used your Officers to put a line
   across to stop people coming into that restricted
   area? - A. It would have been extremely difficult.
   That is what I attempted to do when I used the
   mounted Officers at the rear of that funnel area and
   ultimately supplemented them with foot PCs for the
   closing of the gates when I had seen Mr. Marshall.

Q. Could you have taken people away from that area out
   of part of the wedge and taken them to the sterile
   area if more manpower had been available? - A. I
   could have only taken them there if they had wished
   to go there.

Q. I have heard quite a bit of evidence in this Court
   that a number of people did move out of the crushing
   at the turnstile area.  They did this voluntarily.
                                                             58




                                                            R. HHY


      My own son did that to get away from the crushing? -
      A. I would suggest that was very limited.     I in fact
      experienced one particular c h a p . We were trying to
H     help his son on that bar who would not let him come
a     out of that crush which I was most concerned about,
      when we were trying to assist, and there was a
      desperate need that they wanted to go into the ground
      and so to pull them out and ask them to go somewhere
      else would have been against their desire.

    Q. I have read that some would not get out of that area.
       I was reading something last night.  I was wondering
       if some of the ones further back could have been told
       that some of the people were being crushed at the
       front and they could have been moved away to the
       sterile area taking pressure off the back part? - A.
       That would have been the ideal I would suggest.

    Q. Did the fan who was ejected from the football stadium
       have a ticket for the match? - A. I am not aware of
       that, sorry.

D   Q. Have you ever had to stand on a railing or somewhere
       high up to address football fans before? - A. No.  I
       found it a most uneasy situation purely to stand
       there and attempt to do that.

    Q. Would you think that   the fans who were arriving then,
       coming down, the late arrivals, who may be the worst
       for drink would think, "There is no order here.     The
       Police are on top of the railings".   Could it have
       that effect on them, do you think? - A. I obviously
       can't hypothesise on what they were thinking.    My
       intention when I stood on there was to gain
       sufficient height so   that people could see me and do
       as I instructed which was to stop pushing and hold
       back.

    Q. You said outside the turnstiles you thought there was
       a possibility of deaths occurring? - A. That is
       correct.

    Q. What you thought might happen and what actually did
       happen are two different things, are they not?   It is
       only an assumption? - A. To me it was a reality,
       miss.  I had to form and make my decisions on the
       information that I had available to me at that time
       and I considered at that point that people were being
       injured.  I could consider that people would die at
       those turnstiles if we did not take immediate action.




H
Q. Did anybody die outside or were they seriously
     injured outside? - A. I believe there were a number
     of injuries out there at the turnstiles.
Q.   Is there a list   of these injuries?

      THE CORONER:    I think there is no point inpursuing
that, Mrs. McBrien.   I keep on interrupting you.      I am
sorry.   You may think I am unfair.    I feel a little unfair
but the Officer has said to you at the time he perceived
there was a danger and he took an action.      We know, of
course, he knows, you know, everybody knows, that there
were deaths inside subsequently but he did        not know that at
the time.   If he had not    taken this action    we would
probably be sitting here saying, "Why didn't you open the
gates?" or possibly saying that.     You have to take it as he
saw it at the time.   He has told you that there were
injuries.   He has described the limp child who he thought
was dead.   He drew a conclusion.    Whether he was right or
wrong is another matter.      He drew a conclusion and he took
an action and we have in    the end to accept     that.   Do you
see what I am saying? He cannot tell you whether there are
lists because that is not his job.     It is not our task
either to enquire.   We know there were loads of injured
people on the terraces.    I have not got any idea of who
they were.   We are not concerned with those.     It sounds
cruel but that is how it is.

     MRS. McB RI E N: What I was trying to establish was how
serious was the crushing outside in comparison to the
crushing that occurred within Pens 3 and 4. What was the
comparison?




                                    /THE CORONER
                                                  R. PURDY



     THE CORONER:   Yes, I think that is a fair question
because you did actually see something of the crushing
when you got inside? - A. That's correct, sir.

Can you try and answer that.   I know you didn't realise
what it was like inside until you got there, but are you
able to make a comparison between the two crushes, if I
can put it like that? - A. I think it is very difficult
because when I entered the ground it was some minutes
after the tragedy had occurred and therefore if I can say
that I hope the action I took outside prevented what
would have been a similar occurrence as you have just
outlined within.   I think you had got the pre-state of
what would have occurred inside.   Did you follow that?
I think if I hadn't taken action out there with the
situation that I saw, then there would have been a
disaster out there at the turnstiles and I maintain that.

      MRS. McBRIEN:   But it was only a possibility?   You
can* t be sure, can you? - A# No, but I couldn t not take
the action I did to prevent what occurred, or what I
considered would occur.

     THE CORONER:    Does that help you, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:   What you are saying is that you can't
say quite what would have happened if you hadn t taken
that action, but what you fear would have happened is  ^
what actually happened inside, if you hadn't? - A. That s
correct, sir.

          Cross-Examined by MISS ADDELMANN:

Inspector, just one or two matters.   You have told us
what your understanding was and you were told that safety
is paramount? - A. That is correct.

In fact you can't recall any specific instruction, indeed
you don't think there was any with regard to the build-up
at the turnstiles, as to what should occur if that
happened? - A. No, not specifically.   There was nothing
written down or given like that.

Am I correct in my understanding of it that you didn't
feel in any way inhibited from acting on that day because
you didn't have specific instruction about that
situation? - A. No, it is a situation you' take account of
while you are policing the area.   We had got
contingencies for queuing, planning and searching, and
safety is integrated in all.
                                                 R. PURDY


Indeed there are many potential situations which could
arise which you could deal with on your own initiative?
You are quite used to doing that? - A. That is correct.

Just one other matter.   There came a time when you were
dealing with the situation, that you went to see
Superintendent Marshall? - A. Yes.

Now in that context you have been asked about the means
of communications that there was with the control room? -
A. That is correct.

It was put to you that it was theoretically possible at
least, that a message could be got to the control room by
sending an officer on foot? - A. Yes.

You chose to see Superintendent Marshall, as we know.
Looking at that situation today do you still think you
made the right decision between those two alternatives? -
A. Yes.   He was nearer to me than the control box and I
could personally get to him and speak to him.

It was a sensible thing to do and the quickest thing in
those circumstances - A. Thank you.

            Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Inspector, can I follow up one brief point that roy^
learned friend Miss Addelmann just made about initiative.
Did you hear the evidence given by the officer, Inspector
Sykes, who gave evidence just before you? - A. Yes.

Did you hear what I suggested to him about the
responsibility placed upon and initiative expected of
someone of the rank of Inspector? - A. Yes.

Did you agree with his answer to that question? - A. That
is correct, sir.

When you went into the ground, after you had been
summoned into the ground, it is right that you saw
Superintendent Greenwood outside pen 3? - A. That is
correct, yes.

You didn't feel it necessary, as I understand your
evidence, to go up to him, tap him on the shoulder and
say, "What do you want me to do?  or What should I do.
- A. The situation I noted inside which was the scene of
the tragedy.   When I looked into pen 3 Mr. Greenwood was
dealing with the area around there and obviously for me
to go up and start asking things at that point would add
to confusion.   That is why I went on my initiative to
pen 2.
/,-----   -*J?



                                                                                  62



                                                                              R. PURDY


                     Q. You made an assessment of various means of evacuation
                        from that enclosure which you have told us about, on your
                        initiative? - A. That is correct.

                     Q. And acted on that initiative in securing the removal, or
                 B      assisting in the removal of supporters from enclosure 3
                        into enclosure 2? - A. That is correct, sir.

                     Q. An example of you demonstrating the initiative that is
                        expected of you as an Inspector? - A. That is correct,
                        sir.

                             THE CORONER:   Anything, ladies and gentlemen of the
                        jury you want me to ask this witness?

                             Inspector Purdy,   thank you very much indeed.

                             Ladies and gentlemen we will rise for lunch.

                                        (Luncheon adjournment)



                 D




                 E




                 F




                 G
                              B.R. HUCKSTEPP



      THE CORONER:  Ladies and gentlemen, you were asking
I think another couple of questions about this ticket
tout who was arrested, do you remember, these were the
questions, and you wanted to know more detail on that and
also what the tickets were like.

      We are going to be calling another witness who will
be able to give us this information.  It won't be tomorrow
but we have made a note of it and when he comes I will do
my very best to remember to ask him, but in the meantime
can we defer that.  I have got a note of it.  You have
given it to me.


              BRIAN ROBERT HUCKSTEPP Sworn

                     BV THE CORONER:

Brian Robert Huckstepp and you are Police Constable 115,
isn't it? - A. Yes, that is right.

Is it right that on the 15th April 1989 you were part
of Serial 16? - A. Yes, that is right.

Under the command of Sergeant Payne and Inspector Purdy?
- A. Yes, that is right.

We already know that this particular Serial was deployed
or was intended to be deployed outside turnstiles A -G.
Is that right? - A. Yes.

Did you in common with everybody else attend the briefing
within the stadium at around 10 o'clock? - A. Yes, in
the North Stand.

And having had that briefing did you then have a further
discussion/convers&tion/briefing, call it what you will,
with Inspector Sykes? - A. Yes, at the back of the
Leppings Lane Stand.

The details of your duties were outlined? - A. Yes.

And in a nutshell what were you expected to do as far
as you understood it and can remember it now? - A. We were
to control the fans coming in through the turnstiles A-G;
search them; ensure that they don't come in with any
prohibited articles.  Obviously the fans were supposed
to come through out turnstiles they were standing
supporters. We were to ensure that they got into the
ground; make sure they didn't have any al.cohol, offensive
weapons etc. and ensure just that they got into the
ground.

This involved a degree of searching of individual fans?
- A. Yes, that is right as far as possible to search
them for those.
It   H >
                                                                          64

                                                  B.R. HUCKSTEPP



               Q. Can you recollect, I don't know if you can at this s ag ,
                  do you know outside which turnstiles you had positioned
                  yourself? - A. Yes, I was directly outside turnstile A
                  and B.
               Q. It is a double turnstile,   isn't it? - A. That is right,
           B      yes.
               Q. Is it right you originally positioned yourself a yard
                  or two or three, however many yards it may be, away from
                  them? - A. Yes, not directly outside the turnstiles, we
                  would just be beyond it you know.

               Q. And when you first started at about 11.30/12 o'clock very
                  easy? - A. Very easy, very quiet.

               Q. I am right in thinking, am I not, that the people w ® r®
                  friendly and nobody really complained when you checked
                  them? - A. No, they often stopped.  They would stop to
                  talk to us as they were going in because there was no
                  rush at all, plenty of time.

               Q. As a matter of interest did you actually find anything
                  on any of those early people? - A. For myself I think
                  I confiscated just one, you know like a pole from a flag.
                  That is the only thing I took off any fan.

               Q. Were there eight Officers, one per, or was it four Officers
                  or five.  Can you remember? - A. Ten Officers on our Serial
                  so I would imagine, I am not sure how the othe^s were
                  broken down.  The turnstiles were different.  There was a
                  two and a one.and a two and a one.  I am not sure of the
                  exact deployment of them.

               O. Things carried on like that but presumably the numbers
                  swelled, the number of supporters swelled as it was getting
                  near to the match.  Did you alter your method of checking
                  the supporters? - A. Obviously as match time approaches
                  you have to become a little bit more selective in t e
                  people that you search because the numbers become too
                  many to search every single person.

                Q. So how do you do that, do you sort of say I will take
                   every tenth person" or do you look and select. - A.
                   Generally you do it from your own experience.  You looK
                   at the people who you think might be having alcohol or
                   anything on them and you search them.

                Q. You were saying that as time went on you have to be
                   more selective because there are more numbers and I asked
                   you how you did this and you said you based it
                   experience and you Biooked and thought: I had
                   have a look at him or her"? - A. Yes.




           H
                                                             65

                                     B.R. HUCKSTEPP



Q. And pulled them out, so to speak, and say:   "Come over
   here".  How do you do it? - A. Well you would not pull
   them out.  You would just stop them:  "Is it all right
   if I have a quick look in your pockets".   There is no
   great deal to it.

Q. I have already asked you whether you confiscated anything
   and you said the only thing was this ...   Perhaps I
   should have made that clearer.  Is that in fact the only
   thing you confiscated throughout the whole time or did
   you pick anything else up? - A. No, that is the only
   thing I confiscated.

Q.    So when did it begin to get busier so you had tobecome
     more selective? - A. It is hard to put an exact time   on
     it.   I would think going on for 2 o'clock, something
     around that area.

Q. But at that time you were still able to perform your
   function.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you observe anything else with regard to your
   colleagues at around that time? - A. I noticed that
   various colleagues had to go away from the post for some
   reason or other, some with prisoners and others on other
   enquiries.

Q. Did that happen before 2 o'clock or after 2 o'clock
   in the main? - A. I would think some of them went before
   2 and one, may be two went after 2 o'clock.

Q.   We then approach about 2.30, okay? - A. Yes.

Q. About, I said, not to the minute.   Did things continue
   as you have described from 2 o'clock onwards or did it
   change? - A. From 2.3 0 onwards things changed drastically
   and quickly.

Q. Just in your own words tell me how you perceived it?
   - A. Well by 2.30, that time I was on my own outside
   turnstiles A and B because my colleague had gone on
   another enquiry and I positioned myself in between
   both turnstiles so people were passing either side of
   me.

Q. And and B this is? - A. Yes.  My selected searching, I
   had geared that down very much, there was just too many,
   then all of a sudden the swell just seemed to increase
   and there was no longer queues it was just a big mass
   all outside the turnstile.

Q. Could you see how that happened? - A. No, from my view
   which was directly outside the turnstile I did not have
   a very good view of what was happening beyond out on
   the road etc.  I can just recall all of a sudden every­
   thing increased, the numbers increased and I was pushed
   to one side.
                               B .R. HUCKSTEPP



Were you pushed against the turnstile wall, the turnstile
or something else? - A. Well I came out of the mouth of
th6 turnstiles because if I had remained there I would
have been taken through into the turnstiles so I went to
one side of them and there it becomes a corner with entrance
gate B I believe it is.  I was positioned in there.
But do I deduce from your answer in that position you
were actually out, there was not much you could do because
you were standing to one side, apart from looking of course?
- A. No, I was partly pushed, partly directed into that
side.  My arms were pinned up against my chest.  I could
not have moved freely and I chose that position or I went
into that position rather than go into the turnstiles
because that is where I would have gone.

Did you notice any of the mounted Officers within the area
where you were closeby to you either just before 2.30 or
afterwards? - A. After 2.30 I can recall a mounted Officer
coming up to the turnstile where I was.  This was when
the crush had increased.  I can remember him coming right
up almost next to me.  I presume he was trying to regulate
the fans either side of him into both of the turnstiles
but he did not seem to be having much effect and he withdrew.

Were the fans who you could see, because you were right
up against the turnstiles, were they distressed as far as
you could tell? - A. They were in discomfort.  We were
all crushed together.  You could not move freely.  You
could not take your hand down and put it into your pocket
or anything like that, your hands were where they were
and people were applogising to me for pushing into me
but there was nothing they could do about it.

So does it mean then in fact although everybody was in
a bit of a crush everybody was behaving perfectly properly
as far as you were concerned because you said they were
apologising to you, they were .... A. Yes, all they were
doing was trying to get into the turnstiles, nothing
untoward.

Did people ask you to do anything about it? - A. No because
at that stage I don't think anybody realised it was going
to continue   the crushing, it might just have been a swell
or something like that and they might have gone back the
crowd, but nobody said anything.

Did anybody say anything to you at any time? - A. Whilst
I was outside the turnstiles?

Yes? - A. Apart from apologising for pushing into me no,
just a few jokes that is all about what was going off.

From your reply you obviously left that position at some
point? - A. Yes.
                               B.R. HUCKSTEPP



Where did you go? - A. I forced my way into the turnstile
and went through the turnstile into the ground.

Was that on your own initiative or was it because somebody
told you to withdraw, redeploy, whatever the correct term
is? - A. The only Police Officer I could see clearly
was P.C. Wright who is one, may be two turnstiles to the
other side of me and he motioned for us to go in, so I
presume he got the word from further over to go into the
ground.




                  Q. And having got through
                                          B. R. HUCKSTEPP




Having got through the turnstile, and you were now in
the^concourse area, in other words, you were behind? -
A. Yes.

Did anybody speak to you there, of the supporters? - A.
Any of the supporters speak to me?

Yes. - A. No, nobody said anything.   I didn't stay long
there, I went straight out of Gate C.

I see.  So you then went out of Gate C. What were you
intending to do? You have gone in and you are now
going out, what was the objective of going out again? -
A. I was going to give whatever assistance I could, for
us to be redeployed.

Having got out of Gate C where did you make your way
to? - A. I stayed in the vicinity of the funnel bar,
the blue bar that runs away from the turnstiles.

Which side, the river side or the ...? - A. Yes, the
river side.  The fans were crushed in a the other side,
so I was on the river side.

Did anybody speak to you then? - A. Yes, there were a
lot of fans saying to me, "Why don't you open the
gates?  We have all got tickets, just open the gates
and ease tnis".

Did they look distressed to you at that point?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, I ara sorry to interrupt
again, but really we cannot hear very well at all.

     THE CORONER:     You will have to get nearer. - A.
Is that better?

     MISS ADDLEHAN:    Yes, that is.

     THE CORONER:   Miss Addlecian, when you can't hear
you must tell me. I don't object to that at all.

You were saying that people were saying to you .... -
A. To open the gates.

io open the gates, and I was asking you whether they
appeared distressed to you at that point? - A. Yes, the
people on the other side of the funnel bar where the
crush was, there were people in distress there, some in
more distress than others, some in severe distress.

Are you saying that there was quite a severe crush in
that area? - A. Certainly yes, up near the turnstiles.
                                           B. R. HUCKSTEPP




Was it then that you heard Inspector Purdy say to
Officers at the gate that Gate C should be opened, or
did you not hear that? - A. I can't distinctly remember
the exact course of events. I seem to recollect
Inspector Purdy warning people, Officers outside the
gate, that they were going to be opened.

Was it in fact opened? - A. Yes, it was.

On that occasion which we are talking about now, did it
stay open for any length of time? - A. I would estimate
30-60 seconds.

Quite a   short time? - A. Yes.

Who got in? - A. The fans who were on the river side       of
that bar, it cleared that area.

In fact, those fans that got in were not, in fact, in
such a crush, were they? - A. No, they were out of the
crush.

Then the gate closed.   You had nothing to do with
opening the gate, that is   right, isn't it? - A. No.

And you had nothing   to do   with closing it? - A. Yes,
that is right.

And you don't know, or if  you do know tell me, what
instructions if any were given either with regard to
the opening or closing, apart from what you have
already told me about Inspector Purdy? - A. I can't
remember anybody specifically giving an order or
anybody opening the gate.

The gate having closed again, did you remain at what
you call the funnel bar? - A. Yes.

Did anything happen?  Was there any change within that
area? - A. It had not changed, the conditions for the
fans on the other side of that funnel bar at all.  They
were still in distress and if anything it was getting
worse, people were getting aggravated.

Could you at this point see any Police horses? - A. I
think there were Police horses away to my left, up
towards the perimeter gates.  I didn't really take a
great deal of notice of what was happening.

Could you see why it was that the fans who you were
close to were in this desperation situation? - A. It
must have been from the sheer volume of numbers behind
them all pressing towards the turnstiles.  The fans at
the front were in quite severe distress, and the ones
3
                                                                     70

                                                    B. R. HUCKSTEPP




            at the back, from what I could see, they obviously
            weren't as badly affected.

          . So what you are saying there was a gradation of
            distress as you got nearer to the front? - A. If you
    jg      can imagine that the funnel bar is --- we got a perfect
            cross section of the crowd.  We could see the ones near
            the turnstiles who were really being crushed up against
            the turnstiles, and if you looked back away from the
            turnstiles following the funnel bar, you could see that
            the severity of the distress went down.

         Q. Did you hear any public address announcements? - A. No.

         0. You did not see a landrover, did you? - A. I couldn't.
            I don't think I could have seen it from where I was.   I
            don't recall seeing one.

         Q. Was Gate C, which was the gate nearest to you, opened
            again? - A. For the second time, yes.

         Q. What did you do in relation to that second opening? -
            A. When it was opened the second time, the fans were
            streaming away from the funnel bar and round into the
            gate, and I positioned myself just outside Gate C so
            the fans were passing either side of me and all around
            me, and I was just telling then to slow down, take
            their time, everybody is going to get in.

          . In fact, I think you said that they entered orderly? -
            A. Yes, there was very few running.  There was a couple
            of people running but everybody else was just walking.

          . I think after a few minutes something happened to the
            gate, there was a movement with regard to it, what was
            that? - A. I remember the width of the gate being
            narrowed.   It was closed partially and the access was
            restricted.   I think somebody was checking tickets and
            the flow of fans was much reduced.   They were going in,
            in twos and threes.

          . Did you see it close totally at all, can you remember
            that? - A. I can't really remember it being closed
            totally.  I can remember the flow of fans being a
            trickle and they were just checking the tickets, so I
            presumed I would have moved on before it was shut.

          . You then left that position, didn't you, of standing
            there as a ....- A. Yes, I went back to join the rest
            of ray serial, who were just back round towards entrance
            Gate B again.

          . In other words, you went back into the original area
            outside? - A. That is right.




    H
                                          B. R. HUCKSTEPP




Which by this time I assume was not empty but very much
clearer? - A. By the time I got back it was almost
totally empty.

Did you then hear, or were you given any instructions?
- A. I didn't hear it myself.  There was another
Officer with us that had a radio and we heard the
message to go onto the pitch, so we made our way ....

Can you remember what he told you was said? - A. I
can't really.  I just remember him turning round and
saying that that message had been passed, and we all
just ran inside entrance gate B.

B?- A. Yes, we went in entrance gate B.

lie didn't mention - can you recollect whether he either
mentioned injuries, pitch invasion, overspill, anything
like that? - A. I just remember, "All Officers onto the
pitch".   I would think it would be - I think the
message was a pitch invasion, I think.

You, as you have said, entered the stadium? - A. Yes.

Did you go onto the pitch side of the .... - A. Yes, we
ran in through entrance gate B, past the mouth of the
tunnel and into the South Stand, down the South Stand
and onto the pitch that way.

Tell me this, when you got there, when you got onto the
pitch, do you recollect whether play was still in
progress at that point? - A. I am sure play had stopped
by the time we got there.

You are pretty sure of that? - A. I don't recall seeing
any players or officials on the pitch.




              /Q. You said you went .
                                                           B. R. HUCKSTEPP



You said you went through Gate B. In your
statement - it does not matter but I want to be sure
which gate - you said, "I went through Gate C". Can
you remember if it was B or C? I am not too worried
because it makes no difference? - A. I thought it was
entrance to Gate B because I remember running past
that tunnel because I remember Officers of my serial
going to go down the tunnel.
In other words, if you had gone in through C you
would not have gone past the tunnel is what you
say? - A. I don't think so, no.
             Cross-Examined bv M R . PAYNE:

From your position beside the railing outside the
turnstiles you said you saw the crowd at the front
was in distress? - A. Yes.
Will you describe for the Jury what you actually saw?
What was the condition of the people in the crowd at
the front? - A. There was severe crushing. People
were being pushed up against the wall and against the
funnel or people were trying to force themselves back
from the funnel as well by putting their arms on to
it to give themselves a little bit of a breathing
space. I can remember there was one young lad, his
father made a small gap for him to get out, and I was
going to pull him out but he just wouldn't come
because he said he wanted to watch the match. People
right up near the turnstiles were getting crushed
quite badly.
Were they saying anything to you? ~ A. Yes, they were
shouting to open the gates. There were other people
milling around behind us and they were shouting the
same things, that they had all got tickets, just open
the gates.
              C r o s s - E x a m i n e d bv MR.   KING:

Officer, you had been to a briefing before you went
on to your duties that day? - A. Yes, that is right.
Can you recall anything said to you in that briefing
about the numbers coming into the turnstile area,
anything about that? ~ A. Is this the first main
briefing?
                                         B. R. HUCKSTEPP



Yes, any of the two briefings? - A. No, I don't
recall anything of that.
There came a time, you told us, when you became
ineffective. You could not do anything because your
arms were pinned against your chest and you were not
serving any purpose at the front by the turnstiles.
That is right, is it not? - A. Yes, that is right.
What time was that about? - A. I would think it was
somewhere in the region of 2.40.
At that stage there were clearly so many people
between the perimeter gates and the turnstile area
that it was an impossible situation at that stage so
far as you were concerned? ■ A. It was an impossible
situation to search them and to complete my task that
I had been given, if that is what you mean.
Not only that you were there and you were pinned, so
I understand it, with your arms against your chest? ~
A. Yes.
If you were like that then the people who were coming
by you must have been like that because everyone was
pushed up against you by the sound of it? - A. Yes,
that is right.
You yourself knew that people who were coming into
that turnstile area had to go through the perimeter
gates. You would know that, would you not? - A. Yes.
Did you yourself consider how it was that so many
people were getting through the perimeter gates so
that we would arrive at the situation where you were
pinned with your arms against your chest in that way?
Did you turn your mind to that thought? ~ A. No, not
at the time. I was just more concerned obviously
with my little area where I was getting pushed into.
I had not given it any thought as to why they had all
arrived at that particular time or how many.
Afterwards you came to make a statement, did you not,
to those who were investigating this disaster? - A.
Yes.
I just wonder if you can be shown a copy of it
please?
  THE CORONER:   Which particular bit?
                                                          74




                                               B. R. HUCKSTEPP




    MR. KING:    Page five, sir.
     THE CORONER:   If it is an expression of opinion then
I do not think we will take it. Let us have a look.
     MR. KING: Sir, I want to elicit the facts upon which
it was based. With respect, sir, we have had many
witnesses giving opinions of what was going on, be it
ticket touts in the middle, be it the reason for gates
opening or not opening, based on facts and that is all I
want to investigate.
     THE CORONER:    Just let me read it to myself. I have
read it but I needto reread it. Mr. King, I think I am
going to say no to this; not because we have not done it
before. I agree we have done a lot of surmising but, on
the whole, we have done that with relatively senior
Officers. This man - and I am not criticising him in any
way when I say what I am saying now - had a relatively
minor role to play in this event. That does not mean to
say he cannot have thoughts and opinions but he is not an
and if we allow him to say what he thinks it has no value.
He may be right and he may be wrong but it is not an
opinion which necessarily carries any particular weight.
     MR. KING: Sir, I abide by your ruling and I do so
respectfully. May I say, sir, respectfully that I would
invite the Tribunal, the Inquests, to apply the same
principle to all future witnesses who are being asked to
give opinions as to why a situation has arisen. I say that
with respect, not because I am making any criticism but we
have up to this point had a wide range of opinions being
expressed on a number of issues not necessarily all based
on fact as opposed to surmise and that is why I have been
going down that route, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, that is a very good point
actually. What I think we will do in order to be entirely
fair in this matter is that I will allow you in this
particular instance because you may have felt I have taken
you by surprise, to ask this witness certain things. In
fact there are three points, in fact there may be four, but
you are right. We will draw a line over the opinions and
we will deal with the witnesses simply as to the facts as
they know them. In that way I think we will be able to run
a smoother course.
     MR. KING:   I do not disagree with you.
                                                B. R. HUCKSTEPP



      THE CORONER:   Are you happy with that?
     MR. KING: I am happy with that, sir, and in saying
what I have said I make no criticism of you.
     THE CORONER:   I am sure you will appreciate it is not
easy to steer a course through the middle.
     MR. KING: You do understand when I represent certain
families who hear certain opinions being expressed and when
an opinion is expressed the other way they will get
agitated if that is not put forward too.
     THE CORONER:   I think this seems to be a fair way of
resolving the issue. I will pass my copy of the page to
you.    In fact it  is highlighted the relevant part. Doyou
want him to read    it out?
      MR. KING:   Sir, that will be helpful.
     THE CORONER:     Then you will be sure you have got the
bit that you want.
     MR. KING: Sir, perhaps he can read on from page five
throughout the incident which is the top of the page?
Q.        THE CORONER:   You have got that, have you
     not? - A. No, I haven't.
Q. I will pass it to you. It starts at the bottom of
   the previous page. It is the last paragraph.
Q.       MR. KING: Do you see the paragraph beginning,
     "Throughout the incident", Officer? - A. Yes, I do.
Q. Could you perhaps read that paragraph out to the end?
   — a . Throughout the incident both outside and inside
   the ground there seemed to be communication problems.
   It seemed that many did not know what was going on or
   what was the best course of action because outside
   the ground could possibly have been better controlled
   with more Police Officers and a better regulation of
   the flow of fans up to the turnstiles. At the time
   when the crush reached its height our particular
   serial seemed to be down to a quarter strength of
   what it should have been."
     Can I just say that that is wrong now, sir?
                                                                76


                                                    B. R. HUCKSTEfrP'-



    Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, just read what is written,
         because you will be able to correct it. - A. "I believe
         that opening the outer gates was a very necessary
         decision as the situation was becoming out of hand and a
         serious risk of injury.   Knowing the Hillsborough ground
B        as I do and how the Leppings Lane end fills up, it might
         possibly have been better to direct the fans coming in
         through the open gate into the flank areas which I saw
         were by no means full."

              MR. KING:   Can I just deal with the factual basis
         for the opinion which you expressed there, because I take
         fully on board, indeed I agree with the learned Coroner,
         your view as to a bett er regulation of the flow of fans
         to the turnstiles, is this based on these facts, that you
         knew that for fans to get into the turnstile area they
         had to go through the perimeter gates?     You knew that? -
         A. I knew that but the se opinions are my  original
         opinions after the inc ident and obviously  not with the
         full knowledge of the  other facts and what  was going on.

    Q.    Of course, and that iswhy I want just to glean the facts
         you knew, that's all. - A. Well, as I was stood up
D        against the turnstile and suddenly being swamped,
         obviously the regulation was important to me.

    Q.    What was important to you was there should be regulation
         of people coming into the turnstile area? - A. Of course,
         but as I said I don't know the circumstances beyond that.

    Q. I agree with that, but I am just concentrating on the
       facts. - A. Yes, that's right then.

    Q. The turnstile area we know is a relatively restricted
       area, isn't it? - A. Yes.

    Q. It can only take so many people in safety, that's
       obvious? - A. Yes.

    Q.   I just deal then with the disappearance, if I can put it
         that way, with any particular members of your serial.
         Did you have a Sergeant? - A. Yes.

    Q. What was    his name? - A. Sergeant Payne.

    Q. When did    you last see Sergeant Payne? - A. I can t
       remember    the exact time.  It was before 2.00 pm on   the
       day.

    Q. You have been very fair.   I asked the classic question
       one shouldn't.   I thought you were going to say
       yesterday or something like that!   Sergeant Payne was the
       Sergeant in charge of you? - A. That's right.
                                           B. R. HUCK S T EP F •


You say you last saw him on the 15th of April at what
time? - A. Before 2.00 pm, I can't be sure.

Do you know what had happened to him? •* m . He went to
escort two people who had been arrested, him and three
other officers, I believe.

Three other officers from the serial? - A. Yes, two who
returned.

Can I deal with the communication problems of which you
were aware so I just want to deal with what you were
aware.  Did you yourself have a radio? - A. No.

Who had a radio to your knowledge as far as your serial
was concerned? -A. Sergeant Payne, Inspector Purdy and
possibly one other PC.

You had no personal means of communication other than if
you could do so by word of mouth? - A. That s right.

Of course when you are pinned in the way you described,
it would become impossible for you to make an oral
communication to any senior officer?   That's obvious?
A. At that particular time, unless they are within my
vicinity, yes.

When later on after everybody had gone through the gates
and you told us you received a message to go into the
ground. - A. Yes.

Did you not receive some sort of communication or
understanding as to why you were being asked to go in as
to what had happened? - A. As I say, I didn t personally
receive the message myself.   I didn't have a radio.   I
was of the understanding that it was a pitch invasion.

You had the understanding there was a pitch invasion.
From whom did you get that understanding? - A. It would
be other officers in my serial.

That was before you went into the ground? - A. Yes.

Dealing with what you yourself saw as to the state of the
terraces after you had gone into the ground and after we
know the disaster had occurred, you were able to se®»
were you, that the flank areas were by no means full? -
A. Yes.

Which flank areas of the terrace are you referring to?
To help you if I may could we have the plan up, sir?

     THE CORONER:   Certainly, 274.
                                           B. R. HUCKSTEPF.


     MR. KING:   Just to help you, officer, do you see
the plan shows on the left hand side as you are looking
at it the West Stand and the terraces in front of it? -
A. Yes.

We can see in the middle are pens 3 and 4.   Going from
the bottom to the top of the plan, the two centre ones
are 3 and 4.   Which are the flank areas which you are
referring to? - A. Pens 1 and 2 and is it 6?   Five and
six.

In other words, the other sides of the centre pens? - A.
Yes.

     THE CORONER:    I think it is actually 6 and 7 which
he means:

Five is the little bit? - A. Yes, that's right.

     MR. KING:   When you made the observation that those
side flanks were by no means full, and said to yourself,
"it would have been better to direct people into those
side flanks," that was at what time? - A. It would be
something, what, 3.30/3.45, something like that.

      THE CORONER:   I am sorry, could you repeat the
ques tion?

     MR. KING:   Let me take you through it.   You saw
what we know to be Gate C.   That opened and people went
through? - A. Yes.

Then the situation outside   in the turnstile area had
calmed down.   It had been   - I wouldn't say solved -but
it had been retrieved so there was no longer a problem.
A. Yes.

Then you were asked to re-group with your serial and you
were asked because you had heard about a pitch invasion,
in the way you have described, to go into the ground?
A. Yes.

How long after can you estimate in time Gate C had been
opened and a lot of people  had gone through on that
occasion, was it that you heard the message you should go
into the ground?   Can you estimate the time? - A.
Possibly ten, fifteen minutes.

When you went into the ground then, was it then you were
able to see the state of the side flanks as opposed to
the centre pens? - A. It was something I noticed, yes.

At that stage? - A. Yes.
7
                                                                      79


                                                      B. R. H U C K S T E P F .


        Q. When Gate C was opened for thirty to sixty seconds, that
           is, the short period, as I understand your evidence the
           fans who went   in then were going in, in a sense, because
           they had been   invited to go because, as you understood
           it, there was an intention to open the gates to allow
    D     them in?  - A. I can't recall anybody shouting at them to
    B     go into the ground.    I just recall the gates being
           opened and the fans made their way in.

        Q. Yes, but as you understood it from talking to Inspector
           Purdy the idea was they should be open for fans to be
           able to get in? - A. I didn't actually speak to Inspector
           Purdy.   That was the impression I got.

        Q. It wasn't that you thought for that thirty second period
           the fans were going in against the wishes  of those who
           had made the decision to open the gate? - A. It is not
           something I thought of.    They went in at a fast rate.

        Q. You didn't think that here were fans who were invading
           the ground? - A. No, I didn't.

        Q. When the gate was opened for a second time, and a lot
           more people went in - I wasn't quite sure - how far away
           from the gates were you?   Could you see the entrance to
           Gate C clearly? - A. I would be within five feet of the
           entrance.

        Q. When they went through could you see whether or not there
           were any police officers or stewards on the other side of
           the gate to greet them, if I can put it this way, as they
           entered? - A. I had my back to the inside of the gate.
           I was facing fans as they were coming in.

        Q. So you weren't able to see? - A. I didn't take any notice
           of what was happening inside.

        Q. Did you ever see any steward, for example, near Gate C? -
           A. When the gate had been closed to restrict the flow of
           fans into the gate there was a steward, maybe two
           stewards.

        Q. Where were they? - A. Actually on the gate checking
           tickets.

        Q. Gate? - A. Gate C.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

        Q. If I can just clarify that last point.   When you saw the
           two stewards, possibly one steward, on the gate checking
           tickets, this was after a few minutes of Gate C being
           opened? - A. Yes, that's right.




    H
                                                               80


                                                    B. R. HUCKSTEPF.


    Q. The crowd, the influx, had gone down to... - A. It was
       much reduced.

    Q. Much reduced.      Thank you.


B




C




D




E




                       MR. KING:   Sir, there was one.




H
I >J   _v

                                                                        81

                                                    B.R. HUCKSTEPP



                        MR. KING:  Sir, there was one fact I forgot to ask
                  him for his opinion.

                        THE CORONER:   Right.

            B                 Further Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

                Q. I started in fact two sentences down.  You gave the
                   opinion that it seemed that many did not know what was
                   going on and what was the best course of action.  That
                   was the statement of opinion you expressed in the paragraph
                   you read out.  That is near the top of that paragraph, do
                   you see? - A. Yes.

                Q. What were the facts upon which you based the opinion that
                   many did not know what was going on? - A. To be honest
                   I am not quite sure what were the facts that I based
                   that opinion on, just the overall chaos, the confusion
                   of the incident.  It was just very very confusing what
                   was happening.

                ©. And the opinion "what was the best course of action",
                   course of action in relation to what is that opinion
            D      directed? What stage of the events are you directing
                   us in that sense? - A. I would think it is the best
                   course of action to alleviate the crush outside.

                Q. What did you base your view, what fact that it seemed
                   many did not know what was the best course of action?
                   - A. That would be on the reaction of the P.C.s I would
                   thihk.  We were just wondering what was the best course
                   of action.  The decision was obviously being made but
                   it was not conveyed to all of us so it would be our
                   indecision.

                         MR. KING:   Thank you very much.


                                Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

                Q. When Gate C was first opened was there anybody there
                   checking for tickets then? - A. Not that I was aware of.

                Q. So for quite a while people were just going in like a
                   free-for-all? - A. The first time there was no more than
                   a minute there was quite a fast influx of fans.

                Q. Do you agree that there has to be a limit on the number
                   of fans entering the stadium? - A. Yes, obviously.

                Q. At what point does this limit have to occur? — A. The
                   limit to the fans entering the ground?




            H
i !,   ►
                                                                             82

                                                      B.R. HUCKSTEPP



               Q.   Yes. - A. It occurs at the turnstiles the orderly entry.
                    They know how many to expect and how many to go in.

               Q. So it would not be possible to check the numbers going in
                  through an open gate as the rate of flow was so fast that
                  day.  Do you agree? - A. On the second occasion?
           B
               Q.   Yes? - A. I don't think it would be possible to number
                    them all but the situation had gone beyond that.  It
                    had to be done to save life and injury.

                            MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you, Constable.


                                  Cross-Examined by MISS ADDELMANN:

               Q. Officer, forgive me if I am going over something which
                  you may have covered before but as you know I could not
                  hear very well down this end.

                          You were asked about your opinion as to a better
                    regulational flow of fans through the turnstile.  That
                    of course is your opinion but am I also right in thinking
                    that you don't have any ideas how that could actually be
           D        achieved? - A. That is right.   As I said that was my
                    opinion based on the fact I was suddenly swamped and
                    engulfed by the crowd.  To say how many Police Officers
                    it would have needed to have brought about that better
                    regulation I would not know.  I would think it would be
                    a considerable amount, at least one Officer to one fan.

               Q. I think it is right to say that at the time of the
                  incident last year you had relatively little experience
                  actually policing at Hillsborough? - A. That is right.
                  I had only worked at the Leppings Lane end of the ground
                  once prior to that.  That was my second occasion. I have
                  not got a great deal of experience of working that match.

               Q. To put it in full context I think you had attended
                  regularly as a fan, a supporter? - A. That is right but
                  it is always at the other end of the ground.  I am a
                  regular supporter but never at the Leppings Lane end.

                            MISS ADDELMANN:   At the Kop end.    Thank you very
                    much.


                                       Further by THE CORONER:

               Q. Can I just ask you one thing.  Just look- and see whether
                  you are the Officer in the centre of this picture.   There
                  is a Police Officer facing outward? - A. No, that is not
                  me sir.  I would be just to the left of that picture.
                                                            83


                                      B.R. HUCKSTEPP



Q. I am relieved to be truthful because it saves me putting
   it up on the screen.

         Mr. King asked you what time you last saw
   Sergeant Payne on the day and I think you said some time
   before 2 o'clock? - A. Yes sir, that is right.

Q. Can you just remind me what was the situation like at
   that time at the turnstiles? - A. It was relatively quiet,
   there was no problems.

Q. And you never saw him again until well into the incident,
   I take it? - A. It would be after the incident when we
   regrouped behind Leppings Lane.

Q. So you have no idea what happened to him whether he came
   back or not, just from your knowledge? - A. From my
   knowledge, no.

          THE CORONER:   Thank you.    That is all I wanted to
   ask.

           MR. HALE:     Excuse me, sir, before the next witness
   is called I wonder if you would mind an observation about
   the s e mi c rophone s .

          THE CORONER:   By all means.

         MR. HALE:  I have some experience of these things.
   They are obviously very directional and also intended
   not to pick up the murmurings of politicians nearby and
   therefore they are not unduly sensitive.  I think you
   can see the witness, if he is anything more than 3 inches
   away from it unless he speaks up with something of a
   Thespian voice you just are not going to hear them.

         You sir will get a distorted view because you can
   see his lips and that is half the battle.  The jury I
   am sure also will have a better chance of hearing him
   than we have who are around the corner and my friends
   at the far end who of course will be looking down making
   notes and therefore can't see the lips. I would be most
   grateful if you would ask the witnesses to get right up
   to it within 3 inches and then I think we have got a chance
   of hearing them.

         THE CORONER:  Yes, I agree.  The thing that concerns
   me you are right, quite right, is that witnesses find
   it very difficult to sit so far forward.  That distracts
   them, but you are right.
                                                            84

                                     K.E. HORSFIELD




                 KENNETH EDWARD HORSFIELD Sworn

                        By THE CORONER:

Q. It is Kenneth Edward Horsfield.     You are Police Constable 117
   - A. That is correct.

Q. Your job was also outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles?
   - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. But you were positioned outside turnstile number 16.     Is
   that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. You were still under the same overall command of Inspector
   Sykes but you were one of the other Serials which was
   on the other side of the barrier from A-G? - A. That is
   correct, yes sir.

Q. In fact the nearest turnstile to A-G? - A. Yes.

Q. I just want to take your evidence probably fairly briefly
   but it is by way of comparison more than anything else?
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. You took up your position at about 11.40 or thereabouts?
   - A. Thereabouts sir, yes.

Q. It was quiet at that time? - A. Yes, very quiet.

Q. And you too were intending to search people and prevent
   prohibitive items being taken in? - A. That is correct sir,
   yes.

Q. As a matter of interest did you actually find anything on
   anybody that day? - A. Only soft drink cans.  The people
   that we did check carrying bags we asked them not to take
   the cans into the ground and they were placed in a large
   plastic dustbin which was next to the turnstile.

Q. And   no problems with that at all? - A. None at all.

Q. Would I be right in saying that on the whole people went
   through quite freely until about 2 o'clock? - A. Yes, no
   problems at all.

Q. And   you didn't have any problems. I think there was only
   one   person who was an elderly man who did not seem to quite
   understand what was happening.   Is that right? - A. Yes,
   that would be round about 2.15, between 2.15 and 2.30.
   I observed a gentleman in the entrance to' the turnstiles
   near the gates, the entrance gates.   He was wearing a
   Notts. Forest cap and scarf and he was carrying a whlht&
   plastic carrier bag and a tan ladies purse in his left hand.
                                                        85

                                  K.E. HORSFIELD



   He was wandering round looking rather confused.  I would
   put him into his late 50s perhaps early 60s in age.

Q. My age. - A. Sorry sir.  I approached this gentleman and
   I informed him that he was in fact at the wrong end of
   the ground and that the Leppings Lane end was for the
   Liverpool supporters, quite plain to see.  He did seem
   very confused.  I asked him for his ticket so I could
   direct him to his correct entrance point.  The gentleman
   stated:  "I have not got a ticket but I have got £10 in
   my purse if you know where I can buy one".  I directed
   this gentleman to the Penistone Road end but I advised
   him to go home at that time.




                      Q. Then from 2 o'clock
                                                            86

                                           K. E. HORSFIELD




Q. Then from 2 o'clock onward, things began to become
   busier, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.  Between 2 and
   2.30 the crowds were, I would say, as per normal for
   most football matches, a steady stream of people,
   orderly queues forming at the turnstiles.

Q. About 2.30 did you do anything or see anybody, or did
   anything change in any way? - A. It got a little bit
   busier.  I noticed the groups of young men, people in
   their late teens, stood about in snail groups, again
   near to the entrance gates, the entrance area to the
   turnstiles area, they were just milling about making no
   attempt to go into the grounds.  I did speak to them
   and told them to go into the ground.  They made excuses
   saying they were waiting for someone who had got their
   ticket, and they couldn t go in until they had received
   a ticket from whoever they were waiting for, but they
   just continued to mill round in the area just outside
   the turnstile enclosure.

Q. But we are not talking about hundreds, are we, or are
   we? - A. There were several groups.  I spoke to three
   or four separate groups, perhaps been eight, ten to
   twelve people per group.  They kept milling into the
   enclosed area and when you approached they they
   shrugged their shoulders and said, "He are waiting for
   a friend.  We said we would meet him here", then they
   drifted outside the area back onto Leppings Lane.

Q. What else happened after that? - A. Shortly after that
   period, which I would estimate lasted about five or ten
   minutes, where there were orderly queues, I was stood
   in the corner next to turnstile 16.  Up to that point I
   had been able to walk up and down the queue, talking to
   people and generally laughing and joking with them,
   very good humoured, very good natured people, up to
   that point.  I returned into the corner portion, at the
   side of the large metal fence and the turnstile wall.
   I was engaged in talking to fans as they were entering
   the turnstiles.  I looked up and suddenly the whole
   enclosure filled with people within a matter of
   seconds, and the queues just disappeared and I was
   trapped in the corner between the metal fence and the
   wall.  That is when the first instance of the crush
   which later ensued took place.  Up to that time the
   turnstile queues had been quite orderly.

Q. What time would you put that, if you are able to tell
   me? - A. I would say somewhere round about 2.40-ish.  I
   can't be specific to five minutes either way but I
   would think between 2.30 and 2.45.

Q. We have already heard lots of descriptions about how
   severe the crushing was in the other part.  Of course,
                                                         87
                                         K. E. HORSFIELD




you couldn't see that, could you? There was a fence
between you and .... - A . I could see.

How did you manage that? - A. At the point where the
fence was adjoining onto the brick wall where I was
stood, there was a gap of about four inches, and I
could see through this gap into the approach area for
the standing turnstiles, and I could see that people
were getting squashed quite badly on the other side of
the fence.  It appeared worse than on my side.
People's faces were getting shoved into this four inch
wide gap on two or three occasions.

Sorry? - A. The faces of people who were getting
crushed along the other side of the fence, you could
see them being squashed into this narrow gap by the
crush which was obviously behind them.

How bad would you describe it on your side? - A.
Initially not too bad.   I was able to stand in the
corner and keep a short area around me quite free.    I
was able to turn and move, but the crush was pretty
intense.   It became worse when people started climbing
over the metal barrier from the standing terraces side
into our enclosure.   On several occasions I had people
climbing over and standing on my head and shoulders as
they climbed off the fence, down into our enclosure.    I
removed two or three youngsters and early teenagers,
12-13 year-old children from the fence.    I managed to
pull them off the top of the fence and I put them
through the turnstile number 16 into the stand
enclosure.

Did they say anything to you, any of these that carae
over, can you remember? - A. Not as such.  I could hear
people on the other side - I distinctly remember
hearing someone crying.  I don't know whether it was
male, female or a youngster, but that was about that
time, probably about quarter-to.

Did you have any mounted Officers in your patch of the
turnstile area? - A. Not in the enclosure, no, they
were outside on the Leppings Lane side of the gates.

Could you see what had caused this, it sounds the way
you describe it, a rather dramatic change? - A. It was
just a sudden rush of people, just appeared at once.
That is how I can recall it.  There is no sudden build
up, it was just there.

Sometime during this period you suddenly decided you
ought to make your way towards the perimeter gates, is
that right? - A. Yes.  After a while I got a little bit
fed up of people standing on me in the corner, and I
                                        K. E. HORSFIELD




decided that something had to be done.  The only thing
that I could see from my position was to try and shut
the outer gates to the enclosure, to try to alleviate
the crushing up against the turnstile walls.  I managed
to grab my colleague on the next turnstile, which was
P.C. Alexander, and together we managed to force our
way along the edge of the metal fence up to the large
wrought-iron gates at the front of the enclosure.  I
went to the right-hand gate.

Is that the one near the sweet shop? - A. It was the
gate directly in front of ray position, along the side
of the metal fence, the first double gate section.
Together with P.C. Alexander we tried to close the
right-hand gate to stop people from entering the
enclosure and causing the crushing.   At first we didn't
have much success.  However, I did attract the
attention of one of the mounted Officers who were on
duty outside the area, and he positioned his horse
across the front of the gates, which enabled us to
close the right-hand half of the gate and after some
difficulty, because the gate was being moved constantly
by the crushing, the to-ing and fro-ing of the crowd, I
managed to get the bolt into the floor, the large bolt
which holds the gate shut into the floor, and I
attempted to hold this bolt into the floor while the
other gate was pulled to.

      While I was stood in this position people had
already started to climb over the gate which I had just
closed.   I can't remember exactly how long I was there
for, probably a minute, a minute and a half, not too
long.   I was jostled and I was thumped a couple of
times by people in the crowd, who I have no idea, but
this caused rae to let go of the bolt in the floor and
the gate was just swung wide open again and we just
could not manage to close it after that.

So are you then saying that the demeanour of the crowd
at that position was not satisfactory from your point
of view? - A. Not at all, sir.  I received quite a bit
of verbal abuse from the crowd because of my efforts to
shut tne gate.  They were intent on gaining entry to
the football ground.  I was sworn at and like I said I
did receive at least one blow because of my efforts to
try and close the gate.  They were a little bit
incensed by my actions.

Did you begin to fear that there would be injuries
within this enclosure at that point? - A. Yes, I was
certain that - at that point I was certain that someone
was going to be seriously injured, if not worse, in the
crush outside.
                                                                89

                                             K. E. HORSFIELD




Q. Did you see any gates open? By gates I don't mean
   turnstiles, I mean big gates? - A. Not immediately.
   The first intimation I had that a gate had been opened,
   I saw Gate A to the rear of the North Stand open and
   hundreds of people just appeared to run through it.

Q.   That relieved some of the pressure in your    area? - A.
     That relieved all the pressure.

Q.   All the pressure.   Did you think - well, I won't ask
     you that question.  Were you relieved personally? - A.
     Very relieved, yes.

Q. At some point you also heard or you were told or some
   way you were communicated with, that you were wanted on
   the pitch, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir,
   yes.

Q. Was it word of mouth? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You don't know who told you, do you, at this stage, or
   do you? - A. At that time I was stood out on the
   wrought-iron gates adjacent to Leppings Lane away from
   the turnstiles.  The other Officers in ray serial,
   several, turned and shouted, "Come on, get inside, they
   are on the pitch", and they went through the
   turnstiles.  I approached the turnstiles and followed
   them in, entered the turnstiles and entered the ground
   through a turnstile.

Q.   Did you go onto the pitch side initially? -   A. No,sir.

Q.    What did you? - A. As I entered the rear of   the
     Leppings Lane stand I saw a large group of Officers,
     most of them running, making their way towards the
     South Stand.   As I had no form of actual communication
     I followed to see what was required.    I entered the
     South Stand, which was the way to go round onto the
     pitch.   At that point I saw a large crowd of people on
     the edge of the playing area at the rear of    the
     Leppings Lane goal and I believe that the last couple
     of players were going down the tunnel, off the pitch.

Q. I see, you just caught a glimpse of them leaving? - A.
   Yes.  I believe they were players, and as I was about
   to leave the South Stand and enter the pitch area I met
   my serial Sergeant, Sergeant Morgan, coming back the
   other way, and he said to me, "Come on round the back".
   P.C. Alexander was still in my company at this time and
   together we went back through the South Stand and back
   to the rear of the Leppings Lane stand.

Q. Through the tunnel, you mean? - A. We went through the
   tunnel and onto the terraces from the rear.
                                               K. E. HORSFIELD
A

    Q. Did you have free passage through the tunnel? - A. Yes,
       sir/, there was no one in the tunnel at all.

    Q. Do you know whether there were any Officers ahead of
       you? - A. No one ahead of us.
B   Q. No one ahead of you? - A. Mo one ahead of us, sir, no.

     . So as far as you remember you and your group were the
       first Officers onto the terrace? - A. Yes, I know we
       were.  Myself, Sergeant Morgan and P.C. Alexander were
       the first Officers onto the terraces from the Leppings
       Lane tunnel.

    Q. I see, and at the time when you went through it was
       unobstructed? - A. There was no one in the tunnel at
       all.

    Q. Very briefly what did you attempt to do when you got
       onto the terraces? - A. I was not aware of what had
       occurred or what was happening.  We could see that
       there was someone, some trouble at the front, and it
       appeared to me to be a crush situation, that people had
       been pushed forward.  We got hold of people who were
D      still pushing forwards from the back of the terraces,
       grabbing collars, and pulled them back and pushed them
       out towards the tunnel physically, and virtually fought
       our way forwards, pulling people back as we went
       forwards.  When I was perhaps two yards or so into the
       crowd the people in the stand above were pointing to
       the front and shouting, but I have no idea what they
       were saying to me, I just couldn't decipher.  It was
       just noise, just like, I could describe it as white
       noise, but I knew there was something very wrong
       because of the look on their faces, and the people in
       the stand above me were in a state of panic, and I just
       kept going forwards down the terraces.




                               /Q. In fact, you d-id




H
                                         K. E. HORSFIELD

 ✓
In fact, you did help to carry several people out? -
A. Yes, sir, numerous.

You took them out backwards? - A. Yes, that is
c orrect.

            Proas-Examined bv MR. P AYNE :

Mr. Horsfield, could you just tell the Court whether
you have any experience of policing football matches
prior to this one? - A. Yes, sir.   I have been a
Police Constable since 1971 when I was posted to the
Hammerton Road Subdivision which Hillsborough
Football Ground is within and I have experience of
working at Hillsborough since 1972.

Give a picture of your experience? - A. In relation
to what, sir?

How long, how often, what sort of matches? - A. I
have worked quite a number of previous Semi Finals
which have been held at Hillsborough Football Ground,
numerous divisional matches since that period.
However, there was a break of several years when I
was in the Traffic Division and I was not involved
with the crowd control side but the traffic control
side of policing football matches.

Just give us an idea, I am not asking you to be
exact, of about how many years of attending and
policing football matches? - A. Out of the 19 years'
service I have attended regularly for about 11 or 12
years.

Does that include policing at the Leppings Lane
end? - A. Yes, sir.
Can you express that as a proportion of the number of
y e a r s ' service? I am sorry to be difficult but I
just need to know your experience before I ask the
next question? — A. I would not like to put a number
on it, sir, but I would think I have worked a similar
duty to what I worked on 15th April 1989 on more than
a dozen occasions.

In all that time have you ever seen such a large
crowd arriving shortly before a kick-off as occurred
on the 15th April? - A. No, sir, I have.never
experienced anything quite like that ever before.
                                                K. E. HORSFIELD


Q. Have you ever experienced such a crushing taking
   place at the turnstiles before? - A. No, sir, never.

Q. Your response when you saw Gate A was opened was one
   of relief you have already told the Court? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. Because it relieved the crushing pressure? - A.
   Outside.

Q. If that had not been opened what did it appear to you
   was going to happen next? - A. When I was stood up
   against the wall before I made my way to the front to
   try to close the gate I was concerned for my own
   safety and the safety of the other people around me.
   People were going to get seriously injured unless
   something was done.  I went to try to close the gate
   and I was relieved when I saw the large gates open
   and the crush was eased.

Q. A lot of people streamed into the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. Through the open gate? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. At that moment did it occur to you by these people
   going into the ground....

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, I do not want him to express
any opinions.  Can you phrase the question in such a way so
that it is either what he observed or what he knows.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:  Did   it cross your mind at that time
     when the people went   in through this open gate that
     this would cause any   risk of crushing to people
     inside the ground? -   A. No, sir.   The gate I saw
     opened was I believe   Gate A which leads to the rear
     of the North Stand.    I was unaware that any other
     gate had been opened   at that time.   I just saw one.

Q. Did it cross your mind by opening the gate that would
   cause any crushing inside the ground? - A. No, sir.

Q. It certainly was not obvious to you? - A. No, sir.

     THE CORONER:      Enough on that line I think.      It is
difficult I appreciate but I think I have to be fair
between all the p a r ti e s. I cannot stop M r . King asking
questions about opinions and then allow you to do so.

     MR. PAYNE:  Of course, sir, I accept your ruling but
you will be conscious, as I am conscious, that in due
                                                               93




                                                    K. E. HORSFIELD


course there may be a matter of law which needs to be
explored and it may be helpful at that stage for this sort
of evidence to be explored one way or another.  That is
what I have got in mind.

     THE CORONER:   I appreciate that and obviously we will
just discuss that at the end of the day when we have sent
the Jury out.

     MR. KING:   I just wish to ask one question arising out
of that, sir.

      THE CORONER:    Yes.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. K I N G :

Q. Where did you think that the people going through
   Gate A were going to go? - A. To the rear of the
   North Stand.

Q. It is only a supplementary but it will help.  That
   gate through which they entered led directly to the
   North Stand? - A. That is correct.

Q. So that anybody going through that had to go to the
   North Stand? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can I go back if I may to questions about your
   experience, had you been on duty in the 1988 Semi
   Final? - A. No, sir.

Q. Had you been on duty in the 1987 Semi Final? - A.
   Yes, sir, I was on duty but my capacity for several
   years prior to that was in control of traffic as I
   was a member of the Traffic Division.

Q. You had not ever been on the Leppings Lane turnstile
   end of the ground on the occasion of a Semi Final, is
   that correct? - A. I cannot remember the year because
   I am not a football follower but Arsenal versus
   Sunderland, 1970 something.

Q.   As long ago as that? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    You may not be able to answer this; on this occasion
     all the Liverpool fans, all 24,000, were going to
     enter the ground somewhere in the turnstiles at the
     Leppings Lane end? That is a fact and you probably
     knew that.   Did you know that? - A. I was aware that
     the North Stand of Leppings Lane or part of the North
     Stand was allocated.
                                           K. E. HORSFIELD



Not only that but entry to the North Stand was going
to be via a turnstile at the Leppings Lane end? - A.
Yes, sir.

You say that as if surprised but you could have other
turnstiles not at the Leppings Lane end designed to
enter the North Stand but on this occasion everybody
was going to use the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane
end, the Liverpool fans? - A. Yes.

You understood that? - A. Yes.

You understood that on the day.  That is some 24,000
people who were expected? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you know that? - A. Yes, sir.

Had you ever been on duty before - because you were
asked about your experience - where some 24,000
people were all going to be using the 16 turnstiles
at the Leppings Lane end?

  THE CORONER:      23.

   MR. KING:     23, I beg your pardon? - A. Yes, sir.

When was that? - A. A long time ago, like I said, in
the 1970s at the other Semi Finals when Hillsborough
held a lot more people than it does now.

Certainly with the present layout of the turnstiles,
the divisions, the pens and so forth, the modern
layout, the first time would be in 1989 for you? - A.
I may be wrong, sir, but I think the layout has
changed.  Not to my recollection.

We can investigate that with other Officers and I
need not investigate it further with you.  The normal
games when you are there are much smaller gates, are
they not? - A. Yes, sir.

I mean considerably smaller, the normal League
game? ~ A. Yes, sir.

The people who were entering the turnstile area, 1 to
16, where you were up to 2.30, they were entering
through the perimeter gate? - A. Yes.

That was the only way they could get into that area
obviously? - A. That is correct.
                                           K. E. HORSFIELD



Do I take it from that then that all those perimeter
gates were opened, all three of them I think it is,
up to that time? - A. Yes, so far as I am aware they
were.

As I understand it, there was no Police Officer
manning those gates as they were just opened to allow
people in? That is correct, is it not? - A. So far
as I am aware, yes, sir.  There was nobody given a
specific duty to man, as you put it, those gates.

Up to 2.30 did you see anything from your position by
the turnstiles 1 to 16 which led you to think, "Gosh,
there is so many people here we ought to close
Leppings Lane", for example? - A. No, sir.

Did you know that Leppings Lane was closed to
vehicular traffic at about 2.30? - A. I wasn't made
aware of that.

You did not see anything which led you to believe
that that was about to happen, like a large group of
people? - A. From my position, which I have described
in the corner, my vision was very limited out along
Leppings L a n e .

When you say a large group of people entered, I think
you said in a rush, did you actually see them come
into the perimeter gate? - A. No, I think they just
suddenly appeared would be the best way of putting
it.      That is how I would describe it.   I would
describe it how I have done before.       I was stood in
the corner talking to people in the queue and
suddenly I looked round, and being 5' 10" tall you
cannot see over the heads of people to get a better
view, suddenly I was just surrounded by people and
the queues disappeared within what seemed to be
m o m e n ts .

All those people, the new people, obviously had to go
through the open perimeter gates to get into that
area? - A. Yes.

Before you made the attempt to close one of the
gates, had you seen any other attempt by other
Officers to close any of the gates? - A. I attempted
to close both gates.

I know you did.  Did you see any other attempt by
anybody else? - A. No, sir.
                                              K. E. HORSFIELD



Much earlier on - I am not talking about the time
which you put at about 2.40ish - say at 2.15, had you
been conscious of any cordon of mounted Police
Officers outside the perimeter gates forming a cordon
as early as 2.15 or something like that? - A. No,
sir.

The impression I gained from your evidence is that it
was really only at the time when you suddenly saw
this area suddenly filled with more than you were
expecting, at about 2.40ish, it was only then so far
as you were aware anything was being done, from what
you could see - and only from what you could see - to
stop people getting into the perimeter area.  It was
only then that you saw anything because what you saw
was your own efforts to close the gates? - A. I saw
the horses outside attempting, moving amongst the
crowd.

That was round about 2.40? - A. That was round about
the same time.

I am really talking about much earlier on and from
your evidence it appears that earlier from behind
2.40 you did not see anything similar to that before
then? - A. The mounted Officers were present?

Yes? - A. Before that time so far as I am aware there
was no need for any crowd control action.  My duties
were specifically to control a queue of people
entering a turnstile.  Like I said I was stood in the
corner carrying out that duty.

If I suggested to you that there had been a cordon of
Police Officers attempting to stop people getting
into the perimeter area as early as 2.20 you saw
nothing of that? - A. There were Officers on duty in
Leppings L a n e .

But you saw nothing of that? - A. Sir, the crowd was
such, like I stated, that when you are stood in a
corner you cannot see over the heads of people.   I
knew the Officers were there but I couldn't see them.

           Crf^ss-Examined bv MRS. M c B R I EN ;

You say that the behaviour of the crowd .was not
satisfactory at one stage and that you received a
blow from one of the fans? - A. That is correct.
                                         K. E. HORSFIELD


What did you do when that happened? - A. At that
point I was attempting to hold the wrought iron gate
at the front of the enclosure shut by keeping the
bolt in the floor.  I was being verbally abused by
the crowd because they wanted to gain access to the
enclosure and turnstiles and I did receive at least
one blow which I am aware of from a person in the
crowd.  The result of this was that I was forced to
let go, by the jostling of the crowd, of the bolt
which I had placed in the floor and the gate was
flung open against my attempts to keep it shut.




                              /Q. Did you have that.
                                           K. E. HORSFIELD.



Did you have that person arrested? - A. Madam, I have no
idea who that person was.   I was in the centre of what I
could best describe as a crush situation. ^ Like I
stated, we had to get a horse to position itself in front
of the gates so that we could even attempt to move it.
By the time I had closed it members of the crowd which
was pushing forward, were climbing over the gate, which I
was trying to hold shut.   They were climbing over the
top to by-pass it.

So you didn't see the person at all? - A. Not at all.      I
felt him.

When Gate C was opened, is it possible that person who
gave you the blow just had free access into the stadium?

      THE CORONER:   This Officer didn't see Gate C open
so he can't answer that question.    He was in a different
part.   Sergeant Griffiths, can you just show where
turnstiles 1 to 16 are on that, just to help
Mrs. McBrien.    Those are turnstiles 1 to 16.   He was in
the corner there on the far side.    In fact at the time
he was up at the perimeter gates.    That is where he was.
Show us where Gate C was.    That is a totally different
area, so he can't answer.    You can ask another question,
if you like, but you have got the wrong gate with regard
to this Officer:

That's right, you never saw Gate C did you? - A. I
couldn't see it from my position.   I could only
see Gate A.

      MRS. McBRIEN:  I am just wondering what might have
happened to that sort of crowd.   Would that crowd end up
inside the stadium at some stage? - A. They all did I'm
sure.

     MR. KING:    Sir, there was one question which I
meant to clarify.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KIN G:

Officer, when you heard for the first time that you were
wanted on the pitch - that is the event I am looking to.
I have forgotten where you are at that point.   Where
were you? - A. Stood next to the wrought iron gates at
the front of the enclosure.

I made a note of what you heard people shout, or stated.
I am not sure I got it right.    Was it that you heard the
message, "They're on the pitch"?    Have I got my note
right?   Is that what you heard? - A. Something to the
effect, "Get inside.   They're on the pitch."
                                            K. E. HORSFIELD-


Did you understand by that that "They're on the pitch"
referred to some sort of pitch invasion? - A. Yes, sir.
  ✓
     THE CORONER:   Sergeant, thank you very much indeed.
I understand you aren't very well yourself at the moment.
I hope you make a good recovery and thank you for coming
when you weren't quite well.

     You will recollect, ladies and gentlemen, that when
Stephanie Jones gave evidence we had a bit of a problem
with her timings because it was difficult to reconcile -
I think it was Mr. Catchpole who spotted it.   He spotted
there was a discrepancy between the timing of the
identification on the terraces with the time she said she
went in.

     We said we would nave the family have another look
at the videos to see whether they could confirm or deny,
as the case may be, the terracing identification because
there was very little doubt about Stephanie|s
identification outside.  Sergeant Killoch did that and he
is just going to come and tell us.    I am doing it now
because Mr. and Mrs. Jones are here and it seems a very
sensible thing to deal with it.

                 JOHN KILLOCH Called

                   By THE CORONER:

You are John Killoch and,   of course, you are still on
oath from April/May time?   - A. I am, sir.

Can you tell me then what you have discovered further?
You have got a short statement and I think it will be all
right for you to read it out to me as it is. ~ A. From my
previous knowledge I am able to say that Leslie Jones,
the father of Richard, originally viewed a section of
video which is referenced MAP.l and at timed reference
14:56:31:04 identified someone he believed to be his son,
Richard Jones.

On Wednesday, 28th November, 1990, I showed Mr. Leslie
Jones a still photograph of that same identification.
Mr. Jones is now unsure of his original identification
and cannot say for certain that the person originally
identified is in fact Richard.

To be fair to Mr. Jones, the person shown on that video
is not shown full face but a side view and it is
difficult to distinguish.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Jones, you are not on oath at the
moment, but are you happy?   Is that correct?
 ✓   MR. JONES:      Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Obviously if you wished I would
invite you to come and confirm it, but I think you have
already indicated that you are content that is correct.

     Is there anybody who wants to ask Sergeant Killoch
any questions?

     Can I say the identifications are so hard.^  I am
obliged to you for having another look because it
obviously helps.

     THE CORONER:   What we are going to do tomorrow is
to start at 9.30, have coffee breaks at convenient times,
run on until about one o'clock or quarter to two or
thereabouts and then you can have your lunch hour and you
don't have to reappear until Monday morning at 10.30.

     For tomorrow - witnesses - we are going to call
Mr. Salt, all being well, PC Fry and then depending on
how we do we will watch the video or not, as the case may
be.   We will use the video as the filler if we need it.

      MR. PAYNE:   Before the jury retires I wonder if you
would allow me to say that when I mentioned a matter of
law earlier on I would not like the jury to think there
is anything secret about this, or that anything is being
kept from them.   Certainly as far as we are concerned we
would be perfectly happy to discuss the point with the
jury here.    I certainly don't want any idea that
something is being done underhand or anything of that
sort.

     THE CORONER:      I appreciate that but I think it is
actually easier...

     This is a difficult problem because we do spend time
when you are not here, because when we are discussing
points of law if you are here we have got to be, if you
like, that much more careful because the points of law
and the arguments that are made aren't actually evidence.
They are, if you like, trying to sort out what the law
is.   On the whole I prefer you not to be here because it
gives us a greater degree of liberty.   I don't have to
be worried, so Mr. Payne's point is fair.

     When the time comes hopefully I will give you a
direction on the law and of course you will then have to
hear it.   Hopefully it will be correct and accurate and
the lawyers sitting opposite me will be happy with it.
In the end it is my responsibility as to whether I get it
right or wrong.   You will hear before you have to reach
a verdict what it is.
  ✓
     I will just say this one word because we have not
actually mentioned any of the possible verdicts which you
might have to consider.   The issue really is this:   the
verdict is quite a long document, if you are going to be
technical about it and I will explain all that to you
nearer the time.   Colloquially speaking, the verdict is
what you put at the bottom where you read in the      ^
newspaper, "The Coroner recorded an open verdict" or "The
Coroner recorded suicide," and that is the verdict in the
colloquial sense.

     I am not saying the list I am giving you is
exhaustive because I will decide what verdicts to leave
with you when the time comes and nor am I saying that
every verdict which I now mention I will leave with you
because when the time comes I will have to decide whether
the evidence which we have heard, whether in law it is
proper for me to leave a particular verdict to you.
However, I will explain all that to you nearer the time.

     The verdicts which spring to mind, and I am not
giving you them in order, but which potentially can be
left to you are (1) unlawfully killed;   (2) accidental^
death or misadventure, some people prefer to call it, it
means the same thing or (3) an open verdict.^   Don t
worry about what all these words mean.    I will explain
all that to you.    The problem, of course, as you can
appreciate - not the problem, the most difficult one of
these is the unlawfully killed verdict because it is, in
a sense, equivalent to somebody saying X, Y, Z - you
mustn't name the person of course, or persons as the case
may be - has either murdered somebody or has been
instrumental in what in a criminal sense would be ^
manslaughter.   We don't use those words in^Coroner s
courts, we use the term "unlawfully killed" - a very
serious matter.

     Of course that is why we are spending so much time
over the Inquests and that is why Mr. Payne mentioned,
and, indeed, as you will have heard, we have spent a
great deal of time, and that is what it is all about.

     If we did not have that as a potential verdict I
would be doing the Inquests totally differently because
you would not need to go into detail, but I feel, rightly
or wrongly, that it is correct that you should hear
sufficient evidence - and for that matter I should hear
sufficient evidence - (a) for me to decide whether that
is a verdict which I can leave with you and (b) if I do
decide it is a verdict I can leave with you that you have
got something to think about.   I can't leave a verdict
with you - I could, I suppose - but   I can't leave a
verdict with you if I feel you have   not had a chance to
hear the evidence and that is why I   think we have got to
do it thoroughly.   That is what it   is all about.

      The legal aspects of this and when we are discussing
precisely what that is, I prefer to do it without you
here.

     I have not given you any directions on these
verdicts.   That will all come at the end and I will then
deal with it, hopefully, properly and thoroughly.

               (In the absence of the jury)

     Is there anybody who wants to address me on anything
we need to do this evening?

     MR. KING:   Sir, all I would like to know for
information purposes:  is Mr. Salt connected with a
public house?

     THE CORONER:   Indeed he is.     Do you wish to know
which one?   It is The Owl.

       MR. KING:   That comes as a great surprise to me,
sir!

     THE CORONER:   I did indicate that we were going to
make a few extra enquiries and we have and we are calling
somebody.   We will see what he says.

     MR. KING:     For the shorthand note, it doesn't come
as a surprise!

     THE CORONER:   I forgot to say this to the jury but
I will tell them in the morning.   If we do get to the
video, it depends how long we are, please don t feel that
you have to sit through it and that goes for the families
as well because a lot of you have already seen the video.
You will not I assure you as far as I am concerned, be
considered either discourteous or be prejudicing your
position and I will make it clear to the jury - I am
quite satisfied this jury is sufficiently intelligentto
know that if you leave because you have seen it that that
doesn't mean you don't care.

     I can't tell you whether we will get to the video
because I don't know how long we will be, but if we do
get to it and if you feel like going I will mention it to
the jury.   If not, remind me and I will do it and then
either stay or go as you wish.   That I say to the
families as well, not because I want to exclude you from
it, but because I realise that watching the video is
quite painful*   Don't feel you are letting yourself
down, your loved ones or anybody else if you say,  No,
have seen it, that's enough."

     (The Inquests were adjourned until 9.30 the
                  following morningj
