                                                                                           MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and tim e raised                            Num ber



T itle
          r
                                    P T ~      d      X-               V   ^ r g
                                                                                   „
                                                                                   fir\ CiN->

(include source and any document number i f relevant)


   idfeiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                  Receiver




                                                                                                                  Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                              Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                  Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                                         SIO
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                   Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master N um ber Form
      HER M A J E S T Y ’S' COR ONER FOR SO UT H YORKSHIRE
                           (WEST DISTRICT)



              INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                      STADIUM DISASTER

                  ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



                 INQ UEST INTO THE DE AT H OF


                     STEPHEN PAUL COPOC




                               Before

DR.    S.L.    POPPER,    LL.B,     B.MED.Sci,         BM,   B S , M RCGP

                  (H e r M a j e s t y ’s C o r o n e r )




                                  At

                 The Me dico -Le gal Centre,
                      Wate ry S t r e e t ,
                         Sheffield.

                                   On

                      23rd A p r i l , 1990




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




         From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
              Of f i c i a l Sh or th an d Writers,
          55, G u e e n Street. S hef f i e l d SI 2DX
                                                     INDEX

                                                               Page


                        JAMES IJARDROPE Called
                    B
                           By The Coroner                         1

                        OPENING STATE ME NT BY THE CORONER        5


                        DR. JOHM CilALMERS CLARK Called

                           By The Coroner


                        PET. COM PETER GADSBY Called




                                                                 kjO 0
                           By The Coroner




                                                                     0
                           Cr oss -examined by Ms. Norcliffe




                                                                 <T«
                           Cross-examined by Mr. Catchpole
                    D
                        PET. INSP. MI CH AE L LAYTON Called

                           By The Coroner                        10


                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        2 3 id April   19^0


                                INQUEST INTO TliE uEATH OF STEPHEN PAUL                    •;0C


                                THE CORONER:    We are going to go back to Mr.
                           Jones (GARY PHILIP J Q d E S ), because I think you were
                           still concerned, weren't you, about what Mr. Wardrope
                           had said?
                    B
                                Mil. DAWSON:  Ye:  sir, that is correct,
                           Certainly my clients had had a meeting with Mr.^
                           Wardrope in August of last year, with their social
                           worker from Sefton in Merseyside, at which this
                           indication was given, and I think all they are
                           concerned with was that there did not appear to be
                           anything in the medical records that brought that out.

                                THE COR0MER:   Yes.  Mr. Wardrope is here because
                           I have seen him.  We are going to get him just to tell
                           us what he knows about that.  I didn't call hi«i, I
                           deliberately didn't call him initially because I knew
                           he had no personal dealings with the lad and in that
                           sense it is difficult for him to speak, but in view of
                    D      what he said and the anxiety, he is here.  Mr.
                           Wardrope, you will have to take the oath I am afraid.

                                          JAMES    mlOPE Called               (Sworn) :

                                                  By       1'dE C O R O N E R :

                        Q. Mr. Wardrope, I know we have had you here before but it
                    E      is necessary for you to repeat all your names and
                           position again, I am sorry. - A. I am Janes Wardrope.
                           I am consultant in accident and emergency medicine to
                           tne Sheffield Health Authority, based at the Northern
                           General Hospital.

                        Q. And the case we are dealing with, Mr. Wardrope, is GARY
                           PHILIP JOiiES, our reference number 86 - is it number
                           30? - A. It is number 30, yes, Northern General
                           llospi. i a 1 ....

                        Q. Yes, and this is a case which was dealt with at your
                           request, as far as we can tell, by Dr. Peter Jaines
                           Marsh? - A. He was involved, yes.

                        Q. And lie I think in fact is a doctor based in London,
                           isn't he? - A. That is correct, King's College
                           Hosp Ltal.

                        Q. Yes and fortuitously he was available and very properly
                           offered iiis assistance w h i L ;t he was at               Li ie hospital.   -
                           A. That is correct.


                H
                                                       -     1   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                   J.   U\il   .'ROPE


                        Q. And no doubt you accepted         it with   ....   - A. Very
                           gratefully.

                        Q. The problem is, I think you have got a copy of the
                           notes in front of you? - A. Yes, I have.

                        Q. And as far as I could tell, and as far as one could
                           tell from Dr. Marsh's account, the evidence is that
                           this lad was for all intents and purposes dead when the
                           resuscitation efforts were being made, but it has been
                    B      put to me that at some time when you had a conversation
                           with the family you told tnem that, in fact, he had
                           revived and then died.   So if you want to have a look
                           at the notes first of all, so that you have ,>ot tuera
                           clearly in your mind, and then just tell me what you
                           know about this incident, and reconcile the notes with
                           the account if that is possible. - A. I did see Gary s
                           parents and talked to them about his treatment in the
                    C      Northern General Hospital.    Gary was brought to the
                           Nortnern General Hospital in a state of cardiac arrest,
                           that is, his heart was not going, he was unconscious.
                           He had - resuscitative measures were begun.     During
                           that resuscitation the notes from Dr. Marsh state that
                           he was bradycardic.   That would indicate that tne neart
                           was temporarily restarted but later the heart stopped
                           again, and at that stage resuscitation attempts were
                    D      stopped, and he did, according to the notes, receive a
                           fairly full resuscitation effort but in spite of those
                           efforts the heart could not be kept going.     So I think
                           ire was at no time conscious.   Tiie neart temporarily was
                           started, as it was in some other cases from the
                           Hillsborough incident, but that improvement could not
                           be sustained.
                    E
                        Q. And of course the word bradycardic does not actually
                           tell us at what rate it was going, except that it was
                           going slowly? - A. Slowly, yes.

                        Q. That would be one beat a minute or 30? - A. Yes,
                           anything less than 60 is bradycardia.  There is no
                           record of the actual rate.
                    F
                        Q. From a practical point of view - from a practical, point
                           of view - is what you have said significant? - A. From
                           a practical point of view, no.  Certainly our
                           experience from Hillsborough and my experience
                           generally has been that in a number of cases brought in
                           in cardiac arrest we did get the heart going.   In fact,
                           two of these patients were admitted, but both of those
                    G      later died because the amount of brain damage was such
                           that life was not possible to continue, unfortunately.

                        Q. And, in fact, I think the last line of Dr. Marsh's
                           statement actually finishes up with the word
                           bradycardia, doesn't it - the first line and last line?


                H
                                                 -   2   -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        - A. And next to last line and then he goes                          on to say
                        "fixed and dilated pupils", and I think his                          pupils wece
                        fixed and dilated throughout this procedure                          which does
                        indicate very poor, well non-existent brain                          function.

                        Q. Yes, that is right.              In fact        that is significant?            - A.
                           That is significant,             yes.

                                  Til., C O R O N E R :    Any questions of Mr.              Wardrope?

                    B             MR.    DAWSON:          No,     I have no questions,              sir.

                                  THE CORONER:             Is that clear           to you?

                                MR. DAWSON:   That does clarify the position.                                I
                           am grateful to Mr. Wardrope for having come to the
                           Inquest at snort notice.  That deals with matters.

                                  THE CORONER: Good, I am pleased.   Mr. Wardrope,
                           I am obliged to you for coming over at such siiort
                           notice - please go back to the clinic.   There are no
                           other questions I take it - I for ,ot to ask you.  (No
                           res j >iise)

                                MR FRASER:     Sir, the next case you will deal with
                    D      relates to Stephen Copoc.     I appear as a member of the
                              senna  Committee      repres ent his family and also
                           represent  tnem        person     capacity

                                    ;i L-, can I say before you begin to take the
                           evidenc  ice   Stephen's     best friend,
                                                   's l)est  fri           and in fact a witness^
                            no
                           wno    has,    I  understand,    assisted       West      Midlands Police in
                                  1.      aL.
                            he preparation of this summary, a young man called
                    E       ony Burrows,
                                   Burrows      was killed on Friday night in Liverpool
                            n circumstances which
                           in                       wii    V-..           w ~ ——
                                                            are tragic for his family, but
                            articularly tragic for Mr. and Mrs.
                           particularly                                    Mrs       Copoc, who
                            egarded him almost as their
                           regarded                            ir second son.                  They relied
                            a r w  mni'h    nn Tnrw
                           very m n r h n n T n r w f
                           \/&rv                       fnr hhp information
                                                               i n f o r m a t i o n    he   was   able to
                                                               last movements.     tents.       m e y are
                                                                                                They
                                                               resent in your Court today,
                                       ember or tneir tamil1 w . Mr . Pf l yne,    v / np. isi s bp  h i n d me
                                                                                                  behind
                                      will assist in any w                            O r-»A t.TI
                                                                                                1 1 aKiti Alio
                                       proceedings today to
                           report proceed
                                       Pami Iw
                           Tony's family,        c 1 T*.

                                THE CORONER:   Well I had just, before we came in,
                           heard about the fact that this young man had lost his
                           life but of course I did not realise the close
                           connection with Mr. and Mrs. Copoc.   I am exceedingly
                    G      sorry.  It is terrible for everybody.   I am going to
                           press on nevertheless because it won't help fir. and
                           Mrs. Copoc if I adjourn.  I am just going to press on
                           and just accept that it is anotier awful thing.   Life
                           is pretty awful isn't it really.

                                Shall I just explain to you tne procedure because
                           I assume you were not here so you won't know what is
                    H
                                                            -     3   -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
going to happen.  We are going to - I am going to read
the opening accounts from Last year.  Then we are going
to deal with alconol levels and any corrections that
need to me.  Tnen we will listen to tae pathologist.
Then we will listen to the reporting Officers and then
we will finish.

        Before I start with this, Mr. Fraser, we want to
make a small correction with regard to the exhibit
numbers in the previous case, Mr. and Mrs. McBrien
(J O H N McBRIEN).  You remember we had a plan which was _
initially demonstrated?     DJb3 we had called C50, and it
was dem onstrated on that plan which was not a true copy
of it, so to speak.

     MR FRASER:   That is the concourse area at the
mouth of the tunnel, sir.

     THE C O R O N E R : Yes, and we have now had produced
the small version of that plan which snows the
position, so waat I want to do, I want to delete, so to
speak, from the record tne exhibit DJB3, because we
have now got the correct version in front of us, and we
are going to number, therefore, MWJL/140 as C50.        It
makes no difference to any facts it just keeps things
in order and enables us to have a running total and
correct sequence.

     MR FRASER:   Sir, whilst I am on my feet and we
are talking about the plans, could you indicate for
fellow members of my profession please whether if they
request copies of a transcript of a particular
individual's evidence, it would be your intention to
have annexed to that transcript copies of the small
versions of the plans appropriately marked?

     THE CORONER:   The answer is yes, provided we can
organise ourselves to get these coloured dots on in the
correct colours.  That is not quite as simple as it
sounds but that is one of the reasons why I want to use
these plans, because it is so wuch easier for me if you
do request transcripts, to supply you with something
which is intelligible.

     MR FRASER:    I understand that,   sir.

     THE CORONER:   Certainly that is my intention,
that when you get the transcript you will also get the
exhibits which refer to that.

     MR FRASER:   Sir, it was the principle I was keen
to establish not the time scale.  We will bear with you
in relation to that!

     THE COROWER:   Okay, will you tell Mr. and Mrs.
McBrien, insofar as you think it is necessary for them
to know - it is only a technicality - but they are not
                                                                         J.   C.   CLMIK


                          in Court and I would not want them to think we had done
                          something without their knowledge, so to speak.  Now we
                          are starting on this poor young man.

                               This Inquest was opened on 18th April, 1989, and
                          on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's
                          Officer, said:

                               "The body wuich is the subject of this Inquest has
                               been identified to DC Kinsella of the South
                    B          Yorkshire Police as that of Stephen Paul Copoc, by
                               Harold Copoc, his father.   Me was 24 years of age
                               having been born on 1st August, 19C>8, at
                               Liverpool.  He was a s ingle man and he lived at
                                                     [Liverpool.  He was a
                               landscape gardener by occupation.   fie died at
                               Hillsborough Football Club' following an incident
                               taere on Saturday 15th April, 1989.    DC 1 >15
                               Griffiths caused the bociy to be removed to the
                               Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                               Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                               identified the same body to Prof. Usher and Dr.
                               Cl irk. It is the family wish that the body should
                               be buried."

                          As far as I know the papers which were sent for
                    D     verification, which were signed by Mr. Harold Copoc on
                          2 7 tli April, 1989, confirmed the name , address, date of
                          birth and place of birth as correct in that statement,
                          and as far as you know that is right, isn t it, Mr.
                          Fra; ;er ?

                                Mil FRASER:   Yes,   sir,
                    E
                                Tilt’ CORONER:  The
                                                Th, alcohols were measured in this
                          ca se by Dr. Forrest.    He gave evidence on the first day
                          in respect of everybody, but the level in the case of
                          Stephen Paul was 4y mg. per 100 ml., and now we are
                          going to turn to the pathologist.

                                      DR. JOHN CHALMERS CLARK Called:

                                              By THE CORO.'KR:

                        Q. Now Dr. Clark you have already been sworn so there is
                           no need for you to be re-sworn but please just restate
                           your name for the record, and so that the family also
                           know who you are. - A. Yes, my name is Joan Chalmers
                           Clark.  I am a Senior Lecturer in Forensic Medicine at
                           the University of Glasgow.

                        0. Dr. Clark, you did a post mortem on a young man who was
                           identified to you as Stephen Paul Copoc, is" that right?
                           - A. That is right, yes.

                        Q. And you are satisfied that the information you are now
                            iving me relates to that young man? - A. Yes.
                H
                                                 -   5 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                      J.    C. C'. !K
                                                                                           P. GADS BY

                        Q. Can you tell me taen the .:ai!se of death and how you
                           reached it? - A. Ye;;. The ultimate cause of death was
                           inhalation of stomach contents brought about by crush
                           asphyxia.

                        0. Can I just put it in standard form:    (la) inhalation of
                           stomach contents due to (lb) crush asphyxia? - A. Yes,
                           and I came to that conclusion by noting that Stephen
                           had moderate signs of asphyxia on nis face and
                           internally.   His face was rather blue and he had these
                    B      small haemorrhages on his face and also internally, and
                           this was consistent with his chest having been crushed,
                           preventing breathing.   Terminally he had inhaled vomit
                           into the lungs, causing widespread haemorrhage
                           throughout them.   Only the ot ler findings, there were a
                           number of surface injuries, a few grazes on his face, a
                           .lumber of bruises on his arms.   Taese bruises on his
                           arms seemed to have been due to gripping, sort of
                    C      finder gripping marks around the shoulders.    He was not
                           suffering from an/ natural disease which could have
                           played any part in his death at all.

                        Q. And no natural disease? - A. That is right.

                                IHE COROdER:      Mr.         Fraser?
                    D           MR FRASER:     No questions,            sir,   thank you.

                                      bET. CON.     PETER GADSBY C a l l e d ;

                                               By       IHE C O R O N E R :

                        Q. You have been sworn as well, but would you please give
                    E      us your names? - A. I have, sir.    I am Detective
                           Constable Gadsby of tne West Midlands Police.    At about
                           .1000 hours on Saturday 1151h April, 1989, Mr. Harold
                           Copoc saw his son, Stephen Paul Copoc, leave the family
                           home with the intention of travelling to Sheffield to
                           watch the FA cup semi final football match between
                           Liverpool FC and Nottingham Forest FG at Hillsborough
                           football ground.
                    F
                                Anthony Christopher Smith and Anthony Phillip
                           Burrows travelled with Stepuen Copoc on an Amberline
                           Coach, arriving in Sheffield at 1315 hours.   After the
                           coach parked they made they way to the Gate Public
                           House where they had refreshments.   The three of them
                           left the public house at about 1425 hours and made
                           their way to the Leppings Lane turnstiles where they
                    G      joined the mass of people waiting to enter the ground.
                           Within a short time Gate C was opened and Anthony
                           Smith, Anthony Burrows and Stephen Copoc entered the
                           ground through this gate.  They made their way along
                           the tunnel and into enclosure 3.   Anthony Smith lost
                           sight of his two colleagues then almost as soon as he
                           entered the pen.  Anthony Burrows, together with
                           Stephen Copoc, was forced forward until they were half
                H
                                                    -     6    -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     P.   G A D SB Y



   way clown the enclosure.   Anthony Burrows i'ticaie trap, ed
   on a barrier and as he struggled to free himself he was
   ,jusiied forward and ended up on the perimeter fence.
   Mr. Burrows does not appear to have seen Stephen again
   after that incident.

Q. Can I stop you there?  You obviously did not know but
   you have just heard that this is the Mr. Burrows who
   has unfortunately lost his life, that is right, isn't
   it? - A. Yes, in his evidence he suffered injury as
   well that day and was unconscious and had to be taken
   to hospital.

Q. Yes. - A. Shortly after l.‘30a hours, following the
   severe crushing in the West Stand terracing, Police
   Cons table 151j Michael James Francis Griffith, made his
   way to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.     A man ne
   now knows to be Stephen Copoc was passed through the
   :;ate from enclosure 3 by an unknown Police Officer.
   Police Constable Griffith placed Mr. Copoc onto the
   pitch and having checked for vital signs attempted to
   resuscitate him.     After a short time it was obvious to
    L a e Officer that life was extinct.

        Police Constable Griffith together with persons
   who have not been identified carried Mr. Copoc to the
   rear of the North Stand near the gymnasium.  The
   Officer covered Mr. Copoc with his jacket and then
   returned to the pitch to assist other persons.

        A short time later Constable Griffith returned to
   the rear of the North Stand wand saw Mr. Copoc was
   still in the position that he had left him in.  The
   Officer received instructions to take the body into the
   gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set up.
   Police Constable Griffith and Police Constable Kevin
   Goddard carried Mr. Copoc into the gymnasium.  Police
   Constable Griffith remained with the body.

             At 1605 hours Dr. Allan Paul Redgrave examined Mr.
Copoc in the temporary mortuary and certified life
ext i n e t .

        At about 0500 hours on Sunday 16th April, Police
   Constable Griffith escorted the oody of Mr. Copoc to
   the Medico-Legal Centre.  At this stage the body had
   not been identified.  Police Constable Griffith
   identified the body by reference number 71 to Detective
   Constable Simon Weigold.

          At 0740 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989 Mr. Harold
   C'/.joc attended the Medico-Legal Centre wnere ne
   identified the body of his son to Detective Constable
   Ni choI as Ki n s e l 1a.

        On 17th April 1989, following identification by
   Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. John Clark carried out


                          -   7   -
                                                                                   P.   G AD S BY



                           an autopsy and submitted a report         .iving Lite cause of
                           death.

                               •. Evidence is i n c l u d e 5 regarding the analysis of the
                          blood sample i: coin the' deceased where the presence of
                          ethanol was detected.          The witnesses providing
                          con:, iuuity of the blood sample are Roger Wilson, a
                          Scenes of Crime Offic.r, Detective Sergeant Joan
                          Turner, Detective Sergeant James Fletcher and Dr.
                          Alexander Forrest carried out the analysis.
                    B
                                Searching the clothing of Stepnen Copoc at ter     ;e
                           incident, a full    ticket for the semi final was found in
                           his possession. All this does is tends     to support his
                           entry to the ground via Gate C.

                                THE GOROhER:     Mr.     Fraser,   have you any questions?

                                MR FRASER:       S t e p h e n ’s family have no questions
                           fur the Officer,     sir, thank you.


                                THE CORONER:     Have you got any questions?  Can
                           you say your name   :or the shorthand writer, please.

                                  MS. NORCLIFFE: Yes, Belinda Norcliffe,
                    D      representing tne Chief Constable of '.he South Yorkshire
                           Pol i c e .

                                     Cross-examined by MS.         MORCLIFEE:

                        0. Off icer, just hopefully a few short points, .i th r« :d
                           to paragraph 2 of the summary, I wonder if you could
                    E      tell me if there is any evidence as to what time this
                           young man and his two friends actually arrived at the
                           Leppings Lane .... - A. 1435, I think is mentioned in
                           one of the statements by Mr. Burrows.   They talk of
                           leaving the public house - it is page 8 - they talk of
                           leaving the public house at 1425 and then he goes on to
                           actually say, "We got to the ground at about 25-to-3" -
                           1435 - and outside the turnstile there was a mass of
                           people".

                        Q. I think, just a little bit further down, with regard to
                           Gate C, I wonder if there is any indication in the
                           evidence as to whether this was, if I can call it the
                           first opining of Gate C when it was only opened perhaps
                           to a .... - A. None waatsoever.

                        Q. No indication as to time or .... - A. No indication at
                           all which of those entries that it occurred.

                        Q. Just one last point    ....

                                THE CORONER:      Can I just pause you?

                        Q. I think you are right.        It just says:
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                         P.   G A D SB Y



                                  "It u;as about ten minutes after we had ,ot iiere
                                  that the crowd all of a sudden moved forward and I
                                  got carried along with them tnrough a blue
                                  concertina gate and into the ground".
                             - A. The point b e i n g , I think sir, that the openings
                             ware so close together that there isn't any actual
                             indication of which one it was, whether the gate was
                             fully open or partially.

                        Q.        MS. NORCLIFFE:   Just one last point, Officer.   As
                    B        Mr. Burrows became apparently trapped on a barrier and
                             he was struggling to free himself, he was pushed
                             forward, I think he said.  Is there any indication in
                             the evidence as to whether this is simply the pressure
                             of the crowd pushing forward or possibly ;ny other
                             occurrence around that particular time he could
                             identify? -

                    C             TUP, C O R O N E R :    Is this still on paragraph 2?

                                  MS. MORCLIFFE:    The fourth line up from the
                             bottom of paragraph 2.

                                  TfIF WITNESS:  There is a paragraph at the top of
                             page 9 which explains what actually occurred.   "I got
                             to the end of a barrier", it starts.
                    D
                        Q.        TdE OOUOriER:           Page 9, you say? - A. Yos,      hie
                             third line down —           As I was ....

                        Q. "... forced back"? - A. Yes,                "I got caught up on    hie
                           end of a barrier".

                        Q. I think you can answer that as far as you are able but
                    E
                           there isn't very much tnere. - A. What Mr. Burr v.s
                           actually says is that he was by a barrier, he struggled
                           round the side of the barrier and then his words are
                           that he was "shot forward".  He doesn't actually give a
                           reason why he was shot forward just that he was shot
                           forward and eventually finished up very close the small
                           gate at the front.
                    F
                        Q. Yes, he says, "...            into a kind of void".      - A. "...    into
                           a kind of void".

                                  MS. NORCLIFFE:   Thank you,              sir.   I am obliged      for
                             tne clarification of that point.

                                          Cross-examined by MR. CATCHi’O L E :
                    G
                        Q. Only one question:  was Mr. Burrows able to identify
                           which barrier he got caught on? - A. He doesn't say
                           that, no.

                                  TiliCOROUKR:            Is it in the visual evidence?


                H
                                                           -   9   -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                        M.   LA .-ON


                               iiKT. H-ISP. LAfiONs              I believe I may be able to
                          help on that.

                               Till] CORONER:      Is it all clear to you ladies and
                          gentlemen?    Thank you.

                                         "T.   [NSP.   MICHAEL LAviON C a l l e d :

                                                   By THE C O R O - E R :

                    B           .' E , ET ;'SS: Sir, Michael La/ton,               Detective
                          Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                               THE CORONER: Just stop    for one moment, there is
                          one other point that I wanted to make.       Mr. Fraser and
                          everybody else, you will remember this is cue case
                          where there was an error in the labelling with Dr.
                          Forrest, where iie was called " C o tjol", but I am as
                          certain as I can be that it was just a transcription
                          error.

                                 MR FRASER:        I understand,       sir,   thank you.

                                 THE    CORONER:       We don't need        to &o into details on
                          that   .
                    D          Til1.1 WITNESS: An examination has been made of the
                          visual evidence available and Stepuen has been
                          identified alive in the enclosure which we have
                          referred to as number 3.

                               Anthony Burrows has viewed visual evidence and he
                          has identified himself and Stephen in enclosure number
                    E     3 on a BBC video tape, and the reference for that is
                          MAP 1 14:56:32:02.

                                Jo mi Bartlett Payne has v i e w e d visual evidence and
                          he confirms the identification of his nepaew Stephen,
                          wnich was in fact made by Anthony Burrows, and that is
                          on Lae same BBC video tape reference at the same time,
                          lie has also identified his nephew on a photograph which
                          has been p,iven the reference PR1/34A.        Sir, if I can
                          assist with the time in respect of that photograph it
                          shows 1 5 0 ’;.

                                Police Constable Griffith has viewed visual
                        evidence but was unable to identify himself on the pitch
                        actually dealing with Stephen, but the Officer has signed
                        a ,nan of the pitch area indicating the approximate
                        location at which he placed Stephen and attempted
                        resuscitation.  That plan, sir, has been given the
                        reference number NJFG1.

                                 Sic,    can I refer you to a plan reference MWJL/47?

                        Q. That will now be C ‘>1. - A. This is a plan of tae
                           terraces wnich indicates two locations, first of all
                    H
                                                        - 10 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                         M.    L A , i'ON



                             ‘:.he one referring to the video identif: ;cation on MAP 1
                             and the second the photograph I have just referred to,
                             PR1/34A,     th locations alive.

                        0.   What   time was     that? - A. The    photograph, sir?

                        Q.   Yes. - A. 1505, the v'ideo at 145G.               Sir, would you     wish
                             to refer to PC Griffith's plan?

                        Q.   I think so, please.        That will be ...? -        A. NJFG1,      sir.
                    B
                        Q.   And it will be C52.        Yes, do    you want to show us? - A.
                             Yes, please.

                                 (The witness referred        to L.ie    '■rge    a le   an)

                             Sir, if we could deal with MWJL/47 first of all, this
                             is a plan of the terraces and this is enclosure numner
                             3.  The video references at 1456 refers to this
                             location h e r e , and the photographic evidence is
                             approximately in this area h e r e . If I can assist in
                             tne relation to tne query as to the specific barrier,
                             Tony Burrows is in fact shown on the same video print
                             in that first location.

                        Q. So he is, in fact, just above the barrier which broke
                    D      at some point or another? - A. That is what I believe,
                           sir.

                        Q. And Stephen finishes up - or at least he doesn't
                           finish, he is seen alive at some point below that? - A.
                           That is right, sir, about h e r e .

                    E   Q. At an angle, a diagonal angle? - A. That is correct,
                           sir.      Then dealing with PC Griffith's plan, sic, if we
                           can go to the pitch plan, he has made two indications
                           n e r e , and then h e r e , on the six yard one.

                                    THE OORthiER:      Mr.   Fraser,    any questions?

                                    MR FRASER:        No thank you,     sir.

                                  i!iE ■ <0R0i<LR :     Have you got any questions of           the
                             Officer?

                                   R. CATCHPOLE:   It is really just a matter of
                             clarification.  You put to the Officer that he was
                             alive in the second photograph and I just wanted to
                             check that that was correct, at 150!).

                        Q.         THE CORONER:   That is what you did say? - A. That
                             is right, sir.   Again, it is one of those photographs
                             where there is very little facial definition.
                             Certainly it appears that he is still alive at that
                             t ime.


                H
                                                         - 11 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                              M.   CA   .ON




                        0. I will just ask you one ot ner thing, j ist in gene,:;
                           terms really.  In some photographs one can say wi th
                           almost certainty w.tet.ier a person is .'.live, -e i'ause you
                           can see movement, but in some it is a best guess isn l
                           it? - A. That is right, sir. Wnen we are looking at
                           photographs, particularly the "PR" photographs, the
                           South Yorkshire Police photographs, and take an overall
                           picture of what is taking place, particularly towards
                           the front of the fencing area, if it is only a partial
                    B      face it is difficult for us to determine what state the
                           deceased is actually in at that time.

                        Q. Yes, with a video you may be able to actually see the
                           person move? - A. Oh, yos.

                        Q. And that is a lot easier, but with a still photography
                           it is a matter of making some judgment? - A. Yes, it is
                           a judgment rather than a fact.

                                 THE C0R0HER:     Anything arising out of that bit of
                           ques tioning?

                                MR              No thank you,   sir,

                                THE CORONER:   That is all we are going to do
                    D      today.  Can you please make sure that you convey my
                           very great sorrow to tiie Copocs, not only in the loss
                           of their son, wnich of course is their primary loss,
                           but this terrible tragedy which has happened.   It is a
                           tragedy anyway, but to have happened in the middle of
                           toe Inquest while it is all so fresh in their minds is
                           a very serious double blow to them, and I feel for them
                    E      and I am sure everybody else does.

                                Thank you.  We will rise for a moment or two and
                           then press on with the next case.

                             (The Inquest Into the death of STEPHEN PAUL COPOC
                                    was adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )




                H
                                                   - 12 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
