HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)



     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
            STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before
- S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP
         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At
             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.
                   On
          19th December, 1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                              Page
RICHARD WILLIAM BEADSLEY Sworn

   By THE CORONER                                1.
   Cross-Examined   by MR. HALE                 15.
   Cross-Examined   by MR. PAYNE                17.
   Cross-Examined   by MR. MANNING              21.
   Cross-Examined   by MISS STEEL               22.
   Cross-Examined   by MR. CATCHPOLE            24.
   Cross-Examined   by MRS. McBRIEN             26.
   Cross-Examined   by MR. ISAACS               27.
   Further by THE   CORONER                     28.

RUTH COBB Sworn

   By THE CORONER                               30.
   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE                  38.
   Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS                 38.
   Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING                38.
   Cross-Examined by MISS STEEL                 38.
   Further by THE CORONER                       39.
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS         40.

CHRISTOPHER GEORGE WATSON Sworn

   By THE CORONER                               40.
   Cross-Examined   by MR. HALE                 49.
   Cross-Examined   by MR. PAYNE                51.
   Cross-Examined   by MR. ISAACS               51.
   Cross-Examined   by MR. MANNING              54.
   Cross-Examined   by MISS STEEL               55.
   Cross-Examined   by MRS. McBRIEN             57.
   Cross-Examined   by MR. RUSSELL              58.
   Further by THE   CORONER                     58.

KEVIN VICTOR TOPE Sworn

   By THE CORONER                               59.

STANLEY BEECHEY Sworn

   By THE CORONER                               60.

STEPHEN BROWN Sworn

   By THE CORONER                               62
            TWENTY THIRD DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

            WEDNESDAY. 19th DECEMBER. 1990

     THE CORONER:   I think it is Mr. Beadsley we are
starting with.

            RICHARD WILLIAM BEADSLEY Sworn

                    By THE CORONER:

You are Richard William Beadsley? - A. Yes.

Is it still                                   Sheffield? -
A. Yes, that's right.

Your occupation is a security officer? - A. No, not now.
I work for Sheffield Wednesday, Assistant Caretaker.

Do you still act as steward? - A. No, I don't do that
now.

In 1989 you had a part time job with Sheffield Wednesday?
- A. Yes.

You were employed as a steward? - A. Yes.

In 1989 you had already been a steward for about nine
years? -A. Yes.

Originally you were posted to the West Stand dealing with
people who had tickets? - A. Yes, the seated area.

However, the last four years prior to 1989 you were one
of the gatemen at Gate C? - A. Yes.

You weren't the only gateman, there were two others with
you? - A. Yes, three others, Ian Marshall ind Malcolm
Bain.

That's right, we have had them both here.   We don't need
to go through a lot of the stuff that happened in earlier
years, but it is right that once a year at the beginning
of the season all the stewards used to get together? - A.
Yes, for a briefing.

And you were shown various films of disasters at Bradford
and things like that.   What was the purpose of that as
far as you were concerned? - A. To tell us about our own
security procedure if anything was wrong - "Mr. Meadows",
go to our posts, open the gates and stand by waiting for
further information.
                                           R.   W.   BEADSLEY




In fact that was your primary task, at the end of the
match or during disasters, to ensure that your gate was
open? - A. Yes.

But before the match your job was to keep the gate shut?
- A. Yes, it is just an exit gate, but if the police came
we opened it to let the police in and out.

To allow authorised people in and out? - A. Yes.

One of the uses for this gate was police in and out,
authorised people in and out and ejections? - A. Yes.

These were usually done by some police officer?   He
would come along and open the gate and out and that's it?
- A. Yes.

Were you on this duty in 1988? - A. Yes.

For the same semi-final?   Well, not the same semi­
final... - A. The same two teams.

You were definitely on duty on the gate that year? - A.
Yes.

I want initially to deal with the 1989 match. - A. Yes.

What time did you take up your position approximately? -
A. I got there about ten to eleven, went and signed on
and got down to the gates around eleven o'clock-ish.

Were the first one there or were they others there before
you, can you remember? - A. I can't really remember.

The gate was unlocked? - A. The gate was unlocked.
There is a catch on the gate.  It is unlocked, but it is
like shut, if you know what I mean.   So you knock the
catch off to open the gate.

We have heard from one or two other of your colleagues
that in fact in the initial stages what you did was you
left the gate slightly ajar? - A. Yes.   We shouldn't do,
but we always have the gate open about twelve inches so
we can see, rather than people knocking on the gate all
the time.

Of course there weren't very many people about so there
were no problems? - A. No.

Did you go out of that gate into the area outside
Leppings Lane itself? - A. There was like one of us
outside the gate all the time and the other two at the
inside, just stood with our back to the other two.   We
                                                              3
                     /




                                                 R.   W.   BEADSLEY


   took it in turns, just basically walking two or three
   paces if you know what I mean.

Q. What I am interested in is up to what time did you manage
   to do that before you ceased doing that? - A. Well...

Q. What I am asking you is: what was the last time you were
   outside the gate? - A. Half past two.

Q. You were outside... - A. Before that we shut the gates
   completely but one steward was outside and then if
   anybody came he knocked on the gates to let the other
   stewards know to open the gates.

Q. So the last time you personally were outside was 2.30? -
   A. Around half past two.

Q. The second question, not at half past two but at any time
   between your starting at half past two did you walk away
   from that gate up towards the perimeter gates or beyond?
   - A. No.

Q. You didn't do that at all? - A. No.

Q. Did you wear yellow... - A. Yes.

Q. It doesn't have the word "Steward" on it, does it? - A.
   No, then it said, "Bingham's Glass" and a number on the
   back.

Q. So advertising? - A. yes.

Q. Can you remember whether or not you saw any Liverpool
   stewards? - A. We had a Liverpool steward with us until
   just after half past two.  He had an orange jacket on and
   was stood talking.

Q. Did he have a yellow... - A. It was orange.        He stood
   actually helping us.

Q. Did that one have the word "Steward" written on it as far
   as you remember? - A. I can't remember.

Q. Can you recollect whether or not that chap, or, indeed,
   any other Liverpool steward that you saw with your own
   eyes was outside the gate at any point? - A. I can't
   remember.   I don't think so.   I wouldn't swear, but...

Q. You don't remember anyway? - A. No.

Q. What was the position like as far as you were concerned
   in the initial stages of this match? - A. You mean as
   regards to fans?
                                                              4



                                                R.   W.   BEADSLEY


Q. That's right. - A. It was quiet...   Well, quieter than
   the year before until after two o'clock.    That is why we
   still stood out while half past two.    Then when it
   started getting busy I went inside and then we shut the
   gates.  The Liverpool steward just said, "Don't open them
   any more.   Leave them."

Q. You came in because it became so busy? - A. Yes.

Q. Was that because people were actually coming down towards
   the gate at that point? - A. Well, can I just say, there
   was a police barrier there and the year before it was to
   the right hand side of the gates as you look out of the
   gates, but that year it was to the left hand side so the
   fans could get up to the gates.   The year before they
   couldn't.   They were further down.

Q. Had   you been outside the gate in the year before? - A.
   The   year before we stood out until nearly three o'clock.
   The   police were further down so there was nobody at all
   who   could get near the gates.

Q. Can you tell - I wasn't going to do it this way - in 1988
   there is the perimeter gates, you know what I mean by
   those? - A. Yes, the blue gates.

Q. Then you are saying there was a police  mobile barrier to
   the right of the gate? - A. Yes, to the right.

Q. This is 1988.   In the gap between that barrier which you
   have just described and the perimeter gates in 1988 were
   there any people congregating? - A. I would say
   congregating, but they seemed to be flowing into the
   ground more.   They weren't congested.

Q. What I am trying to find out is whether you are saying
   there were people in this area, which is in fact the road
   way leading to the South Stand? - A. Yes.

Q. Between the perimeter gates and this temporary barrier
   during any time you were outside in 1988, and in
   particular between the hours of two to   three? - A.People
   kept walking up - people who were at the wrong end of the
   ground kept walking up to the police saying they wanted
   to go to the other side so they were sending them right
   round so there was always a few people there.




                                     Q. A few people,     I see
                                                               5




                                   R.   W.   BEADSLEY


         A few people, I see. - A.  But the people that came
         who wanted to go into the Leppings Lane end of the
         ground, the Police like moved them in to get into the
         ground.
B
         Are you then saying that there were people, but there
         were handfuls in 1988? - A. There never seemed to be a
         lot at any one time.

         Okay.  Now you have said in 1989 the barrier had been
         positioned to the left of the gate? - A. Yes, past the
         gate.

         I am going to ask you exactly the same question:   were
         there more people in this area in 1989 than there had
         been in 1988? Okay, they may have been further down,
         but were there more people in this part of the ground?
         - A. Sir, up to about half-past 2 there were people.
         There were still more than the year before, but at
         half-past 2 there were crowds and crowds, and they
         were like past the turnstile.  They had like gone down
         the roadway past the turnstile and they were just
         getting crushed there as well.

         So, in other words, what you are saying is that after
         half-past 2 the situation in 1989 looked to you quite
         different? - A. So that is why we went inside and shut
         the gate.

    Q.   In a nutshell what you are saying is that there were
         many, many more people there? - A. A lot more, yes.

    Q.   By comparison? - A. I would say in figures you are
         talking three or four times more at least.  The year
         before the barrier was positioned the same line as the
         turnstiles, so you got to the barrier and then the
         turnstiles were in the same line, but the year after
         it was past our gates, so people had gone past the
         turnstiles and they couldn't go back to the
         turnstiles.

    Q.   Because there were so many people behind? - A. Yes,
         this was after half-past 2, it was building up.

    Q.   Did you form any impression with regard to these
         people? When you were still outside, apart from
         seeing a lot of people, was there anything else you
         noticed about them? - A. There were a few asking for
         tickets and could they get in through the gate, and
         things like that, whereas the year before we didn't
         get that because they couldn't get to the gate, and
         there were people throwing odd tickets over the gate,
         or through the gate when it opened to eject people or
         anything.
                            R.   W.   BEADSLEY


But, apart from that, nothing significant as far as
you were concerned? - A. Nothing to a normal busy
match.

When you say that there were people who asked, how
many people asked you personally whether you would let
them in? - A. We got offered £10, £15, and things like
that, but we are not allowed to do it and we didn't do
it.  I wouldn't like to say how many people.  I
wouldn't like to put a number on it.

I am not asking you to give me an exact count, but
what I want to know is are we talking about 500
people? - A. No, you are only talking like 10 or 15,
it might be 20, somewhere around there.

That is what I am interested in. I just want a
bracket, whether we are talking in tens or hundreds? -
A. There weren't hundreds, you are talking in tens.

Okay, that is satisfactory, for me anyway.

So at 2.30 you went back inside? - A. Yes.

And you, your friends, whom you knew of course, plus
this Liverpool steward - did you know who it was, can
you remember his name? - A. I can't remember his name.
I have seen him before and he also came to the
Inquiry.  He was talking to us then but I can't
remember his name.  If I were told his name it would
probably click.

Never mind if you do not know it. You were within the
gate and you say it was the Liverpool steward who
said, "Don't open the gate"? - A. No, at half-past 2,
or round half-past 2, the Liverpool steward  said, "I
think we all ought to go in now and shut the gates and
keep them shut".  That was not his exact words, but
that is what he meant.

The sense? - A. Yes.

Did anybody else give you that instruction as well, as
far as you can recollect? - A. No, I think basically
us three all agreed with him.

Yes, and in fact that   is precisely what you    did? - A.
Yes.

Except when you were asked to open them either for
ejections or for other purposes, that is right? - A.
Like I say, after half-past 2 it was mainly just for
ejections.
                          R.   W.   BEADSLEY


Did you have a watch on at the time? - A. No, I never
wear one.

Did you look at it at all?  If you did not have it on,
you couldn't have looked at it. - A. No.  I know it
was half-past 2 because when we shut the gates he
actually said, "It's half-past 2".

I see, so that is how you know the time? - A. Yes.

I will just ask you one more question about the
outside, just before you came in. When you looked up
to see the crowds at half-past 2, how far could you
yourself see then?  Do not tell me what you have seen
on TV or what. - A. You couldn't, because I'm 5' 3"/5'
4" and all you could see is the people close to you.

So you do not know how far back they stretched? - A.
No, you can't really see.

Did you, by any chance, look at the area immediately
outside the turnstile? - A. You can't see from that
gate because it is round the corner.

So you did not see anything of that? - A. No.

We know from video evidence and other evidence which
we have heard that this gate was opened on several
occasions - I will find out how many from you in a
minute - when fans came through.  Can you remember
that? Can you remember fans coming through at your
Gate C? - A. It was opened twice.  I think it was
twice.

That is what I wanted to find out.   I want you to
describe to me the first opening.   What happened and
how many went through that you remember, the first
opening? - A. The first opening was, I would say, just
after 3 o'clock, well either just after or just
before.   The teams had just come out or they had just
kicked off.   We knew they were on the pitch, put it
that way.

How did you know that? - A. You knew the teams had
come out with the crowd.  You could hear them
cheering.  Whether they had just kicked off or were
ready to kick off, I don't know.  It was between 5-to
3 and just gone 3, and I found out since his name is
Inspector White, a chap with a beard, and he came over
and said, "Open the gates".  I think it was a bit
stronger than that at the time.  So we said, like I
said, "You what?" He said, "Open the gates", and I
don't know whether it was me, Malcolm or Ian, or even
the Inspector that actually opened the gates and we
                                                              8




                                R.   W.   BEADSLEY


     opened them about 18" to 2', so that 2 abreast could
     get in and that was 2 or 3 minutes at the most it
     seemed anyway.  Then we shut them again, and then,
     like I said, two or three minutes again we were told
     to open them again and I opened one, or one of us
     opened one, one side fully open.

Q.   Before I go into the timings, can you recollect around
     this time that a fan was ejected and that a number of
     other fans managed to get in at that time? - A. There
     was more than one fan ejected before we opened the
     gates the first time, they were climbing over the
     turnstiles.

Q.   I accept that. - A. Fans tried to get in.  I don't
     know whether they did or not.  They tried to push in
     while this fan was getting thrown back out into the
     crush.

Q.   So how many times would you say fans were ejected
      before the gate was opened on instruction? - A. I
      would say no more than half-a-dozen.  I wouldn't like
      to say exactly but no more than 6.

Q.   That would be between half-past 2 — A. No, I would
     say that was after, like quarter-to 3-ish.

Q.   I see, so you are saying that the gate might have been
     opened up to six times? - A. Yes.  I don't think any
     more.

Q.   That is right, that is why I said up     to six times,
      maximum is what you are saying? - A.    To my
      recollection, yes.

Q.   Before you were formally asked to open it by Inspector
     White, is that right? - A. Told to open it.

Q.   What I am interested in is this, you see. You have
      given us some idea of timing.  I know you did not have
      a watch and I am not trying to catch you, but we know
      certainly from video evidence that at 14.48, we think,
      the gate was opened to eject a fan, as it looked like,
      from the inside? - A. Yes.

Q.   Or it might have been that somebody was actually
     asking for it to be opened from the outside at the
     same time, and a number of fans came in.  The number
     might have been 150, 200, 300.  It was not just one or
     two.  Do you remember that at all? - A. No, not unless
     it was the actual first time we did open the gates,
     which I thought was later than that.
                                                            9




                              R.   W.   BEADSLEY


    Do you remember in relation to this opening that you
    recollect, did a police horse come across the outer
    aspect of the gate to assist with the closure, do you
    remember that? - A. I can't remember, no.
B
    The second opening that we seem to know about and I
    want to check was, in fact, at 14.52, that is 8
    minutes to 3, and on that occasion the gate was opened
    wide and stayed open for several minutes.   Can you
    remember that opening? - A. Those two that you are
    talking about seemed to be what I thought was, like,
    round 3 o'clock, so I must have been wrong.   Like I
    say, I didn't have a watch on, but the two you are
    talking about seemed to be, the two I thought, 3
    o 'clockish.




D




                                   /Q.    There was
                                                                 10


                                        R. BEADSLEY


    Q. There was in fact a third opening at about 3 o'clock when
       it was opened partially and people were coming through
       rather slowly? - A. Yes, that is when we started checking.
       As I say I thought they were all later than what the times.
       You have seen a video with a clock on I suppose, I haven't.
B
    Q. I know that is right.  I was not trying to catch you but
       I was wanting to find out what you remembered before I ....
       I have described what sounds like three openings to me
       but now having told you that I don't want you to say:  "Yes
       that must be right". What I want you to do is tell me
       whether that has brought anything back to your memory.
       If it hasn't say:  "No, I still only remember two". That
       is what I meant? - A. The third time of opening I had not
       classed it as open because it were like just a gap and
       there was somebody actually checking tickets. It was
       like a turnstile as such the third time. They were like
       coming through one at a time and we were checking tickets
       as they came in.

    Q. So you do remember that? - A. Yes.

    Q. And that was the last thing that happened? - A. Yes, it
D      did happen, yes.

    Q. What I am now interested in is this: I want to try and
       pin, if I can use that word, the opening when you were
       asked by Inspector White to do so because it sounded to
       me from what you said that you were only actually asked
       or told to open the gate once. Would that be right? -
       A. No, I was told twice but the second time I can't remember.
       You see there was a lot of people about and we just heard
       a voice and there was more than one Inspector there. We
       were told twice but the first time was definitely Inspector
       White.
    Q. Okay, so the first time it was Inspector White. On that
       opening again describe to me what happened as far as you
       can remember. The first opening when you were told by
       Inspector White? - A. It is difficult. He came over and
       like said:  "Open the gates" and at first we said:   "You
       what?" and he said:  "Open the gate", so we opened them
       and there was Police like crushed against the inside
       trying to slow people down that was on the barrier to start
       with. People came through a few like three abreast at the
       very most crushing through and then after like I thought
       was three minutes but it could have been less, you don't
       really know time without a watch on, we forcibly pushed
       the gates together all three of us because we were told
       to shut the gates again.

    Q. Then the second time when you opened it, you were again
       told to open it on the second occasion, describe what
       you remember of that opening? - A. As I say I don't know




H
                                                                   11


                                          R. BEADSLEY


         whether it was him that told us that time, he told us
         again.

    Q. Yes, I am not telling you it was Inspector White. You
       perceived that you had been told again? - A. It might
B      sound awful but I just pulled the gate open and stood
       to one side and I would not say I started laughing but
       it was just a joke how we were told to do it because
       you could see everybody was running straight to one area,

    Q. So you are saying as far as you remember the second
       opening was when the main crowd came through? - A. Yes.

    Q. How many   would you say came through on that occasion? -
       A. It is   hard to judge. If I had not stood against the
       wall out   of the way I think I would have been trampled
       all over   and it were like, it is like letting a herd of
       cows out   of a shed.

    Q. A lot of people? - A. A lot of people.

    Q. How long did the crowd on this second occasion come through?
       - A. I would say, again it is guessing time, it seemed like
D      no more than a minute, a minute-and-a-hih&f.

    Q. So your recollection is that the second opening was shorter
       than the first? - A. The first opening it seemed longer
       because they were only like coming in two at a time.   I
       don't know whether it was or not but it seemed longer.

    Q. I am only asking you what you recollect. Whether it was
       or it wasn't is neither here nor there.  I am trying to
       find out what you can remember? - A. The second opening
       was only like open until the crowd had gone, if you know
       what I mean.

    Q. And then after that you say it was opened again but you
       were actually checking tickets? - A. Yes.

    Q.   And your recollection is this was all much nearer the
         kick-off? - A. I thought they were actually on the pitch.

    Q.   Of course you could not see? - A. No.

    Q.   And you were basing this upon the noise that you could
         hear from the inside? - A. Yes.

    Q. Which side of the gate were on, were you on the turnstile
       side of the gates or on the far side? - A. When the gates
       was opened I believe I was on the left-hand side. We
       don't like stop in one place.

    Q. I realise that. - A. I was on the left-hand side as you
       look at the gates.
                                                                   12


                                          R. BEADSLEY


    Q. As you look at the gates from the inside or from the
       outside? - A. The inside.

    Q. Did you hear any comment from any turnstile operator at
       all when the gates were open? - A. No.
B   Q. The people who came through where did they go? - A. Most
       headed straight towards the tunnel. The odd one or two
       or might have been 10, 20 or whatever like dispersed to
       the left, well to the right as they came in.

    Q. But the bulk went to the tunnel? - A, The bulk went straight
       forward, yes.

    Q. Were   there at that time any Police Officers in the concourse
       area   that you could see apart from Inspector White of course?
       - A.   There was Police there but you could not actually see
       them   because of the fans when the gates were opened.

    Q. I see, so many people there? - A. Yes.

    Q. So you could not say where they were positioned at that
       point in time? - A. No.
D
    Q. Had you noticed where they were positioned before the fans
       came in? - A. Yes, there was Police on the inside of the
       turnstiles.  Police on the gates through to the left-hand
       side through the wall and there was Police at the bottom of
       the gangways and round the tunnel, well round most areas
       just odd Police.

    Q. What were the Police doing who were behind the turnstile
       area? - A. They were searching people as they walked in.

    Q. What I am interested in is what you saw.  If you didn't
       see don't guess and don't tell me what you think they
       should have done, I am interested in what you saw.

             The other Police Officers whom you have described
       at the gate in the wall I think you said near the gangways
       and I think you mentioned the tunnel as well. What were
       they doing? - A. I don't really know.

    Q. You didn't check? - A. No, I know what they were doing on
       turnstiles because they were stood actually at the side
        of u s .

    Q. You could see them.  Did you have the impression that the
       Police presence within the concourse area was substantially
       different from what it had been in 1988 at the semi-final?
       - A. It seemed a lot different to us yes because normally
       all that season we had had the same Police every week.
       That semi-final for some reason there was a lot of different
       faces.




H
                                                                13

                                         R. BEADSLEY



Q. What I am asking you is numbers? - A. There didn't seem
   as many but that could have been because like as I said
   we know all the Police and we didn't know them so I don't
   know whether that made it as though there didn't seem
   as many but there didn't seem as many.

Q.   In a normal league match, I am not talking about semi-finals,
     do you have as many Police Officers in the ground as you
     would at a semi-final as far as you know, as far as your
     recollection goes? - A. It depends who they are playing.

Q. I see, yes. - A. Like if they are playing a big Club there
   will be as many Police.

Q. Now from where you were standing of course your job was
   to look after the gate but I don't suppose you stood with
   your eyes glued on the gate all the time? - A. No.

Q.    I would not expect you   to either.   So you were looking
     around? - A. Yes.
Q. Did the tunnel come into your view during the afternoon in
   1989, could you see the tunnel? - A. I could see the tunnel
   yes. I would say most of the time because it is not a
   small tunnel.

Q.   It is pretty big? - A. Big, yes.
Q.    Did you in 1989 see whether it was in any way blocked       off
     by anybody? - A. No, it wasn't.

Q. I am not talking about barriers or blue gates, any form
   of control on that tunnel? - A. Not to my knowing.

Q.   You didn't see it? - A. If it was I didn't see it.

Q. Go back to 1988 now,    semi-final,   not league,   semi-final?
     - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember whether there was any difference with
   regard to the control of the tunnel in 1988 as compared
   with 1989? - A. In 1988 they seemed to fill the centre
   pens first and when they were full  they shut the gates
   and sent the people through the wall to the left.

Q. Now I want to get this absolutely crystal clear. First
   of all when you say they "shut the gates" what gates
   are you talking about? - A. The big blue wooden gates.
   They closed them and put Police Officers in front of them.




                               Q. So the people
                                                                      14


                                                   R.   W.   BEADSLEY




    0. So the people within the terracing would have had to
       come up the tunnel against the blue gates, is that
       right? - A. Yes, they did not actually lock them.      They
       were ajar with Police there.  They d i d n ’t leave them
B      closed, they only closed them while the fans got in,
       then they opened them up.

    0. What time are you saying that that happened? - A. I
       d o n ’t wear a watch so as soon as the pens were full.        I
       would say at a guess again between quarter-past and
       h a l f - pas t-2.

    0.   How long would you say those gates were kept in that
         position that you have described? - A. I would not   like
         to say.

    0. Was it from the time that it happened until kick-off,
       or was it only minutes or was it until the match was
       finished? - A. I think it was just like minutes, until
       people were told, until they got to know - there was a
       flow of fans, as soon as they got to know they had got
       to go right or left then I think they opened them
D      again.

    0. So it was a relatively short period of time you are
       saying? - A. Yes.

    0.   Did you see who did that? - A. No.

    Q.   So you can't help us on that? - A. No.

    0. Have you seen anything like that done at league
       matches? - A. At league matches those gates have been
       locked, some league matches, because they used to have
       both sets of fans on that terrace.  They used to have
       away fans at one side - that is what the brick wall was
       built for.

    Q. Can you remember when the brick wall was built?  Were
       you there? - A. I would say at a guess five or six
       years ago.

    0. Five or six years ago from now or five or six years ago
       from .... - A. Five or six years ago from .

    Q.   '89? - A. I would say five or six years ago from      '89.

    0. Yes, I am not going to hold you to it.  Are you then
       saying those gates were locked before the wall was
       built or after the wall was built, at league matches? -
       A. I would not like to say on that one.

    0. You don't know? - A. No.  It is hard to remember six
       years ago, or five years ago.  They didn't use the




H
                                                                     15


                                                    R.   W.   BEADSLEY




       centre pens.  When the pens were put in they didn't use
       that centre pen.  They used to put away fans as you
       walked through the gates to the right hand side, and
       Sheffield Wednesday fans came in at the other side of
JJ     the wall and used the left hand side.

     Q. What I am trying to find out is was there a different
        practice as far as you know, as far as you observed,
        with regard to filling the terraces between league
        matches and semi-finals? - A. If it was a big league
        match all the pens were opened, so it was the same as a
        semi-final.  It was only when small clubs came that
        they actually used the pens, apart from that actual
        semi-final where they closed the middle pen first.

     0. That was the   '88 semi-final? - A. That was     '88, yes.

     Q. What about the '87 semi-final?   - A. Coventry/Leeds - I
        can't really remember.

     0. Tnen of course, after the event people came out to you
        and you realised something dreadful had happened but
D       you did not go into the terracing yourself, did you? -
        A. I was not actually there.   A gentleman came out and
        said, "There's going to be another Hysel here, I want
        to go and claim my money bacK".   This was round what I
        thought was 5-past, 10-past-3.   I took him down to the
        office and when I came back there were ambulances and
        everything there so I went in to see if I could do
        anything, but they just said, "Get water and see if you
        can comfort anybody".

     Q. So you left with somebody who said to you, "There's
        going to be another Hysel"? - A. Yes, I took a
        gentleman round to the ticket office.

             THE CORONER:   Mr. Maxwell, I didn't welcome you,
        I am sorry.  I had not noticed you were here.  Forgive
        me, please - I wasn't being discourteous to you.  Have
        you got any questions?

             MR. MAXWELL:     I still have no questions.

                       Cross-Examined by MR. HALE

     Q. You say that in 1988 you saw, what, a couple of
        Officers at the entrance to the tunnel? - A. Yes.

     Q. And the doors just pulled to,    they weren't locked? - A.
        They wasn't locked, no.

     0. And they didn't stay there very long? - A. The Officers
        stayed there but the gates didn't stop shut very long,
        tne Officers were telling people to go right or left.




H
                                                                       16
                                                       R.   W.   BEADSLEY




     . That time was what, 2.15, I think you said? - A. I
       would say 2.15.  Between 2.15 and 2.30 but I don't wear
       a watch.

Q   0. So you weren't looking all the time in 1989, were you,
       towards the tunnel? - A. No.

    0. Is it possible that something similar might have
       nappened in 1989? - A. It could have done, yes.

    Q. That would not have made any difference at all at 2.-
       m i n u t e s - t o - 3 , or whatever it was, when the great rush
       came? - A. Yes, but the year before they closed the pen
       because the pen was full.              If they had closed the pen
       this year, or that year when it was full ....

    0. Yes, but how do you close the pen? - A. They close the
       gates.

    Q. Which gates? - A. What I am saying       ....

    0. I am sorry, I am only trying to find out the facts.
D      The Coroner will assure you nobody is trying to
       browbeat you at all. - A. The big blue gates was closed
       the year before.  What I saw, I didn't seem them closed
       in 1989.

    0. I am sorry, forgive me, it is probably my fault - which
       big blue gates? - A. The wooden gates to the tunnel.

    0.   The wooden gates? - A. Yes.

    0. I thought you said they were merely put to? - A. They
       was closed.  I said they wasn't locked, they was
       closed, but there was like a gap for people to walk
       through.  There was Police stood there to open them if
       they needed to be opened for people to come out.

    0.    Yes, that is what I am trying to establish. They are
         not, in fact, locked? - A. They wasn't locked, no.

    0. In any way - they were ajar? - A. They was ajar a bit,
       yes.

     . So all I am saying to you is that if it had been the
       same in 1989 when you stood by for fear of being
       trampled and the crowd came through, would those doors
       merely ajar nave stopped that crowd from going down the
       tunnel? - A. Yes, because they open outwards, so if
       they had been closed and open ajar they can't come back
       open, can they?  The crush would nave gone the other
       way.




H
                                                                                 17


                                                            R.   W.   BEADSLEY




    0   ,   Well, we will hear other evidence on that.           I won't
            challenge you on that.

                 THE CORONER:   I don't think you can pursue that
B           because he can't actually answer that.

    Q.              MR. KALE:    NO , I can see the Coroner is aware of
            that.     Thank you,

                 THE C0R0WER:   Can you just put    up 263, and we
            will make sure that we know we are talking about    the
            right gates.  This is a new set of gates, we haven't
            had these before.

    Q. That is a picture of the tunnel,          right? - A. Yes.

    0 . You can just see the blue edges, blue gates, those are
            the gates you are talking about? - A. Yes.  I am
            mistaken.  I thought they did open outwards to tell you
            the truth.

    o, But they open the other way, don't they? - A. Yes.                   I
D      am mistaken, sorry.

    0, That was the point of Mr. Hale's question,                I think.
       Not that you can answer it, in fact.

                 MR. HALE:   I merely wished to establish that they
            were not locked, they were ajar.

                 THE CORONER:   Yes,     that is correct,    isn't it? -
            A. As far as I saw.

    Q-      As far as    you could see, yes.

    Q. They appeared to you to be ajar? - A. Yes.

    0. I would just ask one supplementary question.  Would I
       be right in thinking that the numbers of people who
       were going towards the tunnel in 1988 at the point in
       time when you saw them, in the position you have
       described, was less than the number of people who were
       going towards the tunnel when you had opened the
       perimeter gate? - A. Yes.

                 THE CORONER:   That, I think,     is what you were
            wanting to find out, weren't you?

                    MR. HALE:   Yes.

                            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

    0   ,   While that photograph is still on the screen and you
            have got it in front of you, now that you realise which




H
                                                                     18


                                                     R.   W.   BEADSLEY




         way they close, if in fact they are closed then anyone
         approaching from the pens, walking out of the ground,
         would have to pull the doors towards them? - A. Yes.

B   Q. To get
       closed
                out.  Are you saying
                at a time when there
                                       that those doors were
                                       were large numbers of
       people   inside pens 3 and 4?   - A.They was closed, yes,
       but we   didn't tell them to close them.   They was closed
       on the   semi-final in 1988.

    Q. You mentioned that at your annual instruction you were
       told something about emergency evacuation procedure? -
       A. Yes.

    Q.   That is when the "Mr. Meadows" announcement is made
         over the tannoy? - A. Yes.

    Q.    If that happened when a large number of people were in
         those pens 3 and 4, which would be their emergency way
         out of the ground? - A. On an emergency we are told to
         go to our posts.    I don't know who that post belongs
         to.   We steward the West Stand seating area.   They
D        would have to come out that way.




                               /0. So if the gates




H
                                           R.   W.   BEADS LEY




So if the gates were closed then the first people up the
tunnel of the crowd in the emergency would have to pull
the gates towards them? - A. Yes, but surely if those
gates were closed and "Mr. Meadows" was called, whoever
closed them would go and stand by them the same as we
stood by our gates.

So the crowd would need someone to help them to open the
gates? - A. Well, the crowd don't know what "Mr. Meadows"
means, do they?

They would know there was an emergency though? - A. Would
they?

Are you told what sort of emergencies you are preparing
for? - A. We are just told to go to our posts and wait
for further information.

Like a fire? - A. Fire, bomb scare.

Somebody behaving like a maniac? - A. Well, I don't think
they would call Mr. Meadows" for somebody acting like a
maniac.   They might do, I don't know.   We do what we
are told.

When Gate C was opened in 1989 your evidence is that you
stood out of the way... - A. The second time.

Where did you stand? - A.   To the wall.

Did you see where the other gatemen stood? - A. I would
not be sure but I think they were stood...   You see,
there was only one section of the gate open.   There are
two sections and I think they were stood behind to their
side of the gate.

Was there any chance to give any directions to thefans
when they came through? - A. I think if we had been told
to direct we would have tried.    Whether we would have
got trarapled on and killed we will never know, will we?
If we had been told to do something we would have done.

What makes you think you might have been trampled on and
killed? - A. I reckon - well, seeing hundreds of people
running through...   If I said to you, "Can you go right
or left?" and everybody is pushing behind you, they are
not going to take any notice, are they?   They are just
going to carry on going.   They were pushed with the
crowd.

If anybody stood in the way of the crowd do you think
they would be in danger of being trampled? - A. I think
so, yes.
                                                             20




                                              R.   W.   BEADSLEY


Q. Two more points.   You mentioned something about throwing
   tickets out? - A. Yes.

Q. Give that information, will you?   Speak to the
   microphone and tell the jury what you saw? - A. As they
   were ejecting people from the crowd there were tickets
   following the people out over people's heads.

Q. Have another go.   Just explain a bit more. - A. What do
   you want me to explain?

Q. Give the picture of what you are describing. - A. They
   were throwing tickets.   As the gate opened a foot or so
   to let a person be ejected they were throwing tickets^
   through the gate, over the people's heads who were being
   ejected.

Q. So people inside the ground... - A. ...inside the ground
   were throwing tickets out.   There were people round the
   gate.

Q. They were throwing tickets through the gap? - A. Through
   the gap in the gate.

Q. To people who were outside? - A. Yes.

Q. My last question:  in 1988 you have already made it clear
   that what you saw was there weren't nearly such large
   crowds at shortly before the kick-off.   I think you can
   give a little more information about that, about what you
   did at about ten to three in 1988? - A. I can't...

Q. Have a go.   Do you remember going outside the ground at
   about ten to three with some tickets yourself? - A. Yes,
   I do.

Q. Just tell the jury the story about that. - A. A Liverpool
   policeman had got some tickets for his friends and they
   didn't come.   He asked one of us to see if we would go
   out and give them away and there was no-one about.  We
   couldn't give the tickets away.

Q. At what time? - A. Around ten to three.   I couldn't say
   exactly, because as I say, I don't wear a watch.

Q. Outside the ground? - A. Outside the ground.

Q. You were looking for some spectators? - A. We were
   looking to give tickets away and we couldn't.
                                                             21



                                                  R. w.   beadsley


                 Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. Can I just follow Mr. Payne in that description about the
   tickets?   It was people effectively trying to throw
   tickets outside for somebody else? - A. Yes.

Q.   For somebody else to use those tickets again? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is what the game is all   about? - A. Yes.

Q. We have already had the advantage of hearing from
   Mr. Bain who was one of your colleagues on that gate,
   wasn't he? - A. Yes.

Q.   He described to us the scene of things going on outside
     the gates before they were opened.   People banging on
     the door? - A. Yes.

Q. The door swaying? - A. Yes.      Well, it is a sliding door
   so it does move.

Q. That wasn't something you had experienced in the year
   before? - A. No. Well, the year before the police
   barrier was to the right of the gates so they could not
   get to the gates.

Q. But you had not experienced that in the year before? -A.
   No.

Q. You could hear people saying, "Give over pushing"? - A.
   Yes.

Q. See them climbing over the wall? - A. Yes, there were
   people climbing over the turnstiles, on to the turnstile
   roofs.

Q. All these things were not something which you had not
   experienced the year before? - A. No.

Q. I just want to put to you again what another witness said
   yesterday and see whether you agree with this.   I
   suspect you do, again from what you have just helpfully
   said.   The witness was asked about the possibility of
   directing fans and these were the words that were used,
   "It was impossible to direct the fans because of the way
   they entered the ground."   Is that put in other words
   what you were saying about the probability of being
   trampled and killed? - A. I think it would have been
   impossible, but if we had been told to we probably would
   have tried.

Q. I know you would have tried because you obviously took
   your position seriously.   However, you agree with that
   statement, that in practical effect it would have been
                                                               22



                                                 R.   W.   BEAKSLEY


     impossible to direct them because of the way they
     entered? - A, There was such a thrust I don't think we
     would have stood a chance.

                 Cross-Examined by MISS STEEL:

Q. You say that the police officers who were on duty that
   day were not the officers who were usually on duty? - A.
   No.

Q. Can you remember whether in the 1988 semi-final the
   officers who were on duty that day were the usual
   officers for that end? - A. Most of them, yes.

Q. Staying with 1988, you say that those officers when the
   centre pens were full drew the big wooden doors together
   and stood for a period outside them? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you said they directed people until the flow of
   fans went to right and to left? - A. Yes.   In 1988
   though it was more like entering a football...  Everybody
   seemed to come in a lot slower.   There was just a
   trickle all the time until the ground was full.

Q. Is it your experience that fans will follow each other
   towards whatever the appropriate place is? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you said the doors to the tunnel were then re­
   opened by somebody, in 1988? - A. Yes, but the police
   stayed there.

Q. The police stayed there? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember whether they had to tell many fans to go
   right and left or whether the fans merely followed the
   obvious way to the pens? - A. I can't remember.   I think
   if people went there they were told.   I wouldn't swear
   on it but they seemed to be following everybody else.

Q.   Staying again with 1988, did you spend time outside
     Gate C in the early stages? - A. There was one of us in
     1988 out nearly all the time.   There was one stood
     outside and two on the inside.

Q. In 1988, before you went out to try and get rid of the
   tickets, did you hear anyone asking for tickets
   immediately outside the gate? - A. I can't remember.

Q. Were there any people obviously without tickets? - A.
   There didn't seem to be, no.

Q.   At the turnstile area and around  that area? - A. No.      As
     I say, the turnstiles were around the corner.
                                                            23




                                                 R.   W.   BEABSLEY


Q. Yes, I mean close to the ground where you were? - A.
   Where we could see no there didn't seem to be.

Q. Was that the same in 1989 or were there people there
   without tickets? - A. There were people asking for
   tickets - well, asking us to let them in early on, that
   couldn't get tickets.

Q.That was another difference with 1988? - A. Yes.

Q. I think, dealing again with the differences with 1988,
   the area round the back of the South Stand is normally on
   a league match open for people to walk round the back? -
   A. Yes.

Q. It wasn't on either of the semi-finals? - A. No.

Q. The police you are talking about, the police cordon or
   barrier, do you know why that was there? - A. Just to
   segregate the fans basically, I think.

Q. However, the difference in 1988 and 1989 was the place
   where that barrier was placed? - A. Yes.

Q. In 1988, as you say, it kept them short of your gate? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Turning to 1989, you say there were police in the
   concourse area? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you said at some stage they were at the base of
   the stands and around the tunnel area? - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you remember when the large number of people came       in
     whether there were any police around the tunnel area
     then? - A. No, I can't remember.

         THE CORONER:   Actually I did ask him that and what
     he said was he couldn't see because there were so many
     people:

Q. That's right? - A. Yes.

Q.       MISS STEEL:   There were, you say, no more than six
     times from 2.45, when the door was opened for ejections?
     - A. Well, to my recollection, yes.

Q. Were those the only occasions when tickets were thrown
   out? - A. No, there were tickets going over the top of
   the gate on odd occasions.   Not all the time but some of
   the time.

Q.   However, the three occasions when people came in and your
     gates were opened, is it right that on each of those
                                           R.   W.   BEAPSLEY


occasions those gates were opened on police instructions?
- A. Yes.

The checking of the tickets on the third occasion, was
that done on police instructions, or... - A. Well, there
were two police with us.   They were helping us check
them as they came through.

Because you were acting on their instructions? - A. Yes.

           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Can I just concentrate for the moment on the very helpful
evidence you have given about your experience of the fans
following each other?   Is it right that at normal
matches you will have seen people coming through the
turnstiles and you will have had experience of fans
coming through and watching them and how they go into the
ground from where you are positioned? - A. Well, you
don't really take much notice.   I suppose you do, yes,
everybody seems to follow each other.

So once you get a flow going you get a group of people
just following on? - A. Yes.

Generally that flow is not diverted unless someone
actually physically says to them... - A. Yes.

So from your experience... - A. Unless they have been
before and they know where they want to be at a specific
place then they will try and go a different way.

However, in general, people who are following on are just
following the people in front? - A. Well, I think so,
yes.

It is only an impression you have got, but what they are
not doing they are not standing looking around for signs
or anything, they are following the people in whatever
direction they want to go? - A. If they have got seat
tickets they know they don't want to be stood up so they
will go to where...   Well, if they know where their
seats are they will go there.

I think there is only one other matter.

    MR. CATCHPOLE:   Perhaps, sir, I could hand this up.
It is in relation to the identity of the person who gave
the order for the second opening:

Now there is a club statement.   Do you remember giving a
statement to a solicitor acting for Sheffield Wednesday,
a long time ago now? - A. Yes.
                        /                                           25




                                                    R.   W.   BEAP.SLEY


       MR. CATCHPOLE:         I don't know whether it is helpful,
sir.

       THE CORONER:         I haven't seen it.    I don't know.

    MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is really the third paragraph,
the first two sentences, sir, actually highlighted.

    THE CORONER:   The third paragraph, the one that
begins, "As the order was given...", is that the one you
have got in mind?    Perhaps you can't remember now.

    MR. CATCHPOLE:   I can't remember.    It is the
sentence highlighted.    It says, "We were then told
again..."   I think it is the third or fourth paragraph
down.   Shall I mark it with a pencil, sir?    It deals
with the first opening.




          THE CORONER:         Yes, I'm sorry.   I miscounted
                               R.   W.   BEADSLEY


     THE CORONER: I am sorry, I miscounted the
paragraphs.  I didn't count the first section.  Let me
just have another read.  Why don't you just put it to
him because I don't think it is very controversial
what you have highlighted?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  What I do not want to do is I
think Mr. Beadsley said he could not remember which
police officer had told him the second time round.  It
is just in that statement I think he was able in a
sense to identify him.

     THE CORONER:  Okay, I do not mind it going in.
It is the first sentence of that third paragraph, is
it not?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     Yes.

     THE CORONER:     You will read it in a moment.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Mr. Beadsley, I am not trying to
get you to remember things you do not now remember,
but that statement you made fairly shortly after the
event in 1989.  Do you see the sentence that is
highlighted there? - A. Yes.

Does that jog your memory in any way as to who it was
who gave the order the second time round? - A. Do you
mean that "We heard the same voice ..."?

Did you remember hearing the same voice giving the
order? - A. It is 18 months ago.  Reading that now, it
does jog your memory.  It could have been, I would not
say.

That is a fair answer.     I was only trying to assist.
You could not remember.

     THE CORONER: Do you want to hear it read?        Read
that one sentence out.

     THE WITNESS: "Within a minute or so we were told
once again to open the gate.  I heard the same voice
from behind, the Police Inspector, to open the gate."

     THE CORONER:  Your reply is who knows, 18 months
on you cannot really say? - A. Yes, thank you.

         Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Beadsley, do you know if many fans were ejected
through Gate C in 1988? - A. I can't remember.  If
they were ejected from the ground and not arrested
they will have been ejected from either B or C, but I
                                                       27




                                  R.   W.   BEADSLEY


     can't actually remember.  Gate C in 1988 was open
     nearly all the time, like 18 inches.

Q.   In 1989 would you say that it was constantly being
     used for that purpose? - A. As I say, if fans are just
     ejected, they are always ejected from that end of the
     ground through Gates B or C.  I weren't constantly
     being ejected, but everyone that was ejected was
     ejected through the gate which they are nearest to, B
     or C.

Q.   I do not suppose you would know if ticketless fans had
     been sorted out at the main entrance in 1988, would
     you? - A. I have no idea.

          MR. ISAACS:  There are one or two matters that
     may be I could ask.  I did not ask anything the first
     time round and I apologise for that, but as a result
     of some of the things that have been said there are
     one or two matters.

          THE CORONER:  Mr. Isaacs, I think everybody knows
     that I do usually start again and make sure that we
     have not missed something.

          MR. ISAACS:   I am very grateful, sir.

               Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Q.   Mr. Beadsley, I just want to see if I can in my own
     mind picture what you are saying.   A lot of us here
     have been to football matches and you have described
     in 1988 people going up to the tunnel gates where the
     police officers are standing outside, and you say it
     was like a trickle all the time, more like fans
     entering a football game? - A. Yes.

Q.   Could you just help us a bit about that, the normal
     way in your experience, for those of us who do not go
     regularly to football games, of what you are really
     describing? - A. I say it didn't seem as though it was
     a semi-final;  it just seemed an ordinary match.
     People were turning up and going into the ground.  I
     don't mean in ones.  They weren't turning up like one
     and 10 minutes later another one.

Q.   No, of course not, but dealing with the situation
     between 2 o'clock and quarter-past 2 when they got to
     the mouth of the tunnel and the police officers were
     there, they would come up and they would not come up
     running? - A. No, they were just walking in.

Q.   They would be walking?   - A. Yes.
                            R.   W.   BEADSLEY


And there would not be a mass of people? - A. No,
there wasn't.

Pushing all at the same time? - A. No.

So when an officer said, "Just go down that way", or
"Just go down that way", they would do it without
demure, without worrying about it, without
complaining, as far as you could see? - A. I dare say
some said, "Well, I want to go in there", and they
were told it was full and they just ---

But when they were told not, as far as you could see,,
they would go? - A. Yes, they seemed to go.

1989 it was quite exceptional, was it not, the way
that the fans came into that area? - A. Yes.

It was, was it not, and from what you are telling us,
and you have given a very vivid description of people
being released as if they were a herd being released
from, I think, a shed, acting like an unleashed herd,
in that way they were not behaving like a normal
football crowd at all? - A. Well, if they had just
been crushed up against a wall for 10, 15 or even 5
minutes, and then somebody opened a gate, you are not
going to behave normally, you are going to try and get
into the open space, aren't you?

But once they got into the open space they carried on
going to the tunnel? - A. Yes, but the people behind
were also getting into the open space and they were
pushed along with them.  They had to go where they
were sent.  One or two did filter.

So for whatever reason there was this exceptional mass
of people going towards the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Not "Excuse me, I would like to come this way", but if
you had been there, you would have been trampled over?
- A. I think so, yes.  If they were tall, they would
have done.

     MR. ISAACS:   Thank you very much indeed.

             Further by THE CORONER:

I have got a couple of questions from the Jury and a
couple of questions of my own.  I will deal with yours
first.  You remember you said on the third opening,
which you did not in fact count as an opening because
you were checking tickets, but you know which one I am
talking about? - A. Yes.
                                                        29




                                 R.   W.   BEADSLEY


Q.   Can you remember whether the fans who were coming
     through on that occasion all had tickets, or did you
     have to send some away? - A. I seem to recollect that
     there were one or two without tickets and the Police
     told them they couldn't get in without them.

Q.   I see, but proportionally how many would that have
     been? Was it a very small number or what? - A. Very
     small.

Q.   The majority had tickets, you would say? - A. Yes.

Q.   On that third opening? - A. Yes.

Q.   Because that was the   only time you actually checked
     tickets, was it not?   - A. Yes.

Q.   In 1988 do you remember seeing any fans climbing over
      the walls to enter the ground? - A. No.

Q.   You don't remember, or you did not see any? - A. I
      don't remember. Well .... I don't remember.  I will
      leave it as I don't remember.

Q.   Try and help us a bit more because "don't remember"
     doesn't actually get us anywhere.  - A. I can't
     remember seeing people climbing over the wall.

Q.   I am not trying to make you answer questions that you
     can't, but where you can I want you to.  The other
     question I want to ask you is to do with the opening
     of the gate, C Gate.  Your evidence is that you were
     told to open it, you opened it and initially it was
     not opened very wide on the first occasion - right? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   Have I remembered that correctly? - A. Yes.

Q.   The second occasion I think you said it was opened
     much wider? - A. One half of it was opened fully.

Q.   What about the other half? That is what I am
      interested in. - A. As I say, I don't know about that.
      I wasn't at the other half.  I was at the half that
     was opened fully.

Q.   Which half were you at then? - A. I was at the left-
      hand side looking at it from inside the gate.

Q.   You were there and I was not, so I can't answer this
     question.  Are you saying that you cannot remember
     whether that other half was opened? You see there is
     a difference.  If it wasn't opened it was shut, was it
     not, and you only had half the gate? - A. The half
                                                        30



                                   R.   W.   BEADSLEY


     that was open where I was, people rushed in and you
     couldn't see the other side of the gate anyway.

Q.   The gate is 8' high? - A. Yes, but I am small and
      people are higher than me.  If you have got a rush of
      people running past you, you are not looking at the
      other gate, are you?

Q.   Let me put it to you   the other way. I am interested
      to know how much you remember, you see.  You may not
      be able to tell me whether it was fully open, but how
     was this gate fastened in the centre? Has it got a
      bolt down the middle? - A. There are two bolts.  There
      is one on each gate at the top.

Q.   Can you remember whether the other half, not the half
      you were on, was still in the bolted position? - A. I
      don't know.

Q.   The other question I wanted to ask was this.   You have
     mentioned, I think three times now, that had you been
      asked to direct you would have done it? - A. Yes.

Q.   I accept that.  What I am slightly puzzled about is
     why did you have to wait to be asked, if you were a
     steward, to direct people? - A. Basically I think
     because I was frightened.   If I had been told - I
     don't know about asked - I would have definitely done
     it.  If I had been asked I would have probably done
     it, but I wasn't asked so I kept out of the way.

          THE CORONER: That is a fair enough answer, I
     accept that.  Is there anything that anybody else
     wants to ask this young man?  (No response) Thank you
     very much indeed.

                       RUTH COBB Sworn

                       By THE CORONER:

Q.   Tell me what your name is? - A. Ruth Cobb.

Q.   It is 3234, is that right? - A. That is correct,        yes.

Q.   Is it Miss or Mrs.? - Miss.

Q.   Perhaps I should just say PC Cobb, that would be more
      correct.  On 15th April you were part of, I think,
      Serial 34, is that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q.   Before I deal with 1989, had you done policing of
     major football events before that date? - A. From
     memory, I believe I went to the Leeds and Coventry
     match.
                                 R.   COBB


That is the 1987 match. - A. Is it?

Yes. - A. I went to that one.

As far as I can remember anyway, but you were not at
the 1988 match? - A. No.

So you have not done very many major football matches?
- A. No.

In fact, your job was away from the ground, was it
not? - A. Yes, that is right.

You were not close to the ground? - A. No.

Would I be right in saying that, as part of your
duties, you positioned yourself in Clay Wheels Lane? -
A. Yes, that is right.

Was Clay Wheels Lane one of the areas where coaches
were to be received? - A. Yes, that is right.

Did you know that they were mainly intended to be for
Liverpool supporters? - A. Yes, that is what we were
informed of when we first set off.

Just so that we can dispose of this now, in fact was
it mainly Liverpool supporters who came there? - A.
Yes.

I am not talking about the odd straggler, but the bulk
of people were mainly Liverpool supporters? - A.
Mainly Liverpool supporters, yes.

I think you took up your position at about quarter-
past 11, or thereabouts? - A. Yes, that is right.

What were your instructions? What were you supposed
to do when these coaches arrived? - A. I was
personally supposed to note the registration numbers
of the coaches while other officers in the serial went
onto the coaches, had a look at the tickets, informed
fans as to the ground regulations with regard to
taking banners, and made sure there wasn't any alcohol
on the buses.

As far as you could see was that, in fact, done? - A.
Yes it was.

You went around taking your numbers? - A. That is
right, yes.
                                   R.   COBB


Was that just so that you would know which coaches   had
arrived, or what was the purpose of taking the
numbers? - A. I don't know the purpose.

You were just   told to do it? - A. I was just nominated
to do it.




                        /Q. Can you remember.
                                 R.   COBB



Can you remember, and if you can't remember say you can't,
did you manage to get all the numbers of all the coaches?
- A. Yes, I did.

You did? - A. Yes.

Can you recollect did they come sufficiently slowly for
you to be there when each coach arrived or did you have to
sort of catch up with yourself so to speak? - A. The majority
of the time they were sufficiently slowly for me to take
every registration number as they arrived.

How many coaches did you count at the end? - A. 52 coaches
and 2 mini buses.

52 you say? - A.Yes.

What time was that when you did that count, do you remember?
- A. It started at quarter-past-11 and finished at about
25-past-2.

And by then you had counted in 52 coaches and 2 mini buses?
- A. Yes.

Do you recollect seeing people go on to all these coaches
or did you not observe all of them being, your colleagues
going on? - A. As far as I know some colleague or some
member of the Serial went on to every coach.

Would it be fair to say that the people who came off these
coaches you had no problems with? - A. No, they were all
very nice, courteous. They were just going for a good time.

And you were quite happy with them? - A. Yes, quite happy.

And no doubt your colleagues were as well? - A. Yes.

I just want to check the time.    In your statement, and I
am quite happy to accept 14.25 as being the time when you
counted these, but in what I have got in frort to of me
it looks as though you counted at quarter-to-2 and you
were redeployedat 14.25. Now which is right? I don't mind
it is all the same to me? - A. It would have been quarter-
to-2. They were parked on a really long road and when
they all finished they came on to the road, went to the
other end of the road, turned round and came back so
obviously we were at the end of the road when I actually
finished writing the registration numbers and I had to
walk back to the next point I went to after that.

So it might have been a bit earlier when you did your
counting? - A. It might have been, yes.

Because the effect was the earliest coach was parked
nearer to the ground? — A. The earliest coach was parked
right at the front of the queue so it was going to be
the first to get away.
                                                       34

                                    R.   COBB




Q. So as time went on you disappeared up Claywheels Lane,
   so to speak? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. But you are sure about the numbers, how many you counted?
   - A. Yes, positive.

Q. So you were then redeployed I think because the park was
   full, I think, you could not get any more coaches in?
   - A. Yes, that is correct, it v/as packed.

Q. And I think you were sent to the junction of Claywheels
   Lane with Penistone Road North? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Do we need to see this? Do you know where that is? The
   street map is 284. We will just get the map up.   If you
   open that book and look for 284. Are you a Sheffield
   Officer? - A. No I am not, I am a Doncaster Officer.

Q. Can you see Claywheels Lane there? - A. Yes.

Q. So when you were redeployed were you redeployed to not
   where he is pointing now but to the bottom of Claywheels
   Lane where it abuts on to Penistone Road.   Is that right?
   - A. Yes, we were practically on the junction.

Q. Yes, on that junction there.  In fact I think there is
   a pub there I think called The Gate which is a marker
   so to speak? - A. Yes.

Q. What were you told when you got down there? - A. We were
   told to form a filter lane on the pavement to stop the
   fans; take any alcohol off them if they have got any;
   generally have a quick look in any bags and see what they
   had and just inform them of the ground rules with regards
   to taking things in and when they got there, you know:
   "You won't be allowed to take that in".

Q. Can you just describe to me when you say a "filter lane"
   how was that done, what is the organisational aspect of
   it? - A. It is just the Sergeant saying:  "Find yourself
   a spot and if anybody comes past have a look at them" and
   we were all within like 10 yards of each other so there
   was a lot of bobbies in one area stopping the people coming
   through.

Q. Were you standing in a straight line across the pavement
   or were you standing parallel to the road or were you
   standing diagonally or were you standing in a clump, if
   I can use that word, it is not a very nice word? - A. I
   would say it was in a clump but all the Officers were
   blocking the roadway in some sense so like you had to
   go past one and then past another to get going again sort
   of thing.
                                                               35



                                          R.    COBB




    Q. This was you said in order to check for prohibited articles
       and talk about ground rules? - A. Yes.

    Q.    At this point in time how many fans were coming towards
         you because I presume they were coming down from Halifax
B        Road? - A. Yes, it was totally packed.   I have never seen
         - in all the games I have policed - I have never seen so
         many people coming down the road towards me.

    Q. Were you in fact able to do any checking? - A. We did quite
       a bit of checking yes. Some obviously got through but the
       majority of people we stopped were quite good humoured and
       we you know just told them the rules and what have you.

    Q.   What did you observe about thepeople?   One of the things
         you mentioned was alcohol because they are not allowed to
         take that into the ground? - A. That is right, yes.

    Q. So what did you tell them with regard to that? What did
       you tell them, that is what I am interested in? - A. I told
       them that they weren't allowed to take their alcohol into
       the ground and they had to leave it here. Some of them
       just put the cans on the wall and left them, other ones
D      drunk them and left the cans.

    Q. So what you are saying is they complied with your request.
       You might have preferred them to leave it but they did not
       carry on with the cans, they didn't just say:  "I don't
       care, I am taking them through"? - A. No, the majority
       you know complied with what we asked.

    Q. Proportionally, I mean it is a very difficult question
       to answer, out of say 100 people whom you stopped how many
       of them actually had alcohol in their hand which they had
       to deposit or put to one side? - A. I would say 50-60 of
       them.

    Q. Quite a lot? - A. Yes.    Oh yes, yes.

    Q. But they were as far as you were concerned good humoured
       at that point or not? - A. They were drunk but they were
       happy drunk. They weren't incapable or they weren't
       disorderly, they were just nice and happy.

    Q. We have heard this word "drunk" before.  It is a difficult
       word because it conjures up pictures in people's minds.
       What I am interested in is how you define it in relation
       to these people? - A. It is a difficult question.  I would
       say happy. The obvious ones we see on the evenings when
       we work weren't like that, they were just, all I can say
       is they were happy.

    Q. What you are trying   to say you thought they had had some
       alcohol in them but   they weren't in a state where you
       would have arrested   them for being drunk and disorderly?
       - A. That is right,   yes.


H
                                 R.   COBB




Had you been in this position before, you know working
this locality on a previous occasion at all? - A. No.

So you can't actually say whether this was usual or
unusual with regard to people corning down from Halifax
Road? - A. No, I can't say.

It just appeared to you that there were an awful lot?
- A. Yes.

You took up your position I think you said what was it
14.25 or something like that? - A. Possibly just a bit
later.

2.30 shall we say? - A. Yes.

How long did you stay there? - A. We stayed there for
about half-an-hour, then my colleagues got called into
the pub, then we came back out, stayed for another ten
minutes, then we got called back into the pub and when
we came out eventually at quarter-past-3 we found out
there was something going off and we made our way to
the ground.

But you were there for a good half-hour? - A. Oh yes,
yes.

Before you were diverted, I think it was some incident
or other which you had to sort out and we are not too
concerned about that.

      Did the crowd diminish during that time? - A. No,
they were still coming in the same numbers until about
10-past-3 until I actually left to go into the pub and
then when I came back out at about quarter-past-3 they
had diminished somewhat at that time.

So you had the impression that there were loads of people
coming down for a substantial period of time? - A. Oh
yes, definitely.

Did that surprise you as a matter of interest? - A. It
did considering that the kick-off was at 3 o'clock.
If I had paid my money I would want to be there on time.

Were you able to continue your routine which you have
described you know of looking and taking up drink and
so on or not? - A. We did until about 5-to-3ish but
then a few of the Officers got called in the pub which
depleted our Officers there so we just carried on as
best we could and then obviously we left as well.

So up to 5-to-3 things were as you have described it?
- A. Yes.
                        /                                  37

                                     R.   COBB




Q.   After that it was a little bit more haphazard? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you in fact check for tickets at that position, can
     you remember. You have not mentioned them? - A. No, I
     don't think we did.

Q. One final question on the ticket side, did people approach
   you and say:  "Where can I get tickets?" or anything like
   that? - A. Some people approached us and asked us but
   other fans were stood around near us where we were stopping
   them and actually asking if people had any spares. There
   weren't just the odd one or two like, there were groups
   of probably seven or eight. Probably four or five groups
   that actually came to where we were stood.

Q. But they were in tens rather than in hundreds who were
   doing this? - A. Oh yes, yes.

Q. Proportionally from what you describe these were relatively
   few? - A. Yes, yes.

Q.   Again Idon't want you to think this is a critical question.
     Did you advise anyof these people who were asking for
     spares as to what the position was? - A.   Yes,we told them
     that they probably would not get in and that was it
     basically then they went on to somewhere else or tried the
     other side of the road.

Q. That is in fact my  last question that I want to ask you
   at this stage. You were on one side of the road of course?
   - A. That is right.

Q. Were there crowds coming down the other side of the road
   as well? - A. Yes, but not in the same depth sort of thing.

Q. Do you recollect whether there was a Serial of Officers,
   on the other side doing similar work to you or not? - A.
   I don't believe there was a full Serial but there were
   one or two Officers on the other side of the road.

Q. But you don't know what they were doing?      - A.No.

Q. There were fewer there anyway than there      were on your side?
   - A. Yes.

           THE CORONER: We are going to have coffee and you
     can have coffee too or tea if you prefer it. We will
     come together again in quarter-of-an-hour.

           Remember you are on oath. Don't discuss the
     evidence until we have finished.

                       (Short adjournment)
                                                                    38


                                                              R.   COBB




                      Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

    0. Were there still some fans around in your area at 3
       o'clock? - A. Yes, there were.
B   Q. What were they doing? - A. Trying to get to the ground.
       Just coming down the hill, a continuous flow towards
       us.

                      Cross-Examined by MR.    ISAACS

    o. You mentioned taat there were groups of young men, I
       assume, looking for tickets? - A. That's rignt, yes.

    o .   We can all imagine single people coming up asking, "Can
          you tell me where I can get a ticket?", but so I can
          understand this correctly, here we had according to you
          a situation where   the whole group, or atleast the
          majority of them,would be ticketless? -    A. Yes. In my
          opinion it as as though they had travelled together,
          come down together and said, "Oh, we'll find some when
          we get there".
D
          So not just one of the group? - A.    Yes.

          But all the group  without tickets, and as far as you
          could see wanting to get in? - A. Yes.

    0. Thank you very much indeed.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

    0. The same sort of time, the same sort of area, did you
       actually have occasion to go into the public house I
       think you have mentioned? - A. Yes, we did.  First of
       all my colleagues went in at about 5-to-3 and I stayed
       outside.  Then at 10-past-3 I went in.

    Q. You went in, and were still some supporters inside the
       public house at that time? - A. Yes, there was the bar
       staff, a couple of locals and probably 15 supporters
       that the locals and the bar staff wanted out.

    Q. That was at 10-past-3? - A. Yes,       that's right.

    Q. Thank you very much indeed.

                      Cross-Examined by HISS STEEL

    Q. So those supporters could not possibly have got to the
       ground in time or at all? - A. I don't know if they got
       to the ground at all but not before 3 o'clock, no.
                                                                         39


                                                                R.   COBB




    0. How long does it take to walk from where you were doing
              your check to the ground? - A. Not being a Sheffield
              Of f icer I can only go from me, I would say five to ten
              minutes,
B   o .       So that when you finished your check, it is possible
              that the people you were checking at 2.55 would not
              have reached the ground before the tragedy happened?
              A. It is possible but I would say with not being a
              Sheffield Officer I have only ever walked that route
              once.

    0     .   As far as these people who had not got tickets were
              concerned - you say occasionally there were four or
              five people together without tickets - did you stop
              them from going any further? - A. They were spoken to
              by the Officers and they said, "You'll not get in
              without tickets", and then we obviously went back to
              seeing to the other people that were coming down the
              road.

    0. But you didn't stop them from walking down the road
D      towards the ground? - A. From my recollection they were
       coming back from the ground towards me, asking the fans
       that were going towards the ground if they had got
       spares, so they had already been to the ground and were
       coming back again.

    Q. Just one thing with regard to checking the coaches.
       You were there at 11.15? - A. Yes.

    Q. But what time did the majority of the coaches arrive? -
       A. I can't really remember.  Like I said, it wasn't ten
       at a time, it was just a steady flow, I would say, from
       11.15.

    Q. I am told, but you        can correct me if this is not your
       recollection, that        there were only about two or three
       coaches there when        one arrived at about 12.35? - A.
       Yes, that might be        right.  It was slow to start off
       with, let's put it        like that.  I don't know for how
       long.

    Q. So the majority would come sometime after half-past-12?
       - A. Yes, possibly.

                                 By THE CORONER

    0. Can I ask you this - the Jury have asked a question.
       In your briefings, were you given any instructions
       regarding ticketless fans as far as you remember? - A.
       We were told when we went on the coach to check for
       alcohol, check for banners, and tell them that they
       would not get in unless they had a ticket, and they




H
                                                                           40


                                                        C.   G.   WATSON




       were told that and some of them actually stayed near
       the coach, and didn't bother even going to the ground.

B   0. But apart from that, nothing else that you can
       recollect? - A. Nothing else, no.

               Further Cross-Examined by MR.       ISAACS

    0. Of course, you have no right to arrest any ticketless
       fan, you can only give them advice? - A. That is right,
       yes.

            THE CORONER:     Thank you very much.

             CHRISTOPHER GEORGE WATSON Called (Sworn)

    Q. Good morning.   - A. Good morning,   sir.

    Q. You are Christopher George Watson,     aren't you? - A.
       Yes.
D   Q. Is it Police Sergeant 1710? - A. I am, sir, yes.

    0. You are part of the Nottinghamshire Constabulary,
       aren't you? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

    0. In fact, you came over the Sheffield on 15th April,
       1989, on mutual support, I believe? - A. That is right,
       sir, yes.

    0. Perhaps I ought to ask you this, how long have you been
       a mounted Officer, in fact? - A. I have been a mounted
       Officer for 13 years and I have been in charge of the
       Nottinghamshire Mounted Section for the past six.

    0. That involves quite a bit of policing of football
       matches?  That is a major function? - A. Yes, crowd
       control of any description is a prime function of the
       mounted section and football matches, of course, are a
       very big part of it.

    Q. Were you here in 1988, do you remember? - A. Yes,           I
       was, sir.

    Q. Presumably, being a Nottingham man, you would be
       deployed generally speaking at the Nottingham end of
       the ground?  That would be the sensible way of doing it
       I would have thought? - A. That is quite correct, sir,
       yes, I was at the other end of the ground.

    0. In 1988 you had no occasion to come round to the
       Leppings Lane end at all? - A. None whatsoever.




H
                                                                41



                                                  C.   G.   WATSON




Q. So you can't say anything about what happened in 1988
   at the Leppings Lane end? - A. I have no idea, sir, no.

Q. This year you too were deployed at the Forest end,
   initially at least? - A. Yes, at Penistone Road
   initially, sir.

0. Would I be right in saying that from a Police point of
   view - I don't want to go into a lot of detail - you
   did not really have any problems at that end as far as
   you were concerned? - A. No, nothing whatsoever, sir.
   We organised the queues which was quite easy, everyone
   was most co-operative and there were no problems, none
   that I saw.

Q. Of course, the configuration of Penis tone Road is
   totally different, the geography? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. To Leppings Lane,   isn't it? - A. Yes,   it is completely
   dif f e r e n t .

Q. Had you ever seen the Leppings Lane end of the ground?
   Had you done a circuit of the ground, and did you know
   what it looked like before you were actually summoned
   over? - A. Yes, I had been round to Leppings Lane both
   years, 1988 and '89, before the start of the match to
   familiarise - obviously everyone was familiarised with
   the ground.  Until this day that was my only experience
   of it.

0. So you had seen it but it was relatively speaking a
   superficial work because you weren't planning to be
   there? - A. Yes, I was not expecting to have to work
   there, no.

Q. At 2.50 or thereabouts I think you received the radio
   message, is that right? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Q. Did it come from match control, can you remember? - A.
   Yes, the radio message did come from the control.

0. I don't mean word for word, but can you tell me the
   substance of what the message was? - A. Yes, the
   substance was that I was to take any spare mounted
   Officers that I had at Penistone Road and take them
   round to Leppings Lane, where a problem was being
   experienced.

0. In fact, I think you took P.C. Kelly with you, and went
   yourself? - A. That is quite correct, sir.

Q. I think I am right in saying that you did not go down
   Penistone Road and come in through Leppings Lane from
                          1                                         42



                                                 C.   G.   WATSON




     the roundabout, you came round the back of the ground,
     didn't you? - A. That is right, past ....

Q. The back of the South Stand? - A. Yes, I believe it is
   the players' entrance, that was the way we went.

Q. You then, if you look at the model it might just help
   you - can you point out where Leppings Lane entrance
   is, so that the Officer can see - that is the entrance
   t here. Can you point to the South Stand, Sergeant
   Griffiths?  That is that building there, and the
   players' entrance, you came benind that and up that
   roadway, is that right? - A. Yes, that is the exact
   route that I took.

0. Could you point at Gate C, Sergeant?  Can you remember
   that there was a big gate in the wall there? - A. Yes,
   I remember the gate.

Q. So you  were approaching up that roadway towards
   Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

0. What met your eyes? - A. I saw a very large crowd, I
   would estimate between 2-3,000 people.   Most of them
   were pushing people who were waiting at the turnstiles
   at the Leppings Lane end.   It was chaotic really.
   There seemed to be a lot of Liverpool supporters -
   well, they were all Liverpool supporters - pushing the
   people into the turnstiles.   They were climbing the
   walls at the turnstiles and the whole situation, as I
   have said chaotic is what it seemed to be to me.

0. You and F.C. Kelly were on your two horses,    of course?
   - A. Yes.

Q.    Was he ahead of you or were you abreast? Can you
     remember?  You may not remember, of course. - A. I
     believe I was at the front and he followed, I believe.

Q. Did you ride past that concertina gate, gate C, which
   we have already mentioned? - A. Yes, I did, sir.

Q.   Were you able to get aglimpse - the turnstiles,       as you
     know are divided into two sections? - A. Yes.

Q. By a wall.  Did you know that? - A. I didn't until I
   arrived there but I do know now, sir.

0. Were you able to see the dividing wall when you
   arrived, can you remember? - A. Yes, I did see it.

Q. Were you able to look into the two areas outside the
   turnstile? - A. The section across the other side of
   the brick wall from where I was?
                                              C.    G.   WATSON




Yes.   - A. I could see that,   sir, yes.

Yes, that is what I was trying to find out.        You could
actually see that? - A. I could see that.

What did that section look like to you? - A. That
appeared to be under control.  Everything appeared to
be all right there; everyone was queueing correctly and
people were getting into the ground.

There is a gate there called gate A, which you probably
don't know the name of, but Sergeant Griffiths, just
point to gate A.  Can you recollect seeing that gate? -
A. No, sir.

It is quite a long way round.  What was the other
section like, the one nearer to you? - A. It was a
crush, completely.  As I said, I have been a mounted
Officer for 13 years and I have never seen a crush like
that, never ever.

Having turned up, so to speak, appraised the situation,
what did you yourself do? - A. What we did was to
attempt to put our horses between the people who were
doing the pushing and the people who were being pushed.
The idea was to separate the two, and in effect push
the pushers back so that the people at the front of the
turnstiles could recover themselves.

Where, in relation to the perimeter gates, do you know
which are the perimeter gates?  Can you show him the
perimeter gates - can you see those? - A. Yes.

Do you remember seeing them? - A. I remember seeing
them, yes.

In relation to those where did you seek to place your
horse?  If you want to use the model, it might be
easier. - A. Yes.  I put myself and the horse here at
the end of the steel barrier, and made towards the
wall, and we used the wall and the steel barrier as two
sides, and put myself and the other horse there in
order to try and section that off completely.

Were you trying to get the people who were to the left
of you, assuming that your horse was facing the wall,
were you trying to get them out through the perimeter
gates or were you trying to get them onto the roadway
which you had just emerged from? - A. Initially, we
were trying to get them away from this area here out
towards the perimeter gates, to create a space, to
create a breathing space, if you like, just the re.
Ideally we would like to have got them out of the gates
but that was difficult.
A
                                                  C.   G.   WATSON




    Q. Can you recollect when you first got there whether
       those perimeter gates were open or shut? - A. These
       gates, sir?

    Q. Yes.   - A. They were open.

    0. Can you recollect whether there were any Police horses
       on the far side of them? - A. Yes, across in this area
       I saw some of the Merseyside Mounted Section.

    0. Do you remember whether you saw a cordon going from the
       corner, from the shop to the bridge parapet? - A. Yes,
       I did, sir.




D




                                          /




G
                         /Q. You do remember
                                                         45




                                                    C.   G.   WATSON




Q. You do remember that? - A. Yes.

Q. At that point when you saw that, was that just as you
   arrived or was it formed after you had already been
   there? - A. I believe it was there when I arrived.

Q.   When you arrived? - A. Yes.

Q.   As far as you remember the gates were open? - A. Yes,
     both gates were open and these, of course, were open to
     allow people into that section.

Q. I am sorry, I couldn't hear that last answer. - A. These
   gates just there were open.

Q.    What about the gates nearer theriver?    Can you
     recollect what the position was with regard to those?
     There are three sets of gates in that area there.     Do
     you remember if they were all open or whether some of
     them were shut?    If you can't remember please say so. -
     A. I cannot remember.     I remember these specifically.

Q.   Those were definitely open? - A. I   can't remember, sir.

Q. What you were trying to do was trying to split this
   crowd, in effect? - A. That's right, sir.

Q.   Success depended upon how deep the crowd was on the far
     side of you, didn't it? - A. Yes.There is a limit to
     how much a horse can push, obviously.   This was a very
     deep crowd.

Q.    That is the question I wanted to ask you: could you
     judge how far into Leppings Lane the crowd stretched
     which you were trying to ease back, or push back, or
     whatever word you wish to use? - A. There was, of course,
     a lot happening and finer details are difficult to
     remember.    However, I would say it easily went beyond
     the pavement and into the road way and a short distance
     up the road.    Exactly how far I can't remember.

Q.    The next question I want to ask is about this crowd.  It
     depends to a certain extent how dense it is, doesn't it?
     - A. Yes, it does.

Q. The distance which you have now described, were the
   people close to you packed more densely than the people
   further back as far as you can remember? - A. Yes.     The
   people closest to me were packed very densely.   The ones
   nearer to the back, right at the back, of course, w e r e n ’t
   packed so densely.   They actually had some freedom of
   movement.
                                                         46




                                                    C.   G.   WATSON


Q. Did you think putting your horse in that position - and
   this is no criticism of you - did you think it was
   possible for the people whom you were trying to split and
   move back? - A. Yes.

Q. Were they capable of movement or was it a hopeless
   manoeuvre because of the depth of the crowd behind? - A.
   No, I don't think it was hopeless.   What I have always
   found in the past is that when you do these things
   automatically the people at the front start to push back
   as well to get away from the horse and that is what I was
   hoping would happen.   Not only have you got the presence
   of the horse but people would push back as well.

Q. What you are saying is you are trying to convert a
   forward momentum into a backward momentum? - A. Exactly.

Q.   You are relying not only on the horse...     The horse is     a
     catalyst, isn't it? - A. That's true.

Q.   Then what you are trying to do is get the people who
     because they don't want to be kicked or trampled, to turn
     round and push and if enough of them do it it would have
     an effect? - A. Yes.   As well as the use of the horse
     physically there is a mental aspect to it as well.

Q. Is this a standard technique, splitting crowds into
   segments, if there is a big crowd? - A. Yes, we use it
   quite a lot back in Nottingham.   Of course it was
   essential.   The people at the front were being crushed
   very badly.

Q. Did you have any success at all with the manoeuvre? - A.
   Yes, it was partially successful.

Q.   Describe the success?    - A. Well, I managed to create a
     gap of some, I would    think probably six or eight feet, to
     the left hand side of   my horse, which allowed people near
     the turnstiles to get   back on their feet.

Q. Do you mean the left hand side or the right hand side? -
   A. The left hand side, the side between me and the
   perimeter gates.

Q.    Does that mean that the people who were on the right hand
     side of you...Presumably you wanted them to expand
     backwards? - A. Yes.

Q. Were they in fact blocked in by your horse, if I can put
   it like that?   Could they have expanded backwards? - A.
   They did because I then moved the horse to the side to
   give them that little bit of space.
                                             C.   G.   WATSON


Did you notice whether those people actually moved back?
- A. I believe they did.   I was more concerned with the
crowd that was pushing and my attention was mostly upon
them.

That brings me to the second half of the question.
Having created this gap, what happened to the crowd whom
you were hoping to reverse, so to speak? - A. They began
to run round us.  What we did was to divert the energy
that this crowd created.

You mean they ran round you and back to join the
turnstile crowd? - A. Yes, they ran round the horses, so
we put ourselves in one position but they moved to
another one.

Are you saying they had freedom of movement to move?
One of the issues we are trying to resolve is whether the
people in that position had freedom of movement or
whether they were compelled by the pressure from behind
which gave them no choice? - A. No.   The people nearest
the turnstiles were trapped.   They were compelled, there
is no doubt about that.   The people I would describe as
the pushers, they had some freedom of movement.    They
could have moved backwards or sideways or whichever way
they liked.   The people at the turnstiles were trapped
by the steel barrier and the wall.

You have already said you had never seen a crush like
this before? - A. Quite correct.

Have you come across this sort of behaviour before, that
people didn't respond to your... - A. Yes, definitely.
I have come across that type of behaviour, just not at
this level.

When you say "this level" do you mean this extent, or     do
you mean it was even worse... - A. I think because of     the
numbers involved it was worse.

I think you were quite worried about the people in the
front, weren't you? - A. I was very worried about them.
They were so badly crushed I thought that some people
were going to be very badly injured at the turnstiles.

Did you lose this gap which you had created in due
course? - A. Yes, eventually.   The expansion of the
people at the turnstiles and the running around of the
pushers, as I would call them, did lose us the gap.

What did you do after that? - A. At that we tried to push
them back a little bit more. It wasn't all that
successful at this stage but we tried it.
                                                     48




                                                C.   G.   WATSON


Q. Did you notice anything about the behaviour of the people
   who were coming forward which struck you as unusual? - A.
   Yes, a lot of them seemed to think it was quite amusing.
   They perhaps didn't realise what they were doing, but
   they did seem think it was quite amusing to play this
   game.

Q. That was the impression you gained? - A. That was
   definitely the impression I gained, sir, yes.

Q. Of course, as you say, they may not have realised^
   quite... - A. They may not have realised the gravity of
   the situation, but that was the impression they gave
   certainly.

Q. Did you stay within the perimeter gates all the time or
   did you at any point before the relief of the crush move
   outside? - A. No, within the perimeter gates all the
   time.

Q. So in this area which you have described and that was
   your function? - A. That is right, sir.   I had no reason
   to leave that at that stage.

Q. Did you see the gate open at all, or any gates open?
   Any of the big gates, I don't mean the turnstiles, of
   course. - A. No, the concertina gate, yes that opened.

Q. Which one was it that opened?   There are three
   concertina gates, there is Gate A.   There is Gate B more
   or less opposite...   Sergeant Griffiths, could you just
   show Gate B, please, and then Gate C? - A. It was Gate C
   I saw open.

Q. You saw that open? -A. yes.

Q. Do you know - it is very difficult because you probably
   didn't look at your watch - can you recollect whether the
   gate opened fully or only partially? - A. I thought it
   opened fully.

Q. Did that relieve the pressure? - A. Yes, almost
   instantly.

Q. The timings are a little bit difficult to reconcile
   because according to our video evidence that gate was
   opened fully at 15.52, which would be only two minutes
   after you received your radio message. - A. Yes.

Q. How confident are you of the timing when you were
   summonsed by the Control? - A. Well, timings in this
   situation, you don't look at your watch all the time,
   that is a fact.   I thought that time was correct.   I had
                                               C.   G.   WATSON


got that time in my head because I did glance at my
watch.

Can you say this, what you have described:  message,
"Come round the back,", up to the crowd, split it as you
have described, cleared a space, fill up, re-split or
whatever, and then the gate opens.   How much time did
all that take in your view? - A. Very, very short.    I
would think we are only talking of two or three minutes.
It was a very, very short time.

You had to come all the way round. - A. Yes.

Did you gallop or did you... - A. We trotted, a fairly
brisk pace.

Since that you have had some problem with your horse? -
A. Yes, the horse became very...     He was lifted
completely off his feet.   He was only a young horse and
he became very disturbed over it and in fact had to be
retired.   We have retired him.   He was unable to
perform crowd control duties any more.

You say he was actually lifted off his feet? - A. He was
actually lifted.   The crush was so bad he was lifted
completely from his feet.

Which is perhaps the reason why you were a bit worried
about the people? - A. Well, the horse weighed between 14
and 15 cwts.   The amount of pressure that is required to
do that is enormous.

Have you policed other big matches? - A. Yes, many.

With similar sort of capacity crowds, 40,000/50,000
altogether? - A. No.   Hillsborough is the biggest ground
we go to. We only do that occasionally.    Generally
speaking it is between 30,000 to 40,000.

             Cross-Examined by MR. HALE :

Sergeant, just speculating a little, but I think it is
permissible within the ambit of what we are dealing with.
If you had had more time and had been called earlier and
had got round with your horses to get this crowd before
it got to the perimeter gates, and we are talking about
the same crowd exactly in the same condition in which you
saw them, if you had placed your horses completely
across, say, Leppings Lane in an attempt to stop them
from getting to the perimeter gates, is there anything
special about Leppings Lane that would have made it
harder for them to get round your horses and through,
than they did nearer to the ground? - A. I think if the
horses had been placed...   It depends which position
                                                           50




                                                C.   G.   WATSON


   they were put in, obviously.   Had they been placed
   strategically I think it would have been quite difficult
   to have got round them.

Q. Would you have needed more horses than the ones you had?
   - A. I would say we probably would have done, yes, sir,
   or at least used the ones we had differently.

Q. Were you aware that they were coming from two different
   directions, that the crowd was coming partly along
   Leppings Lane and partly from the other direction from
   Catch Bar Lane? - A. No, I wasn't aware of that.   Of
   course, by the time I arrived there this situation was
   already an ongoing thing.   It had already happened.




                    Q. It is probably permissible
                                 C.   G.   WATSON


It is probably permissible for me to say, because
there has been a good deal of evidence, that in fact
the crowds were coming from two different directions,
so would that have diluted your horses even further,
if you had had to make two barriers, one in each
direction? - A. No.  If I had been organising it, I
would have put the horses in a position to have caught
the two, that is to say straight across the gateway.

So straight across the gateway, which is where you saw
the cordon, I think, of horses? - A. Yes, the
perimeter gates.

That would have been the best place? - A. I would have
said so, yes.

Because it would catch everybody coming from both
directions? - A. I would have said so, yes.

But, nevertheless, this crowd on the day - there has
been other evidence - got through that cordon and also
pushed your horse aside? - A. That is right, sir, yes
it did.

           Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

What was the game that you were describing?  What was
the game that the spectators were playing? You used a
word. - A. This pushing from the back, rushing forward
into the people who were at the turnstiles, it seemed
to be enormous fun to them.  As I have said, perhaps
they did not realise the gravity of the situation, but
that is why I describe it as a game.  They seemed to
find it amusing.

Was it that pushing which was causing the crushing at
the front? - A. Definitely, yes.

You have told the Jury that   you saw Gate C opened   and
that relieved the pressure?   - A. Yes.

Did you see the people going through Gate C? - A. Yes,
I saw people going through Gate C, yes.

Whereabouts, which part of the crowd was it thatwent
through Gate C? - A. It was virtually all of it.

Including those people who had been playing the game?
- A. Yes, including those.

          Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS;
                                  C.   G.   WATSON


Sergeant, how did you feel when the gate opened and
the crowd went through? - A. I was very pleased, I was
relieved.

Why was that?   - A. Because I thought that        a serious
situation had   been averted.

Serious in terms of danger to the people who were at
the front? - A. Yes, I was very relieved.

You have described the scene when you arrived as being
a crowd that seems to have been divided between those
who were being pushed? - A. Yes.

And those who   were doing pushing?    - A. That     is right,
sir.

May I ask you how could you tell that there was this
division? - A. There seemed to be a natural division.
Bearing in mind I suppose experience goes into it ---

Of course. - A. When I arrived there it just seemed
obvious to me.  I didn't have to be told, it just
seemed obvious the people that were doing the pushing.

So where you went into the crowd seemed to be, to you
with all your years of experience, the obvious place
to go? - A. It was and looking back I would say it was
correct.

You were successful to a degree in building up this
buffer zone? - A. Yes.

Those who had been pushed had, therefore, now two
lines of escape rather than just one? The one
previous line of escape had been through the
turnstiles as quickly as they could get through? - A.
Yes.

They could also now move back to a certain degree? -
A. Yes.

The learned Coroner mentioned this a little earlier.
Those who had been pushing had in turn been pushed
back by you? - A. Yes, that is correct.

But they still had, on your account, room to
manoeuvre? - A. Yes.

Sideways, forwards or backwards? - A. Yes.

They were not in any way in the same position as those
who had been pushed at the front? - A. No.
                               C.   G.   WATSON


And yet I think what you are telling us is that those
people, whether it be by reason of having a game or a
desire to get in,it being close to the kick-off, kept
on coming? - A. Yes, they did, sir, they were
persistent.

But from what you are telling us, they did not just
come straightforwards; they had the freedom of
movement to be able to go sideways round your horse? -
A. Yes.  Some of them even managed to climb the wall
that separated the two sets of turnstiles.

When those who were the pushers kept on coming, you
have described how your horse was lifted up? - A. Yes.

Where was it lifted up?  I do not mean that foolishly.
Was it lifted up because of the force from both sides,
or was it the pushers who had got round the whole of
the horse? - A. No, this was in the initial stages and
it would be the pressure from both sides.

Until you managed to clear this buffer space? - A.
Yes.

What was the attitude of those who were pushing, who
you say appeared to be playing a game, towards the
Police and those who were trying to bring some order
into the situation? - A. Defiant, I would say.

Could you help me with this.  Why do you say that? -
A. They would not do as they were told.  We were
trying to tell them to go back to relieve the pressure
and they would not do it.

Some might say, to you or to others, "Well, they
couldn't go back".  What do you say to that? - A. I
would say that there was some way for them to go,
either sideways....  You see, this wasn't just
directed at the few people at the front of the
pushers;  it was directed at all of them.  They could
definitely see us and see what we were trying to do.

So insofar as they did not go back, or they did not
stop pushing, you took the view it was a deliberate
decision on their part? - A. That is how it seemed to
me, sir, yes.

Was there any question in your mind of an attempt on
the part of the pushers of taking on the Police as
being part of the game? - A. It is possible, but it
was obviously an inherent part of what they were
doing.
                                                         54




                                     C.    G.   WATSON


Q.   Not so much that "There are the Police, we must do
     anything, we must have a go at them", but "There are
     people who happen to be police officers who are
     telling us to do something, we d o n ’t want to take any
     notice"? - A. Yes, they just didn't take any notice at
     all.

Q.   And that is despite the noise, for example, that must
     have been going on at the time? - A. Yes sir.

               Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q.   From the time that you arrived there, Sergeant, did
     you see any rescue attempt made to pull people out at
     the front of the crowd where the maximum crush was? -
     A. Yes, children.  I saw, I believe it was two - and I
     believe there may have been more - were lifted out and
     put onto the back of some of the horses and were taken
     out of the crowd.

Q.   So were they pushed hand over head? - A. Yes, they
     were lifted and then the mounted officer would take
     hold and put them on his horse and use the horse to
     get them out.

Q.   So would it be fair to say that whatever might have
     been able to be seen insofar as a person ordinarily
     standing was concerned, that action of lifting a child
     up over heads and onto the back of a police horse
     would be much more visible? - A. Well, it would be
     very visible, yes.

Q.   Insofar as your action is concerned, you have
     described the way in which you rode your horse into
     the crowd to try and make this wedge, this division in
     the crowd? - A. Yes.

Q.   Were you also talking to the people around you as to
     what you were attempting to do? - A. Yes, that was
     going on all the time, trying to get people to see
     sense and talking to them, even shouting at them to
     just get back.

Q.   I know that one of your hands obviously has to hold
     the reins of your horse, but were you demonstrating by
     the use of your arms as well? - A. Yes, that sort of
     action, back.

Q.   Continuous? - A. Continuously, sir.

Q.   You yourself are a tall officer and you have got a
     large horse, as you have described? - A. Yes.
                               C.   G.   WATSON


There is no doubt in your mind as to the visibility of
the action that you were taking? - A. None whatsoever.

          Cross-Examined by MISS STEEL:

Officer, whatever the timings, you were there only a
very short time before Gate C was opened, is that
right? - A. That is correct, yes.

On the timing you have got, it would be somewhere
between 1 and 2 minutes, but it may have been slightly
longer than that? - A. Yes.  It is difficult to recall
exactly, but I would agree

As you came round, you say you have never seen
anything like this in 13 years, the crowd was very
dense, was it? - A. Extremely dense, yes.

You went in, you say, fairly close to the perimeter
gates? - A. I would describe it as midway.  It was at
the end of the steel barrier.

But is it right that the position from the steel
barrier to the turnstiles was absolutely solid? - A.
That is correct, it was solid, yes.

Whatever people may or may not have been doing between
the steel barrier and the perimeter gates, I do not
think you are in a position, are you, to say how the
crush at the front had occurred, the reason for it? -
A. Yes, it seemed to me that it was caused by the ones
who were pushing from the back.

The people you saw pushing from the back were quite a
way further back than the dense crush, is that right?
- A. The whole crowd was dense, but the people that 1
was most concerned for were between the steel barrier,
the wall and the turnstile, and they were being
crushed.  That was extremely dense.

Really there were far too many people in that area,
were there not? - A. Yes, obviously.

Whether or not any of them were moving, there were
more people in that area than it could safely
accommodate? - A. I would agree, yes.

The two children that were taken out, is it right that
they were taken out close to turnstile G, that is the
turnstile closest to the barrier? - A. I don't know
how the turnstiles are lettered actually, but it was
very close to the turnstiles where the children were
removed from.
                               C.   G.   WATSON


You, of course, had a bird's eye view of that from
your horse? - A. Yes.

The people on the ground, on the perimeter gate side,
would not have as good a view as you had? - A. No.
They would see the children being lifted onto the
horses.  I would think anyone would be able to see
that.

It is difficult to use horses in these particular
conditions, is it not? - A. One of the problems, of
course, is that there are lot of innocent people there
and you don't want to injure any of the innocent ones,
and in a crowd that is packed so densely you do have
to be extremely careful to not injure anyone.

It is far more usual to use the horses to disperse a
crowd which is not densely packed, is it not? - A.
Yes, but I think that is a question of crowds do not
usually become this dense.

One of the reasons being that, using the horses, you
can usually prevent that? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Can I come to the numbers of people that you say were
trying to get round the horse.  Are we talking about
ten, a dozen people? - A. No, we are talking about
more than that.

Twenty? - A. No, more than that.    I would describe it
as hundreds.

Hundreds? - A. Yes, because you had between 2,000 and
3,000 altogether there and as we put the horses in,
the whole of the front ranks, if that is the correct
word to use, were trying to get round the horses.

But you would make a space and how many people
broadside on on that Leppings Lane perimeter gate area
are there? - A. Between the horse and the perimeter
gates?

Yes. - A. It is very difficult to say.  I would think
possibly a half of the crowd that I have described.

Within a matter of moments Gate C was opened? - A.
Yes.

And the crowd immediately dispersed round the side to
Gate C? - A. Correct.

So whatever going round there was, it only took a
matter of seconds? - A. Yes, it was extremely quick.
                                                             57


                                            G. WATSON



    Q. You were able to alleviate the crush somewhat but for a
       very limited time because there was only a limited time
       it was needed? - A. Yes.

    Q. You were only there a limited time? - A. Yes, it was only
B      required for a limited time, yes.

    Q.   Just to check again.   You say that there were still a
         lot of people outside in Leppings Lane itself? - A. Yes,
         I saw a lot of people out there, yes.

    Q.   Was there any way in which that crowd was likely to get
         into the ground by 3 o'clock? - A. I would say most
         definitely not.


                     Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

    Q.   Sergeant, when you arrived at Leppings Lane did it appear
         to you that no one was in control of the situation there?
         - A. I think that is probably quite correct.   I just
         think for a second it did appear that in fact, the trouble
         is that communications had become very difficult at this
D        stage but thinking about it I think that would probably
         be correct.

    Q.   Do you know who had assumed responsibility for that part
         of the ground that day? - A. No, I don't know. As I had
         been given the other area, Penistone Road end, I knew
         the Ground Commander there but I did not know who was
         in charge at Leppings Lane.

    Q. You said enough pressure was used to lift your horse off
       its feet? - A. Yes.

    Q. Now do you think it was dangerous to allow that type of.
       crowd into a football ground through a wide open gate?
       - A. Well I think that would depend on the attitude of
       the crowd. Had the crowd been well behaved I would not
       have considered it   dangerous at all. In fact I would
       have considered it   desirable to allow sufficient flow
       at the turnstiles.  If the crowd was aggressive then I
       would want to stop them at the gates and filter them
       through.

    Q. I was just thinking about the amount of pressure that
       these people had used to lift a horse up. If they went
       into a ground with  that type of pressure they could
       exert it somewhere else inside the ground? - A. That is
       quite possible. We have to remember at this stage, of
       course, the people at the front were being crushed against
       the turnstiles.  There was in effect a dead stop, they
       could not go any further than that and of course that did
       help to build up the pressure.




H
                                   C. G. WATSON



        MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you Sergeant.


               Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Q. Sergeant, when you received your instruction to go from
   the Penistone Road end to the Leppings Lane end I don't
   think you told us this:  to what extent was the admission
   of Nottingham Forest supporters at the Penistone Road
   end complete? — A. At what stage was the admission of the
   Nottingham Forest supporters?

Q. My question was phrased in this way:  to what extent was
   it complete but the sense is the same? - A. There was
   still quite a lot to go in at the Nottingham Forest end.
   In fact one of the comparisons that I have drawn between
   this particular instance and the year before is that the
   year before the streets were virtually deserted at least
   a quarter—of—an—hour before the start of the match. This
   year everyone seemed to arrive later for some reason, but
   there was still quite a lot of Nottingham Forest supporters
   still to go into the ground.

Q. But it was not a state of admission that required you to
   stay there? - A. No. Some mounted Officers did stay but
   it was not necessary for us all to stay.

Q. To that extent everything was under control and no problems
   were anticipated? - A. There were no problems, no.

Q. You agreed that the use of mounted Police Officers can
   usually prevent crowds becoming too dense.  Is that when
   one can rely upon co-operation to an extent from the crowd
   one is trying to control? - A. It is nice to have co­
   operation from the crowd but I would not say that it was
   necessary.  It is still possible to use the horses even
   with a hostile crowd to control the flow into the turn­
   stiles .

Q. A crowd that is determined to break a cordon of Police
   horses will do so if it may by going between the necks
   and tails of one horse and another and even under the
   horse's belly? - A. A determined crowd is difficult
   to stop regardless of what you have to stop it with.

         MR. RUSSELL:   Yes, thank you.


                   Further By THE CORONER:

Q. Can I ask you one or two more things which the jury have
   brought to my attention.

         Can you remember when you were in the Leppings
   Lane area whether you saw a Police Land Rover at all?
   - A. No, I don't remember seeing one at all.
                                                        59


                                       C. G. WATSON



    Q. And do you recollect hearing any Police messages frora
       loud speakers, Tannoys or anything else directed at the
       fans? - A. No, I don't remember that.

    Q. Did you hear any messages directed at anybody else
B      through these means apart from your own lips, so to
       speak? - A. No, I don't recall hearing anything like
       that at all.

    Q. Finally we have heard evidence and in fact we have seen
       pictures, I think, of a Police Officer standing on that
       metal railing near the turnstiles, not a mounted Officer
       an Inspector in fact. Do you recollect seeing him at
       all? - A. No sir.

             THE CORONER:  I am very grateful to you for coming.
       I think it is your day off today so I am doubly grateful.
       Thank you.


                       KEVIN VICTOR TOPE Sworn

D                          By THE CORONER:

    Q. You are Kevin Victor Tope.   That is right, isn't it?
       - A. That is correct sir.

    Q. And you are a Detective Chief Inspector in the West Midlands
       Police? - A. Correct sir.

    Q. And you have been associated with the Inquiry and in part­
       icular as far as I am concerned the coronal aspect of the
       matter for quite some time? - A. I have sir.

    Q. But you had other jobs as well to do with it. Is it right
       that you were present in the Interview Room at Furnival;
       House, Furnival Gate, Sheffield when various people were
       interviewed? - A. I was sir.

    Q. We will mention their names in a moment. Were these
       interviews recorded in accordance with the what we call
       for short P.A.C.E. Act? - A. Yes sir, that is the Police
       and Criminal Evidence Act.

    Q. That is correct.  Is it correct at the conclusion of each
       of these interviews you handed sealed tapes which had
       been signed by the Interviewing Officer and the person
       interviewed to Detective Superintendent Beechey? - A.
       That is correct sir.

    Q. Were the interviews which we are talking about as follows:
       P.C. Smith on the 11th June 1990. Have you got a copy
       of your statement there because by all means have a look?
       - A. I have the master record and I can confirm the dates.




H
                                                      60



                                   K. V. TOPE



Q. P.C. Smith, 11th June 1990.   Is that right? - A. Correct
   sir.

Q. P.C. Illingworth on the 12th June 1990? - A. Correct sir.

Q. Superintendent Marshall on the 19th June 1990? - A.
   Correct sir.

O. Mr. Mackrell on the 22nd June 1990? - A. Correct sir.

Q. Superintendent Murray on the 25th June 1990? - A. Correct
   sir.

Q. Assistant Chief Constable Jackson 28th June 1990? - A.
   Correct sir.

Q. Superintendent Greenwood 29th June 1990? - A. Correct
   sir.

Q. And Chief Superintendent Duckenfield on the 3rd July 1990?
   - A. That is correct sir.

         THE CORONER: Perhaps I ought to just explain to
   the jury, we have Mr. Beechey in a moment and he will
   do the same.

         What I am trying to do is I am trying to formally
   get the evidence and when we come to use recordings we
   don't have to bring the Officers all the way from
   Birmingham for every one. This is just if you like a
   convenient way of doing it.

         Thank you very much.


                    STANLEY BEECHEY Sworn

                       By THE CORONER:

Q. You are Stanley Beechey, aren't you, and you are a
   Detective Superintendent? - A. Yes sir, that is right.

Q. With the West Midlands Police as well? - A. Yes sir.

Q. You were I think in the Monitoring Room at Furnival House
   at Furnival Gate here in Sheffield when various interviews
   took place? - A. I was sir.

Q. And these interviews were recorded in accordance with the
   Police and Criminal Evidence Act? - A. They were sir, yes.

Q. Is it right at the conclusion of each of these interviews
   Detective Chief Inspector Tope, from whom we have just
   heard, handed to you sealed tapes? - A. He did sir.
                                                      61



                                     S. BEECHEY



Q. Which had been signed by the Interviewing Officer and the
   person interviewed? - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q. And the interviews in respect of which these tapes relate
   took place as follows, and by all means double check, I
   will read them to you: P.C. Smith, 11th June 1990? - A.
   Yes sir.

Q. P.C. Illingworth, 12th June 1990? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Superintendent Marshall, 19th June 1990? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Mr. Mackrell, 22nd June 1990? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Superintendent Murray, 25th June 1990? - A. Yes sir.

O.   Assistant Chief Constable Jackson,28th June 1990? -    A.
     Yes sir.

Q. Superintendent Greenwood, 29th June 1990? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield the 3rd July 1990? - A.
   Yes sir.

Q. And you have since then retained these tapes in a locked
   cabinet or in some other safe way and you can produce
   them as and when we need them? - A. I can sir, yes.

Q. And indeed that is what you will do as and when the time
   comes you will produce appropriate tapes for me? - A.
   Yes, I will bring the tapes along sir, yes.

Q.   Perhaps you could just explain to the jury that when one
     does these tapes there are usually two. There is a
     working copy, isn't there, and there is a sealed copy.
     Is that correct? - A. Yes, that is right sir. When the.
     interview takes place it is taken with a dual cassette
     tape recorder. You put the two tapes in and they record
     simultaneously what is being said and at the end of the
     interview the one tape is sealed and signed by the
     Interviewing Officer and the person who is being interviewed.
     Then the other one, what we call the working tape, we can
     then take copies of which we can supply to the legal
     representative of the person who is being interviewed or
     the person themselves.




                                Q. Yes, if it is required
                                                                   62

                                                          S.   BEECHEY




    o.      If it is required? - A. That is right, yes.


B
    0   ,   And that is the one one usually uses and you only open
            the sealed one if there is any particular dispute as to
            the veracity of the tape? - A. Yes, that is right, sir.

                THE CORONER:    Any questions of this Officer?

                 MR. MANNING:   I wonder if it is intended to
            establish that, in fact, although it does not form part
            of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act procedure
            ordinarily, that in some instances certainly a video
            film was taken of the interview as well?

                THE CORONER:    I am aware of that.

    Q.      Perhaps you had better just answer that.  In some cases
            the sealed tapes which you sealed were both audio and
            video, is that right? - A. Yes, that is right.

                 THE CORONER:   We will deal with that when the
D           time arrives.  Anything else?  Now it is Stephen Brown.

                           STEPHEN BROWN Recalled

                               By THE CORONER

    Q. You are already on oath.  You may remember that we had
       a look at a split screen video comparing 1988 and 1989
       sometime ago? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

    0, I don't know whether you remember but we certainly
       weren't entirely happy with it, it was difficult to
       follow and so on? - A. That is correct, sir.

    0. Is it right that following that we had various attempts
       to produce a split screen, at my request, but I was not
       satisfied with any of them in the end, and did I ask
       you to try and prepare a different format of film, to
       help us to understand and to compare the two years
       better, is ttiat right? - A. That is right, sir.

    0, Can you describe what it is you, in fact, did? - A.
       Yes, sir.  From the Soutn Yorkshire Police video tapes,
       taken in both 1988 and 1989, I took an hour period
       between 2 o'clock and 3 o'clock in both years, and at
       ten minute intervals selected shots of the Leppings
       Lane area.

    0, Tne point about that is you had to select because the
       camera flicked, didn't it?  It takes three, five, "x"
       number of seconds shots, and then it moves round the
       ground, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is right,
       yes.



H
                                                                           63


                                                                  S.   BROWN




    0. And what you have done is at ten minute intervals you
       have picked segments of Leppings Lane and then joined
       those bits together to give a continuous picture for
       10/15 seconds, something of that order? - A. That is
B      correct, yes, sir.

    0. So you have cut out, in effect, putting it the other
       way, all the stuff which we don't want? - A. The non-
       relevant stuff.

    Q. At my request we decided to do it at ten minute
       intervals, because to do it on a minute by minute basis
       would be an absolutely enormous task, wouldn't it? - A.
       That is correct, yes, sir.

    0. You have done that for 1988, between two and three? -
       A. Yes, sir.

    0. And you have done it for '89? - A. Yes,          sir.

    Q. In addition to that, we asked you to select a frame for
       each period? - A. Yes, sir.
D   0. Each ten minute period, and you have managed to get a
       photograph? - A. A video print, yes, sir.

    0. A video print, that is right, so if it is taken every
       ten minutes or so, there would be about six video
       prints for 1988 and 1989? - A. That is correct, yes,
       sir.

    Q. Can you just look at these two things?  Are those the
       video prints which we are talking about? - A. Yes, sir.

              THE CORONER:        Can we number   '88 as a "C 1
         reference?

                MR. J 0 H E S : The   '88 one will be C332,    sir, and
         the   '89 will be C333.

    Q.        THE COROWER:   It has unfortunately not been
         possible to use our splendid photocopier to reproduce
         these, has it, because the quality of the picture ....
         - That is correct, sir.

    Q. It just didn't work, did it? - A. No, sir.

    0. In fact, we have had a few copies done on proper
       photographic paper, haven't we? - A. That is correct,
       yes, sir.

    Q. A limited number because it is quite expensive? - A.
       Yes, sir.




H
                                                                       64


                                                            S. BROWN




0. May I just ask you this, the ten minute slots which we
   took, in your opinion does that give a reasonably
   representative impression of what was happening during
   that hour? - A. Yes, sir, it gives a good impression of
   the intervals.

Q. In the two years? - A. In the two years,         yes,   sir.

       THE CORONER:   Any questions of this Officer?  We
  will see the video in a moment.  There is one other
  point, one of the shots in '88 is timed at 14:20:32? -
  A.Yes, sir.

0. 2And the equivalent shot in     '89 is timed at 14:16:27? -
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you explain why that is out by four minutes,
   basically? - A. Yes, sir.   Basically in 1989, where it
   shows 14:16:27, the cameras were not pointing at that
   area of the ground at 14:20, so we have taken the next
   available comparative time.

Q. So it is Hobson's choice - you have this or nothing?           -
   A. We have taken the nearest point, yes.

        THE CORONER:    Any questions of ttiis Officer?

         MR. PAYNE:  Sir, we very much appreciate the work
   that has been put into this exercise.  Thank you very
   much.

        THE CORONER:     I hope when you have seen it ....

        HR. PAYNE:   I said so far that we appreciate the
   work, but I am sure that we will also appreciate the
   product.

        THE CORONER:    Thank you, that is very kind of
   you.   What I think we will do is look at the video
   first.   I think we will probably want to look at it
   twice, and then we have got these photographs, so you
   will be able to see them.   We have got to give the
   video a number as well.

        MR. JONES:     Yes, sir, C334.         Has the video got a
   reference number,   Mr. Brown?

        THE WITNESS:     Yes,   sir,   SGB1.

        (The Jury watched the video C334, reference SGB1)
     THE CORONER:   Sergeant Griffiths, could you hand out
the photographs?   You will see they have been bound in
such a way that you can compare them.    Does anybody want
to view the video again?    You can look at the video as
often as you like.    First of all, amongst the jury, or
have you got it clearly in your mind?

     Are you   content?   Do you need to see   the video again
now?   (No)

     That is the best we can do and I hope it is of some
value.

     We are going to rise now and we are not coming back
this afternoon and we are not coming back tomorrow!   We
will be assembling on the 7th of January, 1991, which is a
Monday, at 10.30.   The only other thing I want to say is
that I want to wish you as happy a Christmas as possible
and a prosperous New Year and have a very nice time.

     Remember what I have said to you many times already.
We are still in the middle of these Inquests.    You have
got to bear that in mind.   Think of other things to talk
about.   Anyway, it is better for you.    Don't discuss it
with others. We will see you   all on the 7th of January.

                (In the absence of the jury)

     I think the volumes of photographs, we will want back
in due course.   There is no reason why we want them back
today, particularly you, Miss Steel, I am sure some of
your clients will want to see the.   Why don't you retain
them for the time being and let us have them back when we
next meet.

     MISS STEEL:    I will ensure they are back on the 7th
of January.

     THE CORONER:   If you do need your own copies we will
see what we can do about producing them.

     With regard to the 7th, as I have said, we are
starting on a Monday at 10.30.   At the moment the
prospective list, if I can put it that way, this may
change.  If it does change and I think it is necessary we
will try and let you know through your instructing
solicitors*   At the moment we are planning Steven Jones,
Alan Grier, Simon Hughes, Mark Dawson, PC Butler and
PC Smallman.

     When we have done that day - we will see how we get
on - but what I intend to do is that we have got a number
of stewards and police officers and so on who, in a sense,
we ought to be dealing with as a group.   I think bearing
in mind that we are going to be bringing people from a
distance, initially I intend to use some of these people -
if I can use this term - as a filler, because it is much
easier to get a local man to come at short notice than to
get somebody from Liverpool.

     If we find we can gauge the timings more accurately
then I will revise my procedure, so be prepared that we
may get bits which are somewhat out of sequence.   It is
just a practical problem.

      I do intend to call Superintendent Marshall fairly
early in the New Year.    I think you are aware of that but
I mention it generally so that people will know.    It is
highly unlikely that it will be before the Thursday.
This has got nothing to do with Superintendent Marshall.
It is a logistical problem which we have got.    I just
mention that so that you might know and so that other
people might know.    That is the date I am aiming at but
whether I will succeed I don't know, the Thursday of that
week.

     We have got six witnesses on this day.   I would like
to get to at least eight, because we were talking
yesterday about how long this would take.   To a certain
extent it depends on you, how long the cross-examinations
are, but it would be good if we could get to eight witness
and maybe in some cases we might even get to more.   I
don't want to rush it. We have spent a lot of time
already.   I don't want to drag it out.   I want to go as
fast a pace as possible commensurate with thoroughness.

     Is there anything anybody needs to say to me?

     MR. HALE:   Sir, as regards the deadline for calling
any fresh witnesses, and as you will have gathered by now
I am not looking to extend these Inquests at all, but this
will be a time for taking stock, for looking back over the
witnesses that have been called, perhaps conferring with
the client and so on, and during that period of taking
stock it may become apparent that some witness has not
been listed.   It is very difficult at the moment to keep
in mind who has been listed and who hasn't.

     I would ask you that if during the taking of stock
period we come up with somebody who we would like you to
add may we then write to your Officer and make the
suggestion, appreciating, of course, the decision is
entirely yours.

     Mr. Hale, the position with regard to that is that I
said the 19th of December because obviously what I wanted
to avoid was getting huge numbers of names to consider,
                                                67




but it is my position that if it appears to somebody that
a witness has been left out, or would appear to be crucial
and I ought to consider that witness, then I am quite
willing to listen to it.    Indeed, I will be taking stock
as well of the list, so to speak, and it may well be that
I will be revising it both upwards or downwards as I think
in the light of the evidence because to a certain extent
there are so many witness.    We could go on indefinitely
in fact.   One has to take stock and look, but no, I don't
intend the cut-off to be...    It is very similar to the
3.15 cut-off.   It is a marker but it is intended with
some flexibility around it, some oscillation perhaps would
be the right word.

     Miss Steel?

     MISS STEEL:  It is not an application in relation to
witnesses, but there is a matter and I was hoping to speak
to Mr. Metcalfe before I raised it with you.   I raised it
with him directly and it is in relation to the release of
statements which are, I think, within your purview and
that of the South Yorkshire Police.

     As you know we act not only for the bereaved who are
here today but also as a steering committee for solicitors
acting for the injured and bereaved involved at
Hillsborough.   I don't know if you would take this
application now, but when Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry
was on we made an application that the statements which
were made to the West Midlands Police were made available
to the solicitors acting for those individual clients.
The reason for this is straightforward.   It was a
distressing time for all of them.   The statements were
made close to the time and it saves worry, anxiety and
problems being exacerbated, particularly in relation to
medical evidence as well.

     When the matter came into the DPP's control, very
properly that freedom of access to clients* individual
statements stopped.   I understand that those statements
are now effectively the South Yorkshire Police and under
your control and that of the South Yorkshire Police.   I
have been making application to see whether we could have
the same facilities, which are not intended in any way to
run contrary to these Inquests or to prejudice them in any
respect, but limited purely to the statements which
clients have made being released to their solicitors.
Also if there are witness statements where the witness
gives his authority in writing, very often friends who
have been with the people, that those statements could be
released through the West Midlands Police to the
solicitors concerned.
                                              68




     THE CORONER:   Just to make sure I have got this
right. What you are asking me is where, for instance, you
were representing a particular person, and there is a
statement of that person somewhere in the system...

    MISS STEEL:    That's right, sir.

     THE CORONER:   ...and you would like to see it, or
your client would like to see it, it is those statements?

     MISS STEEL:   It is those statements.

     THE CORONER:   Plus any statements where people
authorise in writing their release?

     MISS STEEL:   Yes, indeed.   One would not seek and
would not ask for general statements, but the object of it
is to try to relieve problems, anxieties and re-living the
events more than is necessary.




            THE CORONER:   Is there anybody
                                                        69



A

         THE CORONER: Is there anybody who wants to say
    anything on that to me?

         MR. ISAACS:  Just so that I can understand fully,
B   what I understand my friend to be asking for are those
    statements of clients of hers, let us say.

           THE CORONER: Yes, just for the sake of brevity.

         MR. ISAACS:  And those statements of people who
    have given her authority to ask for copies of those
    statements.  In those circumstances, certainly I do
    not object and I do not think that one would have good
C   cause to object.  Those people are clearly entitled to
    see copies of the statements they have made some time
    ago, but on that basis and that basis only.

         THE CORONER: I understand.       That is exactly what
    you are asking for, is it not?

           MISS STEEL:  That is exactly what I am asking
    for.    Those are the limits, sir.
D
         THE CORONER: Is there anybody else who wants to
    say anything on this?  I think the only thing that I
    can say is insofar as it relates to people who were
    injured, as opposed to have died, I have got no
    authority at all, I am sure you will appreciate that.

           MISS STEEL:   Yes sir.

E        THE CORONER: Even if I wished to give authority,
    I cannot, because my powers are limited, and I am sure
    you understand that.

           MISS STEEL:   Yes.

         THE CORONER: With regard to the rest of it, in
    principle I cannot see any good reason why I      should
    object to what you have said.  I   am in a slight
F   difficulty because, as you know, I think it is the
    Blair Peach case, where the powers of coroners to
    release statements other than those which either he
    took himself or alternatively which have been used in
    the evidence is dealt with, but it seems to me that in
    principle I would not object to such a release.
    Whether they should be released via West Midlands, or
    whether they come here from another source, I am not
    too concerned about.
G
           MISS STEEL:   Thank you very    much, sir.

         THE CORONER: That is on the   basis which    you have
    described.  The only other comment I would make is




H
remember that even if we are only talking about named
individuals, we may be talking about a lot of people
and logistically it may not be as easy as it sounds.

     MISS STEEL:   The facility was granted for a short
period.

     THE CORONER: Yes.

     MR. PAYNE:  I have not risen because personally I
am taken by surprise by this application, and I have
tried to take instructions from Mr. Metcalf but it is
not entirely clear exactly what we are being asked to
do, or exactly what statements are being referred to.
I am rather doubtful about what powers there are, no
disrespect of course to you, sir, to comply with any
sort of application that Miss Steel is making.  We do
not want to be obstructive at all, but I think the
only proper way to deal with this is if Miss Steel
would let us have in writing exactly whatever it is
that she thinks we have got and then we will consider
it. We do not want to be difficult.

     MISS STEEL:  I think it may be helpful if Mr.
Payne and I speak afterwards, but just to make it
clear, there has been correspondence and the request
has been made in writing to the South Yorkshire Police
with the reasons, but I will certainly expand on them.

     THE CORONER:  Mr. Payne, as I have said, I have
already mentioned Blair Peach and I am very conscious
that there is a limit to my authority and, in that
sense, I have got doubts as   to how effect an order of
mine would be if I were to order somebody to release a
statement.  What I am trying to say is that as far as
I as Coroner am concerned, on the basis as you have
described it, I personally can see no objection to it.
If it turns out that there are legal objections to it
which are sustainable, then of course that will be a
matter which might have to be resolved in another
place.  I am merely expressing, if you like, my view
that (a) I am doubtful whether I have the authority to
order the release, and (b) with that caveat I cannot
see any good reason why not.   If I had the authority,
I would exercise it in your favour.

     MISS STEEL:   I am very much obliged.

     THE CORONER: Does that help?

     MISS STEEL:   Yes it does, that is of great
assistance.
     THE CORONER: It is a difficult problem this, as
you know.  If I were a High Court Judge sitting in a
Divisional Court somewhere I would know my powers in
this respect rather more clearly, but it is an
anomalous position, particularly in these Inquests
because the way the statements were prepared and
gathered in the beginning does create quite a lot of
technical difficulties as to their status.

     MISS STEEL:   Yes, I very much appreciate that,
and also, as it were, the statements have passed from
purpose to purpose, over the last 18 months.

     THE CORONER:    That is right, yes.

     MISS STEEL:     As I say, at one time they were
certainly released    without question by Lord Justice
Taylor.  Some have    got them, some have not, and that
is where we are at    the moment.

     THE CORONER: I understand.

     MR. JONES:  Just following Mr. H a l e ’s point, sir,
the cover arrangements for the Coroner's Office, there
is a telephone number I can release for legal
representatives if they do want to make contact with
us during the Christmas and New Year period but we
will not be available on Christmas Day and Boxing Day
or at weekends.  The telephone number is 021-359-1742
and there will be an answer phone on that as well.
That is for the legal representatives.

     MR. MANNING:  There is purely a practical matter,
sir, as to weather generally.  A very helpful letter
was received from Mr. Jones asking for emergency
contact numbers on our side.  I am conscious, as being
one of the daily travellers, that we can hit a
situation on the motorway, as unhappily we saw last
night but happily in the other direction, where you
can be setting off in good time and then realise that
you are stuck and not really wanting everybody to be
held up.  Is there, in fact, an emergency number which
can be used for that purpose, to notify of that sort
of circumstances so far as we are concerned, or
perhaps a train delay, or anything of that kind?

     MR. JONES:  If you would care to ring my Control
Room at Chester, which is 0244-350000, and ask for
them to make contact with me, I will pick up those
arrangements.

     THE CORONER: The problem is winter, is it not,
and none of us can predict precisely what the weather
                                                      72

m
    A

        is going to do?.  Anything else that we need to raise?
        Was there something else, Miss Steel?

             MISS STEEL:  I was merely asking if practically
B       we remove all papers from now until 7th January?

              THE CORONER: We have got this safe somewhere
        where you could lock them all away.   The trouble is
        that once they are in there, you would certainly not
        be able to gain access next week because the place is
        shut.   So if you think you need them, take them.  If
        you want to use that safe, please feel free to do so.
        Everything I think I do not need is staying in the
C       building.

              Can I take the opportunity of wishing, first of
        all, all the legal representatives a very, very happy
        Christinas and I will use the term prosperous New Year
        - it is appropriate for legal representatives.

              Mrs. McBrien, a very happy and a prosperous New
        Year to you as well and I hope that you feel better
D       soon.   It is a shame about your throat.

             But I do not want to exclude anybody else.   I
        know particularly for the families this is a very
        difficult time, but nevertheless I want to wish you as
        happy a Christmas and as happy New Year as you can
        possibly have.

             Thank you all very much and I look forward to
E       seeing you all on 7th January 1991.

             MISS STEEL: We reciprocate your meetings for
        Christmas and the New Year.

             THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.

          (The Inquests were adjourned until 10.30 a.m.
                    Monday, 7th January 1991)
F
