    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions




Owning Organisation:        South Yorkshire Coroner

Title Memo:                 Meeting with Mervyn Jones and Solictors - Cassette No. 1

Description:


This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the digitised version
of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement by BR Consult to reduce noise
and improve audibility of the incoming radio transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
    Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                      101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                   Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
        Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
00:00:33
CORONER:              Now, gentlemen, I’m very grateful to you for travelling here at such short
                      notice. The reason why I wanted to meet today, Mr Jones and I have
                      been discussing it and we thought it would be helpful if we had an
                      informal discussion between myself, Mr Jones and yourselves as, I’m
                      going to the use words ‘principle protagonist’ but perhaps it would be
                      more appropriate as the people with whom I have corresponded as
                      opposed to other firms of solicitors may have an interest but who, at this
                      stage, have not, yet had occasion to run it in a substantial sort of way.

                      You will, of course, recollect the both of you, however, our interests to
                      obtain darker, shall we say, information because you need it for various
                      civil matters which are concerns of mine. Obviously, I appreciate that it
                      is difficult for you and also Mr Jones and everybody else indeed.

                      The initial, or the original, intention was that once the public enquiry had
                      been completed that I would resume the inquests reasonably promptly
                      and, in fact, we have fixed them for 15 January. We could have started
                      perhaps fraction earlier, I don’t know, but we thought if we start before
                      Christmas would be cruel. We fixed it on 15 January, but in the events
                      which happened, because a criminal investigation was initiated, I
                      changed my mind about that. In the usual conventional way the DPP --
                      one would normally defer an inquest until after he has taken a decision
                      and then depending on that decision on -

MR METCALF:           Still been deferred until after a trial. Indeed, yes.

CORONER:              Now I had a letter, in fact, from Miss Steele and for the company, DPP,
                      and in fact oddly enough because it came on the day when we had a
                      letter from you saying, “Counter

MR METCALF:           Information.

CORONER:              In effect, what Miss Steele said was, “I quite understand the difficulty
                      with the criminal aspect of the matter, but could you at least help us with
                      regard to where the deceased were and how long did they take to die
                      and where were they found and the medical evidence and so on?”

                      Now I reflected on that and I, in due course wrote to the DPP, and I
                      thought this might simply be a way forward so that we could have a
                      resumed inquest on a limited basis with fairly tight rules as to what type
                      of evidence we would hear and how we would defend it. Obviously, it
                      may not necessarily give you all the answers that you want but it would
                      go a long way down the road and, if you like, in criminal parlance what
                      we would be dealing with is; who the deceased was, when he died and
                      where he died. We would strictly not be dealing with the question of how
                      we died.

MR METCALF:           Minor questions of causation.
00:04:08
CORONER:              In other words because that, of course, could prejudice the criminal
                      facts. I do not want to do that; it would be wrong. The DPP has
                      specifically asked me not to. Certainly if you look at it from the
                      bereaved’s point of view it would be against their interests, assuming for
                      a minute that there are bereaved people who wish to have a prosecution

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                 2
                      and certainly Mr Hieghton (?) indicated that in his concluding remarks.
                      So it may not necessarily be that. Certainly if you look at it from the
                      point of view of the bereaved, they certainly would not want me to
                      muddy the water to such an extent that any criminal prosecution,
                      assuming that there was one, fell to the ground.
0 0 :05:01
                      So, what I wanted to say to you today then is this - there are one or two
                      other minor details but the crux of it is - do you feel that it would be
                      helpful if we arranged to reopen the inquests for purpose of taking
                      evidence on those in that limited way? We would then have to
                      re-adjourn, of course, at the end of that particular bit of evidence - and I’ll
                      come to the question of what would happen on resumption because that
                      will depend on the DPP to a certain extent. Have I made myself clear for
                      what we have in mind? Have you got any thoughts on that?

MR METCALF:           Speaking from the point of view of the South Yorkshire Police, I am one
                      day away from being able to say whether it would be useful or not. We
                      have a hearing tomorrow before Mr Justice Steyn at which what is in
                      conflict is whether the present civil proceedings should continue or they
                      should cease to be restarted or new proceedings started when all
                      matters, including the inquest, have been completed.

                      Now, if the conclusion tomorrow is that the present proceedings have to
                      go ahead, whether they be heard in October or a bit later, then I can say
                      straightaway it would be extremely helpful if the inquest could proceed. I
                      think it is fair to say that must be true of all defendants, I don’t think any
                      of them would say, “Oh, well we don’t want this information” whether it
                      be good or ill in what it does.

                      If, on the other hand, the proceedings are discontinued, then it really
                      ceases to be significant from the point of view of South Yorkshire Police
                      except, “With any information, the sooner we have it the better” but there
                      ceases to be what I would call an overriding reason. So that’s ...

MR FRAZER:            Certainly, so far as the bereaved are concerned, one of the major
                      questions which is in their minds is, “How did my husband or my son
                      die?” “Why can’t I have particular information about him?” So, I think
                      anything that be done to get that information to them in almost a non-
                      adversarial way would be warmly welcomed by them. The proceedings
                      of which Mr Metcalf speaks don’t directly involve the bereaved because
                      they are - 1mean you correct me if I’m wrong - a contribution
                      proceedings between the various defendants. The insurers of South
                      Yorkshire Police have agreed that subject to proof, they will deal with all
                      the civil claims and there are issues arising from that but, certainly in
                      terms of the bereaved, those proceedings are not a factor and I’m sure
                      they would all welcome as much information as is possible to get.
00:08:09
MR METCALF:           I think there’s a further point, which again, I suppose it affects us directly,
                      which I perhaps ought to make on that. One of the aspects, as Mr
                      Frazer says, nobody is being kept waiting for compensation subject to
                      prove of the extenuating circumstances, so that’s not a live issue. The
                      question of the amount of compensation is in issue and one of the
                      particular aspects is something that is variously known as pre-death
                      terror, pre-impact terror which we used to describe simply as pain and
                      suffering before death. If it be the case that there is evidence of people
                      having survived fora long time or recovered consciousness sufficiently

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                   3
                      to realise what state they were in or suffered pain then those people are
                      likely to be, or their relatives are likely to be, entitled to higher
                      compensation on those grounds.
0 0 :09:08
                      So, that may be a factor which is preventing cases being settled at the
                      moment. In other words are people saying, “We can sort out the normal
                      damages that are payable in these circumstances, we can sort out the
                      funeral expenses, we can sort out this, we can sort out that. What we
                      cannot sort out is that.” Until we know whether this was a man who lost
                      consciousness and never regained it and died quickly or whether he
                      woke up, found himself extremely severely injured, suffered badly and
                      then died subsequently. That, rightly or wrongly, makes a big difference
                      to our conversation.

CORONER:              Those questions would depend upon what they evidence they --

MR METCALF:           Exactly.

CORONER:              -- collected and I cannot actually tell you that at the moment because I
                      do not know yet.

MR FRAZER:            Certainly from our point of view that, obviously, is a major factor. Again,
                      I don’t think that is adversarial in the sense that - and as between
                      ourselves - that is really a matter for finding out information. That is why
                      you have been bombarded with all these letters from people asking for
                      more information.

CORONER:              Yes, I didn’t mention it but, of course, there is another anxiety, quite
                      understandably, amongst people because they know, for instance, that I
                      have got all the alcohol levels of the bereaved and they do not know
                      what they are because I have not told them yet. They are getting cross,
                      shall we say, because they feel that I am not telling them stuff which are
                      (several inaudible words) that is true. I do have the alcohol levels and
                      we have not yet, for medical purposes, disclosed them.

                      I mean looking from the bereaved’s point of view, my feeling is that they
                      would welcome even a limited inquest, provided that the limits are
                      explained to them and that they understand the reasons for them. In
                      fact, I am sure most people, once they understand the reason, will
                      accept a limitation. I think that will be right.

MR FRAZER:            Yes. There will be one or two people who you will be faced with, I think,
                      if you do proceed, who find those restrictions difficult to accept and you
                      will have to be as firm as I know that you can be with them. Even
                      though they have it explained in advance, it is an extremely emotional
                      situation, particularly for those who were there with people who died but
                      not perhaps so much for people who are at arms length, as it were. The
                      wife who was not there; but the brother who was there will want to,
                      perhaps - this may be an opportunity subject to how you decide to call
                      evidence - see this as an opportunity to get it off his chest and that could
                      be a problem, I think, couldn’t it?
00:11:44
CORONER:              Yes. We have already thought, to a certain extent, about this aspect of
                      the matter. It is difficult and I also recognise that it is impossible for me
                      to satisfy 95 families. However hard I’ve tried, however good I am, there
                      will be some who will leave this court dissatisfied in one way or another.

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                 4
                      So long as it isn’t too many.
0 0 : 12:11
MR FRAZER:            Yes, as long as you can get the balance just right. Yes, I think that must
                      be right.

CORONER:              I mean it would be nice to think everybody left content, but it’s too much
                      to hope for. Yes, actually you’ve raised the next point which I was going
                      to mention, which is: how do we intend to present the evidence or how I
                      would like the evidence to be presented. We’ve thought about this quite
                      hard and (several inaudible words) if you like, the constraint of the
                      (inaudible) proceedings. The first thing that we feel is absolutely
                      essential is that we will not have any South Yorkshire Police officers be
                      giving oral evidence at this hearing.

MR METCALF:           I can’t think that any of them could actually give you any information.
                      They can give general information about body positions and so forth.

CORONER:              Oh no, they can’t.

MR METCALF:           Is that so?

CORONER:              There are a lot who participated in the resuscitation --

MR FRAZER:            The rescue attempts.

MT METCALF:           Ah, sorry. Yes, I was thinking about the original --

CORONER:              No. I am thinking in some respects it is only fair to say that by not calling
                      them we are harming, if you like, those who did well, shall we say, and
                      who did try very hard. We thought about them and decided it was
                      impractical to select, “We’ll have him but we won’t have that one,” that is
                      the first thing. Secondly, it becomes very much harder to control all of
                      the questioning and, for that matter, the answers. The point that you
                      were making just a moment ago that somebody may well want to score
                      a point, shall we say, while he has the opportunity. So we have made
                      that decision.

                      So the principle way we want to present the evidence is that there will be
                      a team - 1think that is right, isn’t it - of officers from West Midlands,
                      many of whom already are known to the families but not necessarily all.
                      They would prepare a summary of the evidence for me and will present
                      that summary. So they might say, for instance, that ‘X’, a 15 year old -
                      or whatever, a 20 year old or whatever it is - left his home at 9.30. It is
                      known that he had a ticket because his father, who saw him onto the bus
                      with it, and then they will trace the factual evidence and the movements -


MR METCALF:           Through statements as well as through pictures presumably.
00:15:11
CORONER:              Okay. I’ll come to the pictures in a moment. Basically the statements of
                      this at an early stage. What we intend to is, as soon as these
                      summaries are available, to circulate them in the first instance to, if you
                      like, to the solicitors or the steering committee. That is a question I want
                      to ask you: whether you felt that you wanted to see them. If you felt that
                      that was acceptable as it stands then I would propose not to call any
                      other evidence other than that. The summaries will be as accurate

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                 5
                      factually as the officers can make but they won’t deal with the how. So
                      they will make, if you like, statements of fact --
00:16:11
MR FRAZER:            Based on the statements that we have got.

CORONER:              Yes. So, Mr Y - they won’t name the name - was seen by his friend in
                      pen 3, for instance, he helped to lift him over the fence. He was then
                      seen to be carried by a policeman who confirmed that he did carry a
                      body across (several inaudible words) the officer. So, at the end of the
                      day, you will know what the statements contain factually and you will
                      also know the names of the witnesses but you won’t have seen the
                      witnesses in person. The second thing we want to use is the thing
                      called (several inaudible words), have you seen them?

MR METCALF:           Yes.

CORONER:              These are very good aide memoirs but the main advantage of them is
                      that they have a --

MR FRAZER:            Without prejudice to the one (inaudible) I’ll try and leave his name out of
                      it.

CORONER:              What we intend to do basically is to have the officer produce this so that
                      it is available so that you can see it. Again, you will see it actually
                      summarises very briefly major events in this particular person’s history.

MR FRAZER:            If you can remember (several inaudible words) the complexity of trying to
                      bring them all together unless there’s an easy explanation.

CORONER:              Yes. Oh, yes.

MR FRAZER:            Basically is the way in which the presiding officer brings, as it were, a
                      sequential plan of what went on. It’s all based on statement which is
                      (inaudible).

CORONER:              May I just read this for one moment because we might need this later
                      on? If you just excuse me.

MR METCALF:           Please. Does it identify the witnesses?

MR FRAZER:            Yes, that’s the witness. Our statements are (several inaudible words).

CORONER:              If on the opening day we intend to have somebody who will actually
                      explain the (inaudible) and the way the exhibits are numbered and so
                      on, in order to make intelligible.

MR FRAZER:            Basically the box paraphrases the comment or the happening, if you will
                      - the event, the occurrence, call it what you will - the witness’ name is
                      there and then that’s our statement reference number.

MR METCALF:           That’s on the (inaudible) top of that page.
00:18:51
MR JONES:             That’s it. That’s the date of obviously the incident. I do not think any of
                      that actually goes before that. Then the time which is the crucial factor,
                      of course, as to what went on. Be course running parallel to this is
                      visual evidence, of course, which is actually much precise in time in

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                  6
                      terms because it --
00:19:11
MR METCALF:           Presumably got   a -


MR JONES:             Yeah, down the second, or, in fact, a tenth of a second using BBC film.
                      We, having now, been able to identify a common clock because we have
                      got quite a number o f -

MR FRAZER:            So there are all sorts of time (inaudible).

MR JONES:             Yes. Yes.

MR METCALF:           At least one of the photographers was a minute out, wasn’t he, because
                      that snared problem.

MR JONES:             That’s right. It actually says a lot when you have something like visual
                      evidence then you compare it with people’s accounts and what they
                      remembered and didn’t remember and indeed times they set on it. Just
                      makes people think how (inaudible) memory is really in that sense.

MR METCALF:           Yes.

CORONER:              What I intend to do is to have something like this for every single one -
                      that’s right, isn’t it? - plus a summary for every single one. Now, before -


MR FRAZER:            Plus any video or still photographs that are available as well, will they?

CORONER:              Yeah, let me come to the specific (several inaudible words). Well, I’ll
                      deal with it now. On the whole we do not want to use the videos,
                      certainly at this stage, because first of all it is very distressing to show it
                      to the relatives. Most of them have already seen the videos and most of
                      them have seen the stills because the officers who are going to be
                      presenting the summaries will be able to say that the identifications have
                      been confirmed in nearly every case. There are a few where we have
                      not been able to establish the whereabouts I think it is true to say and
                      there are a few where the families just did not want to look at the
                      photograph or see the police, which is perfectly all right, there’s no
                      objection to that.

                      By and large most of the, if you like, principle parties have already seen
                      the visual evidence. Now, on the whole I do not like using visual
                      evidence in my courts because I find that it is unnecessarily distressing.
                      What I have in mind is that the officer -- we’ve put flags and the little red
                      dots where various people --

MR FRAZER:            Seen alive the same day.

CORONER:              -- have been seen. That is right. We will produce those facts - at least
                      they’ll be produced by the witness. Now, if in any particular case, it is
                      necessary for somebody - or if somebody really feels that they want to
                      see the photograph then we will have usually blowups of the video
                      scene as a still. So we will be in a position to produce it - well, at least
                      somebody will be in a position to produce it so that it can be looked at.
0 0 :22:11
                      I anticipate there will be many cases where it would be unnecessary to

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                     7
                      do it and I do not see any point in just tabling distressing photographs,
                      which have already been seen by the principle protagonists at this
                      particular hearing. Any thoughts on that?
00:22:33
MR FRAZER:            The only comment I’ve got about the summaries is that, perhaps it is
                      because I have a Liverpool background, any summary is somebody’s
                      approach to the problem. I wonder whether in addition to being given
                      the summary it is possible or even practicable to be given the evidence
                      from which the summary has been extracted so that, say, when the
                      solicitor has read the summary, if there is anything in it which causes
                      him or his clients concern, the body of the evidence can then be gone
                      into. I would not expect the body of the evidence to be gone through
                      piece by piece before you, but any summary is bound to be subjective.

CORONER:              Well it is; you know that. We thought about this at considerable length
                      and it cannot easily be done, particularly with regard to the evidence of
                      the police officers because it may contain their statements. There are
                      various technical problems in some of the statements but quite apart
                      from that, statements may contain, shall we say, DPP sensitive --

MR FRAZER:            Yes, I suspected I knew the answer before I asked the question b u t...

CORONER:              Now, we had toyed with the idea of going through all the statements but
                      it would be an absolute mammoth task and scoring out all the bits but on
                      balance we thought that that could be even worse than doing what we
                      are doing. That does not, of course, preclude you at the inquest from
                      saying, “Yes, okay. We have heard what you said but if the inquest
                      were to be resumed it may be appropriate^) we would want to hear
                      more detail” and we could perhaps make a note of it and, subject to
                      resumption, I would consider that as a possibility. I am not saying that
                      that would inevitably concede it but I would certainly consider. It is a
                      very difficult problem.

                      Now, it may be that when I read through the files that there will be some
                      witnesses, say friends, who I might feel I would call or it may be that
                      when I read through the evidence that I may feel that I can read as
                      documentary evidence - even evidence from police officers - because I
                      only need to read what is relevant under the rules. So in a sense, if you
                      like, I am using the black pencil up there.

                      In that respect, of course, I was only reading the relevant bits. It may
                      well be possible to actually hear, shall we say, the words of some of the
                      witnesses but we do not want to do it for all of them because it would be
                      an interminable job. It would take a great deal of time and only want to
                      do it in those cases where you felt really you wanted to hear what he has
                      to say.

MR FRAZER:            Yes. There will be some families who want their - what is it somebody
                      said -1 5 minutes of fame I suppose. I suppose to some extent then
                      they are going to have to be given that opportunity, aren’t they? I mean,
                      I think the vast majority will go through very smoothly and without any
                      difficulty, but I think that there are going to be one or two who are going
                      to be problems.
00:26:00
CORONER:              So we recognise that. We want to make the inquest meaningful. You
                      might say, “Well, there’s no point in having an inquest anyway”, but if we

www.merrillcorp.com
                      are going to have an inquest then it must be as meaningful and helpful
                      as we can make it in the circumstances. That would be my objective.
00:26:27
MALE SPEAKER 1:       I see it serving the two points; particularly in getting information and also
                      dealing with our problems on the civil claims. Those are the two --

MR JONES:             Can I just take Mr Frazer’s point if I may, Mr Frazer, in terms of the
                      summary? It is not only one of my police officers’ summaries of it, as it
                      were, just reviewed by me and my people; it is actually going to go to
                      Dr Popper. So, he gets actually the full file with all the statements,
                      everything in including matters which could be considered prejudicial.
                      He can actually read those matters which relate to the death and
                      actually look at that in terms of how it compares with the summary.

CORONER:              That’s right.

MR FRAZER:            So you’ve got to plough through 95 reminders. That’s fine.

MR JONES              So, the summaries come out from the Coroner as opposed to come out
                      from me, as it were.

MR FRAZER:            Yes. I mean no disrespect to West Midland’s officers but I think if that
                      point is made, and clearly made, I think some of the, “Oh, but it’s another
                      policemen ... the policeman’s statement...” you know the sort of thing
                      that we all face. If that summary, as it were, comes from your office then
                      obviously it is going to be much easier to swallow, I think.

CORONER:              Yes. It has always been my intention - never not been my intention - to
                      read the summary and to read the file. It is going to be a very big task
                      but I think I’ve got to do that. In any case I need to do it because I’ve got
                      to decide whether I want to have somebody as documentary when I
                      want to call somebody. So the summaries will be (inaudible) but I’m only
                      human as well. I am not claiming that just because I read it I cannot
                      make a statement, of course, I am just as capable. All I can say is that
                      both the officers, in whom I have confidence, will do their best and I will
                      do my best to try and make sure that it is accurate; that is what we want.
                      We want accuracy and completeness within the parameter. That is
                      right, isn’t it?

MR FRAZER:            I was in Liverpool myself at one stage; I know exactly what you are
                      talking about: your 2 lines of summary which actually reflect 15 pages of
                      happenings, as it were. It tends to be a thorough summary so it actually
                      goes into the detail without prejudicing (overspeaking). One can see a
                      situation that all it does is would create frustration here in terms of, “Well
                      that’s hardly answering anything. Why did we bother coming?” that is
                      the last thing we want to happen.

CORONER:              That is why I would have liked you to have seen it beforehand. If there’s
                      anything specific and you think, “Oh, goodness me, I can see a problem
                      here” you can call it to my attention. If we can meet it, you know, the
                      point that you make then we will. It may not be possible because of the
                      constraints and my aim is we should understand that clearly.

MR FRAZER:            You will sit without a jury for that then, will you?
00:29:18
CORONER:              Ah, well I will come to the jury in a moment. You anticipate ... Would

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                  9
                      you want to see the summaries Mr (inaudible)? I mean, it would not be
                      an impossible task. I would prefer not to have to circulate the
                      summaries to dozens of parties because in a sense --
0 0 :29:35




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                         10
