     HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                  (WEST D I S TRICT)    :   !


          INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

       VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                    STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15th APRIL, 1989




                    BUSINESS MEETING




                         Before

DR. S. L. POPPER,   L L . B . , SB.MED.Sci.,   B M , B S , MRCGP

              (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                            At

             The Medico-Legal Centre,
                  Watery S t r e e t ,
                    Sheffield.

                            on

            Tuesday, 30th October, 1990




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS



       From the Notes of J. L. Harpham Ltd.,
            Official Shorthand Writers,
         55 Oueen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                           APPEARANCES


^ r - T. King - counsel. Instructed by the Hillsborough Group
of Solicitors, representing the bereaved and injured.

Mr. C. Russell — counsel.   Instructed by Barlow,        Lyde and
Gilbert representing Superintendent Greenwood.

Mr. S. Catchpole - counsel.   Instructed by Davies, Arnold,
Cooper, representing Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

Mr. V. Hale - solicitor.       Representing Superintendent Roger
Marshall.

Mr. R. Manning - solicitor.      Representing Superintendent
Murray.

^r *   Isaacs - counsel.   Instructed by Hepworth and Chadwick,
representing Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

Mr. Gregory - solicitor.   Representing the Insurers of
Sheffield City Colmcil and Sheffield City Council.

Hiss B. Norcliffe - solicitor.   Representing      the Chief
Constable of the South Yorkshire Police.

Mr. P. Jac kson - solicitor.     Representing   the Football
Supporters' Association.

Mrs. J. McBrian.    Representing her family.

Mr. Holroyd.   Representing     the Police Federation.
                                 BUSINESS MEETING

                                        Held on

                        TUE SD AY ,   3 0 tn OCTOBER,       1990

  ;   t h e CORONER: Welcome.   Can I say first of all that
 tnis is not a part of the inquests proper, because the
         f Pr° l>f r arS a c t u a L L y resuming, as you know, on the
rnv letter°^o              ^ pUrpose of this meeting as I said in
my letter to tne legal representatives, is for me to have an
opportunity to meet members of the legal profession and
thafGn n ft        eS ln ° M 2r to sort out Pr oc ed ur al ma tt er s              so
act ua lf v          p o s f lbLe we can run the inquests when we
      ly g e t ,?own to, them, m as smooth and as efficient a
  y as possible m     tne interests of everybody who has an
interest in the matter, including myself.


not - 1T ? e n « a t tn n ? V° i1 a V y PossibL e m i s u n d e r s t a n d i n g we will
 ,.    j     P-at not - de a l witn any q u es ti ons of e v id en ce
          n0Sn *   questions of fact.  We are dealing with
simple procedural matters.   I tried to make that clear in
the invitation, and I hope that was understood, but I iust
w^n  to Lepeat it so there can't be any doubt about it at



          i}y ? - I11** ineetlnS is - it is difficult to know
wnat to call it because in Coroner's proceedings you don't
normally nave opportunities for this sort of gathering        but
L°sslon'                          °f anal°8 y ’ CCeat 1C -     If U we,e a
  r      ° n before the Judge m chambers or an interlocutory
procedure.           The point about it is that although nothing
w e \ i n faid w h J-'rn 1S likely to cause any problems because
                   sticking to procedure, it should be treated as a
business, meeting, as a private-gathering between myself and
                     i Pec,la»>f 1 ou^ t to say that I did m a k e it
Sin?             ^nS l e “ er that I would not raise any o b j e c t i o n to
  nt e r e s t e d parties coming.      I m eant that beca u s e I d i d n ' t
want anybody to feel that I was m e e t i n g wi’th lawyers, or
an yb o d y else f0r that matter, where the people who had a
one or   w £ e £ ! St W S Ke s P e^ i f icaL]-y excluded. I recognise
          vo faces, but I don t r e c o g n i s e everybody, m a i n l v
problem.      ^   S° P° ° r 3t reco§ nition °£ faces,               but that's my


      Would it be best if you just introduced yourselves                            the
            so\, ^      !2d ‘S® ^ e s e n tat Ives,                I know w h o ’is
nere and    so that     the s h o r t h a n d w r i t e r can   take a note         T
am taking a proper note of what is going on because I*
tnought it was wise that we knew p r e c i s e l y what was said.

     WR. KING:   Sir, my name is Timothy Kins of Counsel
I am instructed on behalf of a number of tSe deceased

                                  ~ 1 -
 trirough their personal representatives.    I cannot today
read out a definitive list of everyone whom I represent,
lhat is oecause there was initially a preliminary list of
about forty to forty-two.     At the moment it is about twenty-
six definite sets of instructions.-     It is likely...,that that
will be added to and if it is of help, sir, within a week I
am told I can provide you, sir, with a definitive list of
tnose who will be represented through myself.       I am
instructed through Hr. Fraser, solicitor, who is one of six
solicitors who form the Hillsborough group of solicitors who
were known as the Steering Committee at the time of the
lay lor Inquiry, acting on behalf of the bereaved and injured
and they in turn have been instructed by a group which have
formed themselves through the families called The
11 i 11sborough Family Support Group.

       However, we don't claim to represent each and every set
of personal representatives of each deceased, only those
w m c h I have indicated number now twenty-six and is likely
to go up possibly to forty to forty-two.

     THE CORONER:   Ihank you.  Well, when Hr. Fraser or his
instructing solicitors are in a position to let me have a
definitive list it would be helpful because then I will know
who you aren t representing.    That is what I am really
interested in.    It is the ones who are outside your...

     MR. KING:    Sir, I ought to say there may well be
individuals here today who represent personal
representatives of, deceased who haven't given instructions
to ourselves who would want to be heard today as being
representatives.

     1 H E .C O R O N E R :   Indeed.   Perhaps it is only fair to say
this invitation wasn't extended to every single
representative.             It was a limited invitation to people who
1 thought had most to gain from the meeting.

   ^ HR. RUSSELL:     Sir, I am next in line.   My name is
Cnristopher Russell and I am a barrister.     I am instructed
by liar low, Lyde and Gilbert, solicitors in London, to whom
you^extended sucn an invitation, to represent the interests
of Superintendent Greenwood.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   My name is Stuart Catchpole.   I am a
barrister instructed by Messrs. Davies, Arnold, Cooper.
With me today is Mr. Doyle from that firm of solicitors and
we appear on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

     THE CORONER:   Yes,, I do remember you from the interim
hearings, Mr. Catchpole.

     Mk. ilrtLli: I am Vincent Hale.    I represent
Superintendent Roger Marshall.    I am a solicitor.

                           - 2 -
     MR. iiANNING:  My name is Richard Manning.             I am a
solicitor and I represent Superintendent Murray.

     MR. ISAACS:   Paul Isaacs, sir. Counsel.           1S
Mr. Copland of my instructing solicitors, riepworth and
Chadwick.   We represent Chief superintendent Duckentield.

     THE CORONER:       Yes.

     HR. GREGORY:    fly name is Gregory of Keeble, tlawson.
I represent the insurers of Sheffield City Council an       i
Council itself.    Mr. Hepworth is also a solicitor from
City Council.    He is with me today.

     THE C O R O N E R :  I understand you are a member of the
press, is that right?         Well, with the g r e a t e s t of respect,
I would like you to leave.         This is not part of the
proceedings.'        It is not a reportable occasion and I would
be grateful if you would leave because I think that is the
basis upon which I called this meeting.

      As I explained to you, this is not because there is
anything being said here which is so secret that nobody can
hear it, but I don't want - bearing in m i n d tne matter is
?oine, to be dealt with before a jury - I think it is only
right that we remember and we just deal with the procedure.

      MISS HORCLIl’FE:  Sir, I am Belinda Norcliffe.   I am a
 solicitor and I represent the Chief Constable of the South
 Yorkshire Police.

      THE CORONER:       Yes,   I remember you too from the
 previous sessions.

      MR. JACKSON:    Sir, I am Peter Jackson.      I am a
 partner in Hill, Dickenson, Davies, Campbell, and I
 represent the Football Supporters   Association.      bir,
 feel I ought to point out at this stage t h a t w e are nere in
 response to your, invitation, for which my clients thank you.
 It is unlikely, due to the funding of my clients
 organisation, we will be able to appear before you
 throughout the inquiry.

      THE COROWER:   Perhaps I should explain that re mark to
 tne rest of the lawyers.   I had been in touch with Hill
 Dickenson in the past and they very properly pointed out to
 me that they weren't representing anybody in p a r t i c u i a r , ^out
 it occurred to me when I was thinking about the^preparation
 for these inquests that supporters in general might well
 feature to a greater or lesser extent in the evidence.              1
 thought it right to draw that to the attention ot Hill
 Dickenson in case they wished to take a view on it. ^ That
 is why you are here and obviously it is a matter entirely


                                - 3 -
for you to decide what,         if anything,   you do.   I appreciate
your.difficulty.                                  .

     MR. JACKSON:   Sir, ray clients do take the view that
there would be a void before you in representation if the
supporters weren't here, but we are in difficulties.    I
will speak to the. solicitors for the other parties-   It may
be that if I can obtain undertakings about the extent and
scope of criticism of Liverpool Football Club supporters,
that a lot of the need for representation before you will
go.   That will obviously depend on what,sort of
undertakings I can obtain.

     THE CORONER:    Have I got all the lawyers now?   I did
write to firs. McBrian - yes, there you are - because I knew
she was not represented specifically and I thought it was
rignt that you come along as well.
              I
     MRS. McBRIAN:        I am Mrs. Joan McBrian and I represent
our family in this.

     IH jl CORONER:      Yes,    that is all you can represent,   just
yourself.

     While I am on names, I appreciate that some of you may
not want to be present throughout the inquests when we
resume.   Some of you will be here all the time, some of you
may change.   It would be helpful to me if once you know who
is going to be coming on a more or less r e g u l a r ,b a s I s , if
you could let us know because we are going to be going to
try and make name plates for you so that I can recognise you
when we sit in court.   It makes it a lot easier for me to
address you correctly by name, so if you would let me know
we will get that done.  That is an aid for me.          Of course,
you are free to change, if somebody is new or doesn't want
to be there, or something like that.

     MR. KING:   Sir, in the case of the deceased, I am here
as junior counsel.   At the time of the Inquiry leading
counsel was also instructed. ... It is the intention, I know,
of those who instruct me, thai: on occasion they may wish to
have leading counsel here, leading myself, and possibly
leading counsel only on his own.     I assume, sir, you w o u l d
have no objection to that course?           J

     THE CORONER:        No objection at all.

     MR.   KING:      I am obliged.

     THE CORONER:   Provided somebody has got locus standi,
in the sense that they represent an interested party, I am
quite prepared to be as reasonable and as accommodating as I
can be.   All I am asking you is that you help me by keeping
me informed.
     Can I go through one o r two things which I think you
might want to know and then I will either pause from, time to
time to give you a chance to chip in, or at the end if there
is anything I have not dealt with which you feel I ought to
be thinking about then I will give' you an opportunity to
draw it to my attention.

     The venue of the resumed inquests is going to be- the
Council Chamber.   For those of you who were at Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry, it is exactly the same location.  Whether
we will stay there the whole time will depend upon the
numbers of people who are present.

     Sir?

     MR. UOLROYI):  Good afternoon.     I am Mr. Holroyd
representing the Police Federation,   sir.   My apologies   for
being late. ,

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.   Whether we translocate at
some point or not I don't know. . It will depend upon the
number of people who attend.   It is obvious, looking around
this afternoon, that we would have the dickens of a job
getting in nere assuming we have this sort of turn-out and
that was the reason why we chose that venue.

     M e are doing our best tOMiiake it as convenient for
legal representatives and others as possible, but, of
course, I am limited with what is provided for tne.

     I have been asked whether there will be space to store
papers and we believe there is a room.    They call it a
safe, but it is actually quite a largish room which we would
be able to make available for anybody who wanted to put
things in.   You would hav-e to be responsible for your own
security.   I could not possibly take any responsibility for
security.   They key to the room is in the custody of the
City Council and we would make arrangements for it to be
opened and shut at convenient hours, say,, between nine and
ten and five and six, or something like that in the
afternoon, so that you can have access, (a) to put things in
and (b) to get things out.   Whether you use it or not is of
course a matter entirely for you.

     The times of the sittings:    at the moment I have it in
mind to sit from 10.00 until about 12.45 or thereabouts.
Obviously the hours have got to be flexible because of
evidence.   Then maybe from quarter to two or .two o ’clock
until around four.    You may feel that that is not very long
and that Lord Justice Tayl o r sat for a lot longer.    I know
he did, but then lie did not sit with a jury.   . It is not
fair, in my view, to expect ordinary people who are not used
to legal proceedings, even albeit this is just coronal


                          5 -
proccc-viings, to expect    them to sit for very much longer than
that.

     If we find   that we   want to make a few adjustments to
these times, we   will do   so as we go along.  We will pa use
probably in the   morning   and afternoon for a short br ea k to
allow people to   stretch   their legs and have a cup of cottee
and so on.

         I have to tell vou that the present position is that
the City Council is a no smoking zone.       I am sorry about
that for those of you who are smokers, but apart from^ the
fact that that is their standard policy, we also think the
fire service might not be too happy if we allowed it.
Therefore, for the time being you have to assume it is no
s m o k in g .

      Is that reasonably clear with regard to venue and time?
One final thing.      It may be that you may have points of law
to put to me from    time to time.   Obviously if it is
something that has to be dealt with there and then, then we
will do so and we will send the jury out.      However, if it
is something which you feel you want to put, and which would
have to be put in the absence of the jury, I would suggest
we try and do it around the four o ’clock mark so that we use
the time when the jury have gone home.      That is not an
invitation that you address me on each and every day on
points of law, but it is just a convenient way because .   on
principle we should be able to cope with just a littLe 01
 longer tnan the jury.    However, as I say, if something
occurs during the day that you feel has to be dealt with
 then, then so be it.

      Now the next    thing I want to talk about is what I
 the scope of theinquests.     You   will recollect that we have
 already dealt at considerable length with three questions:
 who, wtien and where.    In fact we dealt with them rather
 more extensively than in an average inquest w h i c h l would
 normally deal with.     For various reasons I felt it was
 right.                                        ,

      What is left of the four things which Coroners by and
 large deal with, is the question of how and that is what we
 are going to be concentrating on in these resumed inquests.
 For practical purposes the "how" will apply to all the
 ninety-five deceased.   Technically, as you will appreciate,
 I am not doing one inquest, we are d o i n g ninety-five
 separate and individual inquests, which is why we took
 evidence individually for ninety-five people in April and
 May.   However, because it would be a practical
 impossibility to recount the generality of tne evidence
 ninety-five times over, we will take the evidence together
 in respect of all of them.    I, in common with mo s t of us, •
 will slip into the fault of calling it the inquest.      When I

                              - 5 -
do that you will forgive me and read it as meaning the
inquests.    We will by and large be dealing with all the
evidence for everybody today.

      I am, of course, aware that there are some differences..
Just to take a simple example, there were two enclosures -
enclosure 3 and enclosure 4 — but I don't think that affects
the validity of the principle of how I want to deal with the
evidence..    If evidence is specific to enclosure 4, then of
course we will take cognisance of that-     If evidence is
specific to something else we will take cognisance of that
as well, but we will be dealing with the evidence in respect
of everybody together.

     I have to remind you that an inquest is not a public
inquiry.   In another case which I happened to have read
recently, Mr* Justice Woolf, as he then was, described an
inquest as, "An inquiry in public, but not a public
inquiry."    I thought that was a rather neat way of putting


      I do not expect, particularly as there has already been
a public inquiry, to repeat everything that Lord Justice
Taylor had done, but it is, I'm afraid, as I see it,
inevitable that we will be duplicating a certain amount of
the work he did.          This is because it falls within, as I
perceive it, tne purview of my jurisdiction and also, of
course, b e c a u s e a s I am sitting with a jury and as they have
to reach a verdict on the evidence, it is no use relying
upon what was said fifteen, sixteen, eighteen months ago
before somebody else.          Regrettably, or maybe not, it
depends which point of view you take, there will have to be
some replication of evidence of Lord Justice Taylor's
investigation.          Indeed, if you look at the Terms of
Reference and compare those with what the Coroner's Act
says, you will see there is a quite remarkable similarity in
places.

     I have to remind you that in contrast to a public
inquiry, witnesses in a Coroner's Court have got certain
privileges, particularly witnesses whose conduct is liable
to be called in question, and in particular they have the
right not to answer incriminating questions.   I will be
dealing with this again when I open with the jury and
explain tnis to them in detail, but I want to take this
opportunity now because it is an important point to
understand and if one doesn't grasp it then one tends, not
just in tne Hillsborough Inquests but in all inquests, to
walk away disappointed.

     Therefore two things p r o c ed u r a ll y : witnesses have got
privileges which I will ensure that they are cognisant of
and if they wish to exercise their rights then they are
entitled to do so.   Secondly, a coronal inquiry has got

                           - 7 -
    limited objectives and again within the best of my
    we will, try to stick to those.

          My present intention is, as far as possible, to take'
    the evidence we will hear viva v o c e .   In other words, I a'}
    going to try and get the witnesses to come and give
    evidence.    We know already that that is not going to be
    possible in some- cases.    A t least one witness whom I had.
    thought about, though not necessarily decided on, has died.
    Clearly we cannot take his evidence viva v o c e .   There may
    be some others who, for medical or other reasons, are so         ;
    reluctant to come that I would think it only fair not to
    call them.     Houever, we have a huge pool, if I can use tha,t
    expression, of witnesses and I think it will be possible to
    haye the bulk of the evidence viva v o c e .   I think that is
    preferable though maybe a little bit more time consuming and
    certainly--oaore expensive, but at least people will have
    heard it by "wcrrd^Qi’ mouth.                    .- ,
                  (
         Shall I pause for a moment here and ask whether .I have
    made myself clear, whether you have any queries on this
    aspect?

         [1R. KING:  Sir, I don't know whether this is the time
    to raise submissions as to the nature of the evidence you
    are going to call or the ambit of the evidence.    If I may
    make myself clear, on tine nature of the evidence I have a
    number of submissions to make to you as to the use of the
    Taylor Report itself.

         THE CORONER:  1 I will come to that in amoment.  I
    appreciate that you didn't know that, because I have not
    dealt with it.

         MR. K I N G : As to the ambit of the evidence, it may be
    tnis is not for today at all, that is to say, the starting
    point of the events which you intend to investigate and, if
    I can put it thisway, the    cutting off point of events.

         THE CORONER:     Yes, I am coming to that as well.
    Perhaps I had better carry on for a little bit longer and
    then turxi to you because it may be that I may cover some of
    the points which you nave in mind or, indeed, other people
    have in m i n d .

          In fact you bring me on to what I have called "Groups".
    I take the view that, if you like, t he^.cXi-fe— o-fHr~-po i n t f o r the
    evidence is - I have selected as a marker the a r r i v a l T ^ f t h e
    first ambulance on the pitch.     That does not mean to siy^Hg
    will necessarily deal with every event up to that point, but^x
X    it is a convenient marker beyond which whatever happened has              \
(    either been dealt with inApril/May time, or is outside the                }
\    scope of my inquiry.   So if you like that is the end point. ....


                                -~T~-
     Now the beginning is a little bit more difficult to
determine because one has to consider the events of the day
on the one hand, and to a certain extent one also has to
consider possibly the previous occurrences, because they may
have a relevance in evaluating and assessing the evidence
which is put before the jury-

     However, generally in principle the way I look at it is
we are going to start, as far as the day is concerned, from
the outside and work our way inward*    The evidence will
become more detailed or, if you like, I will be calling more
witnesses as we get closer to the events.    To take an
example, I may just call very briefly somebody's evidence as
to traffic conditions, but I certainly wouldn't go into any
great detail.   It is really, as my colleague in east Kent
said when he was dealing with the Zeebrugge inquests, it is
like a theatre.   You have got your staging, you have got
some subsidiary actors and you have got. the main plot, but
it is difficult to understand the main plot if you have not
got the staging, so you need to have a certain amount of
information which isn't necessarily vital but which makes
the whole thing more readily understandable.

     As I say, I intend to move from the outside in and as
we get nearer to the ground we will be going into more
detail.

     I anticipate calling evidence from supporters, if I can
use that term.    That will include relatives, but with
regard to relatives I am going to be very - relatives who
qualify in my vievr as witnesses and whom I consider to be
appropriate to call.   Certainly even if I felt a relative
could give useful evidence, if he/she really felt they could
not go through the trauma I would be very sympathetic to
that point of view.

     So supporters include relatives, friends.  What I have
just said for relatives applies to them as well, although to
a slightly lesser degree.   Other contacts with the deceased
and  Others  - people who were there who didn't necessarily
have something to do with the deceased but who can tell us
something about what happened which I consider to be
relevant to the purpose of my inquiry.

     That is the first group.

    The- second group will be local residents.

    The third group will be people like shopkeepers and so


     The fourth group will be what I call "Other
Independents'.   I don't meant supporters aren't
independent, but I mean people who were either

                        - 9 -
professionally present or who may not even have been at the
scene.    I will give you an example, media people, for
instance.

     Then we are going 'to take evidence from club employees.
People who were engaged with the club. ‘ For example,
turnstile operators, stewards and people of that nature.

      The police, of course.  While I am on the subject.of
the police., there are in the case of a few police officers
and, indeed, at least one other person, statements which
were taken under PACE - that is under the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act. • It is my normal practice.at the
moment if I was dealing, say, with a road traffic incident,
that if there was such a statement from, say, the driver,
that I would have that either read or played on the audio
tape.    I have decided that I am going to do that in this
case as well, so we will hear whatever is said in these
statements. < I intend at the moment to use the audio tape
rather than to have them read because then we have it as it
was recorded.

     I have decided that I will not circulate the list of
witnesses who I intend to call in advance.       There are
several reasons for this.       The first one - I don't have to
give you all the reasons but I will give you a few just so
you know it is not an entirely arbitrary decision.          The
first and maybe the most important point is this:         this is
an inquiry which I conduct.        It is an inquisitorial
procedure and not adversarial.        It is totally different, in
fact, to every other legal proceeding in England anyway.
There is in fact I       think - certainly the books tend to
indicate that it is quite proper not       to disclose or
circulate names, and I never do.       When I say "never", that's
a big word.      There may be the odd exception when I have had
to let somebody see a statement for very special reasons.
However, in principle, I don't and I don't intend to do it
in this c a s e .

     Secondly, we haven't got the capacity, even if I wanted
to do it, to deal with the circulation of statements.           We
have got our work cut out in coping with my needs.            I am
very lucky.    I have got what I suppose for a Coroner is
quite a good sized         team, but we have to remember that I am
just a Coroner, an         inferior court of record, let me remind
you, and not a n y t h i n g e l s e . There are limits to what I can
muster, so I cannot do it from a practical point of view.

     The third thing is that circulation of statements, we
did do it with the summaries.  As you may remember w e ^ i d
circulate tne summaries because we thought that would b<
helpful.   In fact to a certain extent in some cases thal
bounced back on me.   People weren't entirely happy that Jthe
evidence which was given was not word for word what had^xDeen
s e n t o u t in t h e s u m m a r y , which; w a s <i n t e n d e d r e a l l y as. a _-
suide- a n d to- give. l e g a U representatives:; a m o p p o r t u n i t y to
comment and c o m e           back:ani           us to ,nak* any f u r t h e r              .
Investigations-                I have:- l earned from that and so I don
intend     to   g e t . .in t o , t          h              a              I
 ■i>V, El know this may: corneas a ' d i s a p p o i n t m e n t to; . ■
                                                                       Y £ ^
 ^Ihat-isSth^posttfon^S^Ifac^no^sendin^a^^l^ol^
witnes s esaiiop&amgKj^ r c ^ aj^
      What I will d o ; i£ l"'am able,' is to f iv* £° u ° ^ _ P U !:r I
on a no tice board the proposed witnesses for t                  idea o£
two days and maybe even three days,, to give Yo u 1!°me i d ^ nt. ...
what is coming.     I a m not trying to' b e di f fi c u l t ._ I want
to make life as easy as I can for all of us, but that
includes me as well.      We will almost, certainly
witnesses to refresh th e i r memory from the statements on the
day.    Do y,ou follow what I mean by that?        It is eighteen
months ago that this event happened.,, approximately.^             Some,
of the witnesses may have g i v e n : statements or w r a t t e n ,^°    .
 recollections which are eighteen pages long, or even l ^ g e r .
They may not recollect in detail what they s a i d and, indeed,
 they may not recollect the events.        It is U k e i y that we
 will allow them to have a sight of their statement, although
 I don't expect them to have them in the witness box.
 would not normally do that.

      With regard to Lord Justice Taylor's Report, if I J ~ at\
 deal with that next.   I do not intend to admit that report
 as part of the evidence at the inquests.       The only Y^y one
 could do tnat would be to read it in t o t o , and I don
 that would serve any useful purpose.

         Secondly I perceive it is going to cause m o r e problems
  than it is worth if I did that, so I don t intend to admit
  tha t .                       -
       Similarly, I do not intend to use t h e _transcripts of
  the evidence at Lord Justice Taylor s Inquiry.         course,
  I am fully aware that you will'have access to the
  transcripts as indeed I have, and I would n ot be at all
  surprised if you looked through them with a view to seeing
  what people have said.      I would expect you to do that, and
  I don't mind that provided your questioning is relevant
  the inquests.   What I would not permit is if, for instance,
  a witness were to exercise his right not to answer an
  incriminating questions, I would n o t permit you to put to
  that witness quotations from the transcripts so that in        c
  he could then exer cise his rights not to answer that
  question, but in fact you had put what he had said.       L am
  going to use commonsense.      I don't want to muzzle you.     I
  don't want to prevent you asking all pr oper and legitimate
  questions in o rd e r that at the end of the day as far as
   possible you will feel you have had a f a i r chance, so to
    ; speak, but equally I intend to be fair to the witnesses as
       a r ,as am. a b l e to. b e . j o , >f5w-.>tl.^r .. _ ■.<                          -
' S r ^ r - . ,, .   . ., , , ;.r   -   - -   <-> V ,   „   - .   " -           , -

           Although I don't, intend to allow Lord Justice Taylor's
                  b e introduced as evidence,^.!t is going to be,vary
^.difficult., no tv. to; refer to ,it:from', time. to t i m e . .’C o m m o n s e n s e
   will dictate^where^we d r a w ,the, line.                think. it,;is^also^s
   rr g h tv;to-:say* t here* m ayt b M the# od(^‘o c ^ ’iion^ wh axre^»0 :wi I ha v
   to^ breach.; whafe; Li havens jxist^s aid;! tfiatKwe^ will;-have to* uset%-'^y
   som e or the*transcripts^f b u t ^ ^ f e i n k ^ i t ^ w i l l ’b e a ^ r a r i t y t " ^

             Documents.     B y that. 1 mean bundles of documents, or
       plans o r photographs o r anything of that sort — exhibits, if
       you wish-    Bearing in m i n d (a) w e a r e dealing with
       inquests, (b) with a jury and (c) that we are going to have
       our work cut out as it is with the number of witnesses, I
       want to restrict as f a r as I; am* able to the n u m b e r of
       documents which are put in as exhibits-"         There is very
       little point in having hundreds and hundreds of pages of
       documents if the' jury cannot, absorb them.

            ^ •r? •^r? Parec* t0 listen to you on this point because it
      is a difficult one,       but what I have in mind, and I will
      pause after this to enable you to come back on what I have
      said, is that if, for instance, we were to introduce the
      Green Guide, which is a document which we won't be able to
      avoid referring to, we can introduce it as an exhibit.
      However, I would not expect the jury to read the whole thing
      trom cover to cover because a lot of it we don't need for
      the inquests.       If.you have a particular point on it which
      you wish to make to a witness, then I would expect you to
      either pick that paragraph out and read it, or I will read
      it, or somebody will read it, or if we have already dealt
      with it then w e c a n just refer to it.      So that at the end
      what tne jury will have in mind will be, say, ten paragraphs
      out of the Green Guide.        Also-with other documents.     There
      may be other documents which we may need to refer to.
      Iherefore, at the end of the day they will have only to
      think about those bits of the exhibits which are relevant to
      us and not maybe fifty or sixty pages which are there but
      which are totally unnecessary for o u r purposes.

           Is that reasonably clear what I am trying to say?    I
      think it will be easier to do than for me to explain it.
      Shall I pause here?   Mr. King, have I dealt with some of
      the points you had in mind?.

           rlR. KING:   Sir, you have, and if I might deal with one
      or two.    Sir, if I d e a l with matters which you feel, ought
      to be reserved for formal legal argument, please stop me.
      I am not in any way trying to trespass on times when I
      fihmilHn ' t-
        Can I deal, first with: matters arising, out of-.what^have .
been known1‘as the« mini^inques ts',* and ■you have-"■a 1 ready*'3^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 15^-?^^®'
referred to the? fact: tha t von the1 individuals you have::b e e n ' ' ^ %?:f* a
 into certain questions already?            I have an e v e r increasing
.number, of sets- of.: ins truc tions** as; toe indi vidual;; questions;::wg't;w?*ss-
a nd matters rela ting® to# thosej^individua I-4 mini inques ts
specif ically.fa thfc&£ac.tual||mattecs^laidv:outeingthes..summaries
 to? which- you-'havefreferredfwbiclSB^understoodfwere^la
 before:,, the-fj ury^l^l^doi^tswish^totgo^into,--'thenisnovftthisv^^.^^y^
afternoon,' b ut what* r^wduld* wisir'to; have liberty, to do is to ^
communicate with you under the name of each individual
deceased — hopefully it will not be as long as I am perhaps
indicating — but there are* specific, issues of fact where I
know those who have lost their loved ones are very anxious
 that either factual inaccuracies o r omissions, if possible,
could be rectified.         Sir, if they could be laid b efore you
 in written form you may take the. view, and. I would hope1 that
you might, ttyat in m o s t of those cases you. would, ber prepared
for those matters to be rectified perhaps straight away-at
 the beginning of the. inquests p r o p e r in November, or, if
necessary, to hear a small amount of evidence relating to
them.

     Obviously until you hear the questions you cannot make
your mind up, but I would wish to give notice, if I. can put
it that way, tnat that is what I am instructed to lay before
you.

     THE CORONER:   Can I tell you my view on that?    I was
aware you might well be raising this point.    I have already
made it clear that I don't intend to re-open all the ninety-
five cases.   Indeed, I have had correspondence from the odd
person where they have raised matters. „ If the matters are
put to me and if when I have seen them,, if your instructing                       j
solicitors would communicate with me, if I feel that the                       I
point which you make is — I will use the word justified,                       J
that is not intended to be rude at all -     justified and
legitimate, and proper to be dealt with, then of course I
will consider that sympathetically.    However, there may
well be matters which may be raised which I feel have either
been adequately dealt with, in which case I will say so, or
alternatively which I feel are outside the scope of the
inquiry, in which case I will also say so.

     I am not turning you down.    I am just reserving               the
position, depending upon wha t you actually say.

     HR. KING:   Indeed.. Really, the purpose of my rising
on that matter now was to give you forward notice of it and
to emphasise, because I know there are those here hearing
what I am saying, they are matters which inevitably are. dear
to the hearts of many people.                                                          ’■

      THE CORONER:       I understand     that-
           MR. KING:. - Sir, might I. now address you on the cut-off
 .yy point,.. as  it has been called, of the scope. . As I understand
.    L you have i n d i c a t e d , sir, you .have in mind the arrival of
     the first ambulance, which is probably going to be sometime
     — I. am guessing: n            o       w       .       .      ^      -

, . ■,     J-11b. 0 K0 N E R :   About fifteetkminutes:^past,      or something'
gsiillike- tha                                                             -5 " •

          MR    k:i n g ^
                                        . - V.—
                                 *s ubirti'ss-ionsto^n
          ,                                       :  m a k e to. you rw h i c h ;is
     very neart felt held by those I represent,, , and I would say
     it is a matter that is very d e a r to them, that it should be
     extended, that timing,, to about four o'clock.. . I explain
     why.     A number of those who I represent are anxious that
     there be an inquest into the nature of the^ medical attention
     whicn was given to those who had been in the crushing, in
     regard to the allegation which certainly they wish to m ake
     and wi s h to investigate, that the absence of p roper med ical
     care facilities and attention and technique, led to those,
     certain of them in any event, dying perhaps when they might
     not have died at all or certainly dying sooner than might
     have been the case, and specifically the diagnosis of when
     somebody had actually died.

          Sir, I know in selecting your cut-off point - and I can \/
     understand from having read some correspondence on the        s
     matter relating to it - that those are matters which your
     immediate feeling was you weren't going to go into.
     Certainly my submission is they are relevant to the "how" m
     respect of the deceased here because the time of death is
     obviously of importance and how they died involves the
     consideration of the attention paid to them when perhaps       I /
     they were still alive and that i s a very relevant matter.    V

          THE CORONr_R:  Can I stop you there because I think we
     are getting into a legal submission.

           I have heard what you say,.  I don't think it would be
     right for me to give a ruling on that because I would be
     breaching, if you like, the procedural aspects of this
     meeting, except to say that obviously I have, thought about
     this point quite a bit and at the momen t I am not persuaded
     yet that I would want to go down that road.        I have
     reasons for it, but I donY t think I will d e a l with them,
     would not want to encourage you to think I will actually
     accede to that, but if you could just remind me before we
     end that you have made- this point because it may be that
     what we should do is have a nother meeting possibly before
     the 19th, but a formal meeting of the inquests proper, so to
     speak, but without the jury, where legal
                                         ^     points can be
     discussed in a more conventional way

            Can we move on to your nex t point?


                                      14 -
       HR. KING:    Sir*, I would welcome that because as                              say
 m   many wa/3 I f>w only really giving notice..

        THE C O R O N E R :    Yes , I unders t a n d .

     - MR.- KING : ;r^EqualLy ,;^;when^ dealings with'matt errrs? which,^
|Sir, you have ruled :on,.f iro-af sense^'becauselyou: h a v e :;very
[H£°Perly .indicatedihowpyoufpriposedttofpcoceediandfltkriow^
fnot-agaln   w hethe^ ^
s.a»matter where:- thes d#»ttrs iLnon^ r
                     ^ d ecrs::
                                       i fso&maA   an / t a r t - w A . 'Z^'~j&&nukseiv»i£ji
                                            f m a d e ^ a n ^ t h a tSyoui^ a r e i ^ ^ i M i
'entitled to make it, sir.      Could I’ just be heard to comment
on the decision not to circulate in advance the names of
witnesses.       I understand the logistical problem of
statements.       I fully understand that.   The great advantage
ot those I^ represent of knowing in advance the names of
witnesses is thiS ; I would hope, sir, you would be willing
at the end of the day to:;h^rr~refEesentaitian .as to your
c a L l m g witnesses who haven't been called.   '

 • e T[IE CO RONE^ ' May I interrupt you,. Mr.. King?. X r hS-ve
 >n fact forestalled you on that because I have a l r e a d y \
 written - I think it must be a month ago.     I wrote to eve ry
 single firm of solicitors that I was aware of.      If I hav«
 missed any I apologise, but I have written to every single
 firm of solicitors that I was aware of specifically
 requesting them to name people who they wished me to           /
 consider as witnesses.   I made it clear that the f i n a l /
 decision would be mine, but I did invite them to draw^ify
 attention to anybody they wanted rne to think about*'"" You
,may be interested to know that I think I hfu*e-tSad five
             m rhrfe ° ^ . thein said thej^di-d'-'fiot have any names
f nd                                       a few names.      There may
be six,     but anyway, a very small number.

        If I can just come back to your point.      That
opportunity has already been given and the mere fact I don't
n f rC^ i a fe names does not st0P y°u f^orn telling me the names
ot people wno you want me to consider.

t o  f’1RI K]?N?-   S i r ’ 1 a PPreciate that,, and ever so gently,
I am not wishing to occupy your time, put the counter
 r^ument.      In the nature of this inquiry where there have
know fro.nS £hpUf?       -°f y itnes?es 7 when I say witnesses, we
know from the Inquiry investigation that a vast number of
t-hf t ™ 6?     ]iave.been taken from many, many people and before
the Taylor Inquiry began they were circulated and added to
if m o, W K 2 ^ u n \  I ^nOW a technique which has been adopted,
    may be the technique of convenience which will have to be
unadopted, of many of those instructing solicitors who
instruct myself, has been, "Let us wait and see whom the
Coroner intends to call to see whether we can see any
of^utinrdoi^’H      caiher up
ot sitting down and making thavtheir
                                 ? ingownu list,
                                            the °ther
                                                 as if                         they


                                    - 15 -
                                                          r,
  *■rjwnss^..

        wecf , t h e Coroner,. of the complete., whole-                Obviously it.,
?'Kj51"ould     ,.be     S dupIicat:lo,nj°c
        would' b e a duulication-fnf* a          a                   JSp ~

                ■   oir,,^al.L I c o u l d u r g e upon you. in t h e n a t u r e of an
                   t- ° ^ *this?- s or     wou ld%be^the>textreme?helpf i/rhes sr*fo & at• p & ^ m
          .rs t,-no    t^a^lis
          -Ko *- ..1 «-U        tr^wi  tfr*an>^statementsiatf!
                               -- 1... . .    *e> •              a L K i l p § S : i r.
                                                                                      ^.;F
                                                                                         ..!'
                                                                                            1leave
                                                          icrorrsxa ex^LtS asaxn:

        n ot sure I will be able to'oblige- you^'but I will certainly
        reconsider.            v .■                    - ...,■      3

             MR. KING:   I am obliged-       Sir, again, I repeat ever
       so gently because I know I am trespassing on your
       jurisdiction and authority to make whatever decisions you
       wish, as to the use to be made of Lord,Justice T a y l o r 's
        uP° ^ ’Lan  really in support, of the submission that it
       should be put before the jury, not in its entirety - and
       this again might be r e s erved f o r an argument b e fo r e you when
       the other matter is reserved - but of c e r t a i n •paragraphs
       wnich can be identified.      They are paragraphs whi?h go to
       tacts, not opinion, and they would curtail a lot of argument
       as to certain events because they are there laid out very
       clearly and succinctly.                                          y

             Sir, if I might d raw an analogy.   I know this is an
       inquisition.    It is n ot a civil trial, it is not a criminal
       trial, but in the civi 1 litigation which is now complete a
       very useful devise whi ch everybody agreed to was that it was
       agreed that the cote facts, subject to anybody's right to
       say, "I dispute a part icular fact," would be as set out in
       certain numbered parag raphs which were given and handed in.
       Everyone agreed it at the end of the day to approach it in
       that way and it proved to be a great boon as a setting, a
       base, upon which every one could operate from, because, of
       course, of the difficu lty of no t wishing to be a Public
       Inquiry.

            Sir, I can only urge again that perhaps some
       consideration be given to that-

      .._  THE CORONER:   O n e of the reasons why I am reluctant to
      use the Report is because i t does not necessarily follow
      that it_is accepted, or that every paragraph is accepted, by
      every single party before me.     It would be improper to ise
      it, or it L did we would then have to argue out all the
      disputed aspects of it insofar as they w e r e relevant.

              If it were possible for the parties to reach an
      agreement and say, "We accept the following paragraphs, XY
      f S , Z ’ then, of course, I would not have any objection to
       nth because it would be an agreed statement and I would be
      quite happy with that-     What I d o n ’t want to do is to


                                            -16 -
                                                   ' ..., , A-J'
                                                                    5*1:
           _    p r o d u c e sections ,> m a y b e r. o f :the-;Report,, which rightlv or  --
>. ^         „ .wrongly somebody** may^ take*: objection''1to                              £%&
       '           „,.MK.  KING;:..
                     MH . .KING'S        Yes.
                                  ■’’^'..Yes rvs.ir
                                              .s i r . ...         - V -

                     /THE; CORONER r ^ T h a ttr
                                               ■ ^wrty
                                                   „          waa n
                                                                  nttr4* to^caIP:
                                                                         F rtlW a T T thef e v ii’ud''-_eIj-'f
                                                                                                            nce^#^
              ^tgyoui- L i k ^ i n . , to to ^
                                               .93^.®ySftt-.9iltc^tan di!b e& fa ^ E|jppaj|fj)eo pi
              ?asvr fac'^asf* E;vam*^a.b le^JS


              another pre-trial review,                 if r can. ca l L it that          that that
              tned p a r t i e L Wn;LCh C ° Uld be a mattec of communication- between

                       THE CORONER:          Yes

                       MR- KING:        Sir,    if t could just clarify the t r a n s c r i D t
              withinC thpy0l£llW0ULd have no ob J ection, as I understand it,
              w i t n m the rules you have, laid down as to privilege   to a
              p u t t i n ^ t o him"8 !?36? ^        c^ oss -examiliation of a witness as
              LtateSlnt?                                  C a S 6 ’ 3 P revious inconsistent

                       THE CORONER:            Yes, within certain limits.

                       HR.    KING:            Yes,     of course.

                   THE CORONER:   The                 difficulty is that the Public
              Inquiry was done on, if                 you like, slightly different
             intend*2to         °m Th P°W e r s ’ ie y° u l i k e > and also the way I
             and JIp W p V      Un    5 6 ln^ uests and my main objective is to try
             want also           * ^      thin§S fairly> which 1 am sure you would

                . flK*TK JNG: O f course,, sir. Sir, you will be D i e a s e d
             Understand it® n° observations on the documents because as -I
             understand it we are going to feel our way through it     if I
             o b s e r v a t i o n ^ ^ way*     1 commend that and one can make
             obse rva tio ns, perhaps,          as it arises.

                   k   ^ C>           I just raise one piece of evidence which has
                c 6?s ? : ntr ed 30 f a C * L un c s tand there is a video
             which is m your possession,, sir, of the events        I don't-
             theW jSry!h3t eXtent you were intending                       to use that video to


             that                 k am ® ^ ad you bave reminded me about
                 . . i? fact you have     reminded me of two t h i n e s ' T t is
             my intention - I will give everybody else J c h a n c e ’as H i t
             At tne moment, it looks as if Mr    im n„             ,      7 well.
             here, but I will come back to everybody, but i f ^ d e a l with
             minds^ ^          ^      WUh SOm* ° £ t h * P O i n t s ’ w h l c h l r e ^ J o I I r


                                                   — 17 —
                                                                      1'                 -        ■■>'      ‘              L";:
                           - ■                     .■ ■       '                              ■ : '- -      ■              v. ' :
                            ; There is what is. known as.. a_ compilation v i d e o , which,
                     was used in- Lord Just: Taylor* ffHlnquiry".^^Jtf“isfabout: a two
                     h o u r tape.
                              tape. <3- -TTtt iis
                                    '*          S rn^ ^
                                                  rny'  t~*-1oan h-'*''-! n a n t- -?
                                                       present^Intention^to^          / use ;that^ to show
                     it to the jury, because it:.. is;a- usefuL. summary                        I t . . . B ...
- sf ^ :f ^ 5 ;^ ^ a ct ual l y - v iv id ly ^ d e m o n s tr a te s r ^ ife E ic a n a u s e a th a t^w o rd ::s i^fe?sr:^            ■!p:
                     fiec&!-'are-.- on er.o o itw o » fa th e r^fv fd e o '^'a I's o fa v -a rla b le ^ o f** 1988
                   ?e.yeats.,
                           <zr?MA n d A pH ^SbTSk c h » 'n E-ifc                                    j - — ^ n f f ^ a ^ l Q 8' i f '
                   ^etfentr-                                                                       sMM
                                                                                 !have;, two’’'*’'*
                  Mcavceatsi-abou-MtheifewfdAftg^ y pryr^                    ^notifi n tend.. tOKjpp®-
                    show sixty-seven hours, 'or h o w e v e r many- hours there a r e , but
                    there is ‘ an awful
                                     " ' '
                                         lot of video footage,        It is of no
                    benefit to my jury o r to my inquiry and          d o n ' t intend to do
                    it.

                         Secondly, I nave no facilities for providing copies of
                    this video.    Normally speaking,., of course,, if L take
                    evidence I prepare a transcript and if you want one you can
                    have one, as ^indeed some- of you. haver done..  You may say if
                    you show the video that is., exactly the- same, thing..    I t is
                    an exhibit and therefore T must produce copies.         I have
                    none, so I cannot — in fact I will not — produce copies for
                    distribution to people on request.       If that is not
                    acceptable then I would rather not use the video at all.          I
                    think that would be unfortunate because I think it would
                    help the jury and it would help everybody, indeed, if we saw
                    it.   However, I do not have the capacity to set up a video
                    duplicating organisation, so this would have to be
                    understood by everybody.

                         Does that raise terrible problems as far as you are
                    concerned?

                         MR. KING:   Sir, from my point of view I am content
                    witn how you have indicated.     You will be pleased to know
                    for  the moment that is all L have to say.

                             THE CORONER:                 Now if I work my way down the line.

                         MR. CATCIIPOLE:   Sir, I only rise really to echo Mr.
                    king on one point and that is in. relation to the T a y l o r
                    Report which certainly from Sheffield Wednesday's point of
                    view we feel could be beneficial,, both in saving time and
                    dealing with some matters that are not disputed.      If you
                    are intending, sir, to issue a general invitation for the
                    parties to attempt to agree certain paragraphs which may in
                    tne end form a useful basis to be put to the: jury, we would
                    be very willing to take part in that.

                         THE CORONER:    I have got no objection to that at all.
                    I had assumed that that was going to present the parties
                    with some considerable difficulties but if in fact I am
                    mistaken on that, then of course if w e can save time and if
                    we can have something which is agreed, then I have no
                    objection whatsoever.

                                                                -18 -
              o f ; .JL      RUSSELL:        - Sir, -you.: kindly outlined the categories

         ’"_.        assump .t
             ^ t o assume        t-h* ^ ^
                                  na t-  pro -
                                      t vou             s w ^ vJj&tho.
                                             will £ p^ttinrr
                                                                ^ t u u dsces
                                                                            .w
                                                                 ».?•? ^ e*<■I*w^ii*-u».tincees
                                                                                              s sseess r. are;
                                                                                               ~     »_»
                                                                                                          ar   we
          ■■'■' c a t a » o H » « ? ' |.£°U “ i U be?caIIln8:«i-tnesses: front those
                categories in the order that you ha,ve-outlined them7 .:•• T<*
‘’ !   V 'yF          *"> your; presen fctin ten tio

            .J    S   ™   2! ?°*0                             1                            d o ^ y b < ^n ea n* «i


             -^> '-■ MR. RCJSSELL:-          - f o r residentsr and ' t h e o ^ o p l S ^ e r S ^ ^ ^ '

                  IKE CORONER:    No, not necessarily.   That was purely a
             grouping.   What I would intend to do is to work from the
             outside in.    If, for example, I was dealing with the
             I “rf° U ?2 ln8f 1° f u eppings L a n e > we would call some residents,
             we. wouid calL other groups,., w e would. caLL any supporters who
                   something specific to s a y on that. * Then we would move
             our way tnrough the events, so to speak.               I do recognise
                  t m many cases it is n o t actually possible to
             ? ? ^ f 0 r j;s e * JYou canlt say, "We will only listen to this
             little bit and not to the rest."               If we call a supporter
             ue is going to want to tell us the story from A to Z, and
             quite rightly, because there is no way we could get him to
             come backwards and forwards across the Pennines just to suit
             tne convenience of a scheme which I have designed.

                  However, there are some witnesses who will only give
             very restricted evidence because they don't know anything
             else, but we wi 11 try and deal with those as we go.           The
             order in wnicn I gave them was not specific.           It was just
             the way I happe ned to write it down.          In fact it is quite
             likely that for logistical reasons we might well start with
             local people in the morning and have people who are coming
             from a distance later on in the day.           In other words, I
             will be guided not by their c a t e g o r y , but by the convenience
             and timings of where they live and so on.

                      Does that help you at all?

                 MR - RUSSELL:. Thanlc you for that, clarification,        The
            other matters are perhaps matters I could raise at any
            subsequent meeting if there is to be a further l a w y e r s '
            inh l ''1 a L V        matters of law are going to be canvassed.
             ra?L^          n    two matters my learned friend Mr. King has
              t       L i          ^    relating to the matters arising from
                      n6 has ter,ned the m ini inquests, additional matters
            that lie wishes to nave put.        What concerns me, my first
             >oiS 9 ? n ’h1S whether and to what extent those matters are
            It J L l c ^      circulated to the other legal representatives.
            It seems to me appropriate if he is going to supply you with
            specific questions for you to ask the witnesses, which is
            should U p «rftandK?® wishes to do, w h e t h e r those questions
                   be made public to other representatives so that we

                                                    - 19 -
         might have: an opportunity to comment o n 'whether those , -
         quest ions-- were- ory were^notf proper^ emanating1-from M r ^ ^ f C x n e ^ ’5
.•V:,
        WSf-tri:^:       "~ 'ntp111                  ],
                                                      '
                                                      i
                                                      j>iijj,,)/j'll'i '’f.t" ," 11I'IHI Ij
                                                                                          iI
                   V lE CORONhRj    No,"with great, respect, we are getting
          xiilu legal araumen tl^Hiif'i!T"e>o.i TiArA.',^.-i c a __

                        yj

 ^^etwi.en^everybody^who|;ha^a.^£nterestfin^therritatter3%&Efjil
  *'          , •tfls P°l n t you'havV'made, but I think it is:'a
     concern which maybe you do n't have to be too worried about.

        f    J ? * RUSSELL:       Thank you.              Insofar, as my learned.
        /n U             seek t0 dissuaded you from the course which
        LporrVdnn^rf            w i t u c f l a t i o n Co Lord Justice Taylor's
        no t-~ 1 * 1  " ^I kn0w w h e ther you    y ww... are goi
                                                               5 v.-j.ng
                                                                      11ji to
                                                                            uu xiivxte.
                                                                               invite eacn   of
                                                                                        each ol
        of the debate     ?< !;e n n e t h t0 that v ie“                 °n<= side o r other
          r tne debate,.   S il     on my part may I suggest that nuttins-
        selective parts of the Report before the j S 2 ^ i s pe^haoi f '
        -oin^fnT       than putting the whole, when one is perhaps
        t. O 1 FI 'P.    L O   l*\   \/ ^   T-\    H i    C m i   f a    r» t~>   f   , ,1.   « L   ... -   a_    i     -*     ,        ‘

        part*                                       d H SpUte 33 t0 which >P ^ ^ should be the
        P 5                            1          ?      bearing m mind that the Inquiry was
        L ^ T ^ e T L ? ' ? . ! ep° Ct W l “ «” ’ 3t «                                                                before all the

              THE CORONER:    Mr. Russell, wha t I was trying to
        i"(
          a JCa^ e waf     1!: tiiere was an agreed statement as to
        what we would put then I would be prepared to consider it.

        regard to Ithe
        re^ard'to    n ? use
                         ™ * of
                             ^                                    tne1 report.
                                                                       Stick ^                  wha " 1 have said with

                    HR.        RUSSELL:                      Thank you.                       Finally,           sir,        you have
        saidnJin w i n 1 0n hd K t h - c omP ilation video. Although you have
        said you will not be m a position to provi.ii conies, will
        you be m a position to afford facilities for legal
        representatives to view it before the inquests s t a r t 7       Thev
        H L t V T , 0 f.th«>'.?1.
                                1 ? « h « in a particular p L c J ' a n d a                                                                  ?
        video
        video to  W ^ lme
              to legal     WniCa a a - been Set aside foc l o w i n g the
                        representatives.

        51ief fi^pl         •- ^'*r,r P erhaps I could help. Obviously
        oheftield Wednesday tor their part hav e copies of the
        compilation video and I am instructed that we would be
        d o e s n Ji-ah    aS We aCe a b l e ’ to assist a n y other person who
                   C have a c °P-y ln Providing our own copies of our copy.

        R u s ^ n ETC° R0NER: That would be very helpful and Mr.
         ussell I ai.i sure you will accept that very generous offer.

                   HR.         RUSSELL:                     I thank my                 learned friend for that.

             il!E CORONER:                                 T h a t will assist me as well.                                         Th a n k vou
        very-muon indeed,                                Mr. .Catchpole.                                                                    you


                                                                        - 20 -
                                   ' v.' S. . ? 1.Y f-'*'      , „ '         -    -
 - A ; so H R ;-H A L E : ^ My f ^ d            fro. the Football Supporters' -
    JnH« Ja £-°n' v e r y ^ p r o p e r l ^ r a l s e d ^ t h e ^ q u e s t i o n :‘whether:
  f        r t a ^1" 8 s .m i Stlt be given which m i g h t save a lot of time
ss.
| f s e a r c h i n e ^ K ^ ^ m y -a r - a ^ 3 SaV^              l 0 ^ 0 ^ g c ^e ^ and$heart^ ^
--is:_  .          *"\ "      P. m n    1ent%I^would3i begveiry^              happy*’to ‘e Ive
    ^ ^       ^    nd ertakln& ^ ^ W M b ^ £ n b I b £ t e d i b « L e ^ a c t i o n ^ ^ ^
I f Dot Srth ?            P 1e7 ma y f t a k ^ ^ I p o h c i e r f i       m ^ u l c t l b e?vf
^vourr' of fire'nsrhl" •J^pui^^ettfh^tpgetheE3|hiere^todajrj*-ori''l)y^*‘                       ”» ^ 5 ^ ^
     lis f        , ^ perhaps sfndmg- to each person who Is Sn yo u r —                            ™
     list as a representative, a complete list of all the
   a n d Csee"whether we t h a t .w e fm a y § et in touch w it h each other
          ,   whether we_ can m       fact agree on any specific matters
   avoid’areas°of c o S u f n ! "              y°Ur Jurlsdictl°"> « S h t help to

  verv haDDy3 ^      be done 1 know that.my client would be
  to any of ihk relatives!" “ant t0 cause an>' A e t h e r distress

          THE CORONER:           Can you see any objection to my
  and,CCUi5tln8
        addresses3 and
                   list referencp<??
                         t0 311 ° E                 T °f yoGr respective
                                                              respective names
                                                                         names
  would object to that, so we can d                        o     “UPP-
                                                                     P** any ° E y°U

  U n d e r t a k i n L W h T % K ? U i,S a y * * ,
                                                  t hink the <lu e s tion of the...
  noh e takings, I think, are risky m                    these inquests.       It is
  o b v i o u s l T l wi ? ? y        undr takings anybody should give,                    but

  ; s p iv ts ; i s ^ o ^ L ^ - h i ^ r ^                                                 out
 of tSeseeunJortunaJ
                   tebpeopU.'nake *" lnqUiry int° the deaths’

 The f i r s t ^ p t ^ L , S i l i m % V J ask y °u to c l a r i fy two points?
 u      n        I I       ° the Tay lor Report, because as I
 understood what you said at the outset, the Taylor ReDort
 was not to be used at all, save insofar as my l e a r n e d
 certain f a c t 7 Sel|h a ? d ° ther colleaS ues m i Sht actually agree
 can hp H o ™       a T h a * m a y or m a v not prove something that
 t o n hfi?!        A s ?V'ning that that c a n n o t b e done, h o w far do
 all?          y °U W1       allow' the u s e of the T a y l o r Report at


         As I say, as I understood it at the outset,                          it w a <? n n t
M r lnfin°       US^ ’ bUt then 1 noticed when my learned friend
c J ^ t a i n l y ^ o t ^ r ^ ^ 8 Y °U b r i e f l y ’ the im pression I

wl^certai'nl^not ^                   ^     « ” s5 « « 5 i M t i ^ ° p u ^ p o s e 8 , which
would be s o m e tS L g Sw h ? c ^ - gaL U ?d l e ^ e 0 thiSt t ^ a n o t h S r U m e
  I would make submissions against.

it          ?'S ^ h e 1 first P ° i n t r s i r . T h e second is this and
     is a relatively min or m a t t e r and relates to the video
evidence.      Yes, the video will undoubtedly be shown if the
circumstances are r i g h t , ;and that is as I understand your ,
present p o s ition.5* ^ Wbuld^you:-clarify this r ^ a s T ; understand
it you would not intend that the video be shown during the



      ^THE: CORONERl § W 1 t ^ r e g ^ ^ ^ t ^ t h e ^ ec o n cB p o i n tfpf
*pri ncipler the rfanswe^tt^that^ls^yes'^^^Wegwould^look^at^the^
video and that w o u l d vb e % t ? ^ ~ H o w e v e r ^ F haverto be^a: little
bit careful with regard to this response because I can
conceive of a situation where a point,,is. raised and where it
would be ijnfjjxi-tel^L.^quicker and easier to resolve it "by'
 looking at the video.         I would not give an undertaking that
we would not look at the video at other times.                         I would
 seek to avoid it.      The purpose of the video is to give the
 jury an overview, if that is the correct word, of what
happened and* in order for them to be able to understand
b et ter what the witnesses are saying.                  It is an aid rather
 than anything else, but it is n ot inconceivable that one
might want to look at the odd snatch of video.                         Indeed I
 can tell you now, in one or two statements which I have read
 the video is referred to, or part of the video is referred
 to, and it may well be necessary to look at it because you
 would not be able to understand the statement otherwise.

       MR.   ISAACS:     We are very grateful for that.

      THE CORONER:    However, the last thing I want is to
spend hours and hours re-running videos and assessing
ijiinutiae on it.  We want to hear the people viva voce as is
conventional.

     Now the other point which you raised regarding Lord
Justice Taylor's Report and in particular the transcript, I
must confess I do find this quite a difficult problem.    What
I was trying to say is this:   it would be foolish of me to
assume that you don't have the transcripts and that none of
you are going to look at them because I am sure you are all
going to do that, particularly as you no doubt have guessed
some of the witnesses are inevitable.    We have got to call
them because they are key players, shall we say, in this
matter.     In that sense it is unavoidable, as I see it,
that people will use the transcripts to prepare their cr oss-
examination.

     What I am not very keen on doing is (a) I certainly
will not allow the transcript to be used to put things to
people so that one puts them in the position where they say
they will not answer the question.   If I have put it to
them that it is an incriminating question and they have
exercised their privilege not to answer, then I will not
allow whoever it is to pursue them on that point by quoting


                                -   22   -
   be oppressive!^6 tranSCript:beCaUSe..LWOLlld consider-that- to
                                                      '’   M*aj

 V ^   r Howef ? ^ l ' t ; m a y ^ w e i r ® t h a K # K | S ^
 ;^           w       f r e not^ really^controversiaI':or e v e & X f f h X ^ f??^ ?^
i|£and^                                ;haves been., d e a l t .with;.sensibly— - -i- , S-




 * 5
  how to do it c o r r e c t l ^ ke " J ^ t S a t ^ Pr° b? bly haVe t o > as
  the right that I too may have to m o d i f y ^ h a t ^ d o ? reServe

         Have I helped you in any way?

  understand^!?;                Certainly. V?u have,. sir..             One can
   naerbtand,      it I can p u t i t this          way,     the use of       thp


  it, that was the sort of exam p l e               you were e i v i n ^     inof a
  m o m e n t or two ago.                                    giving          just a


  thls-Wh?hat if1-15 learned fclend Mr. King was saying was
  coiv’of Vhi > . witness X says Vi and Z and Mr. King has a
  Mr Kin h !:anfctrlPt where he actually said AB and C that
  Hr. King should be permitted to-/ usay1 to• uthat witness
  moment, you are savino yv
                                                                   "Wait ^
                                                     l t n e s s ) wait a
  said AB and C         util $        ,u        .b " 1 ei8 hteen months ago you ,
  something we ^re all u L d               t o ^ S ' i ^ ^ f c i Jftrwes.




 C and the XY and z «e.                    entlcely         uPon “hat the AB and
                  1?aVe this P o l n t ?         We are moving on to the

                                        ” “ll?bhaveSto°havi a^ es s^ n^ .
 deal u i f h ,h        g a l subl»issions and we- can then trv and
 as far « t       Te
                   ?fcters and 1 “i U try and give you rulings
 y
 ao,ufaH
       rr:,I.I.::.?bl- at the tl“ *       15 tha/acce^table


 i d e a . ^ f P m a y Ssay £     e " talnl1' ls’ SlE' and a « < * 8°od



 ;it„d%Y"5H
     nesses.    ^a i n l y
             Cert                  o n e can u n d e r s t a n d why   it w o u l d   asked
                                                                                      be

                                    -23 -
                         oppressive for a witness from over the Pennines or,' indeed, '-'v
                         front down south to be-comings up on a numb er of r e g u l a r ‘                                    ^    :
                         oc c a s i o n s , b u t r, sir,;* thatr|same:? pointymus t also apply because
                         the giving of, evidence^iajlany-^ay ,J e v e r u b y ’a. s e m i r ^ ^ ; ^
                         professional w i t n e s s ,. is. going to be- traumatic,: that same" v                              t
                         point must apply,, in my; submission,♦It a * a l L witnesses-                              It.
          f ^ P S S K would b e ;w r o n g ^ i m ^ y ^ s u b m i s f s f b r » f o r ^ f o i ^ e x a m p l e ^ r a ^ ® ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
                         particular police^of ficer|tofLbeg;aske d ^to come back' and ' d e a r ^ ® ^ ^ '
           .t        .?
                        tw£.th3i h a l fil an%ho urlfb S wtia t^Eoot
^SC3r>%                  three;days-slater; to^cbraee; ’              3    ^eaI|0<rLth? another^half-:
                                                                                         V*          *•. — v'
                                                                                                           -^» *
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                     an 7/
                                                                                                               . '"•'Wi   '
                                                                                                                          ^*t
                                                                                                                            Sv   -   i
                        U ^ v . - —   >4 -- «   ~   ___^ ^ ^ s S S f c * f - r i : ' ' V ' •-••
                         hour' and •so •onv*              fm^f^ubmx sslo ® tha t^wo uldib e*fev er
                         oppressive indeed-

                              THE CORONER:   I take your point*      I think that is a
                        very fair point and I agree..     I am not saying that, no
                        witness will ever be recalled, because if you remember those
                        of you who were here at the interim inquests, we did recall
                        witnesses even in that instance because things occasionally
                        come up which we had forgotten or a point is made which on
                        reflection w4. ought to have- explored.     It may be that I
                        will have to recall witnesses from time to time, but I
                        accept your point.    I think it is a very valid one and in
                        principle I agree with you.     I entirely accept that these
                        inquests are going to be pretty hard on everybody, not least
                        the w i tne sse s.

                              MR. ISAACS:  The only point that perhaps I ought to
                        make, one can understand why witnesses should be recalled to
                        elucidate some point that had not been raised at the time
                        when he or she gave evidence, but that is quite different
                        from asking a witness to stop at some stage and then come
                        back.

                            THE CORONER:   No, that wasn't my intention.      What T
                       was trying to say was that if, for example, we have a local
                       resident who can only give evidence as to what happened
                       outside the ground, didn't go in, then obviously we will
                       stop at that point with him because there is nothing more he
                       can say.   However, if we have a supporter who was there and
                       then he went into the gates and so on, we w i l L listen to all
                       of it and ditto with officers as far as they are concerned.

                            MISS NORCLIFFEr    Sir,, just the- o n e point. We did
                       previously send to you. o r draw to your attention a n u m b e r of
                       items of documentation which the Chief Constable w o u l d like
                       to be before the jury and we have previously asked for
                       permission that that be the case.      That wasn't done, sir,
                       on the basis that the jury would be expected to take them
                       away and read them from cover to cover, but that they should
                       be used to dip into as and when required.

                            THE CORONER:    Yes, that is right.    In fact you sent
                       me I think volume 3.     I cannot remember your volumes 1 and
                       2 at the moment so it is difficult for m e to a n sw er this,

                                                                                                  — 24 -
                ^     it seems to me if we could agree, if you like, a bundle
        ^         •w£ f pefs » or three bundles,: which, are the ones we are
     ... . .. \ t-iof ^     uW ?n r tC> d l P i n » and that is a- good word, because
                    t is what I ;w a n d o n , ' t;want the. jury ;to -have-, to-;. .
                peruse^ thousands. of pages r^or^hundredsfeeven,.- of. documents ,
              ■ out it we have a c o n v e n i e n t w a y of having before us
^ ^ - : ^ » ^ ^!JrnentS;"whlch" aEa agreed? tn.,4the;?:sense? they a r e relevant
                     SJSSJf                                             ten titt't h e n#£ t




             thi* «JSS N0RCJ;IFFE:  Sir, d°es that mean that actually at
             this stage we have got permission to put before the jury...

             towarH 9 Et- h ^ ° N ER|    N ° ’ n0t ^u i t e » but y° u are pushing me
             fnrfhf    k               Want to think about this a little bit
                     a becauf e m y original intention was to go the other
                   h              6 yOU P roduce each document, or each page, as
             me is tS ^         " anted to u s f U ' W h a t           « » ■ ceaLly asking
             It mL , L        rW y °“    ? • P r o d u c e ifc in advance and then to dip.
             bP a L h ? * r       am, inclined to think at the m om ent that might
             further                         W3nt t0 think about it a little bit

                   Has anybody got any thoughts on that?

                  MR. ISAACS:   It would be nice to know, s i r . w h a t
             documents my friend is referring to and then perhaps...

                  THE CORONER:   I understood we had all had copies
             because that is what you said in your letter.

            i/ i MISS NOKCLIFFE:       Sir, if I can explain what they were.
            Volumes 1 and 2, and there were three volumes referred to
            you    were in fact the South Yorkshire Police Inquiry volumes
            L r k l ? ’ S^   tted before the Public Inquiry.     The^South
            material^      °    subml1
                                     tte d .something called "Background
            material , and then volumes 1 and 2 which were iust
            V o l Z p nW h    ™ ey K 6re standing Orders, briefing notes etc.
            core bundlp3 if3 ?              referred to by the C o r o n e r is a mini
            fhLf ?         ’k      C a " C a l L lfc t h a t » documents wh ich the
            Chief C o n s o l e considers are relevant which a l l parties
            have had access_to,. either from the PubLic Inquiry o r from
            the r ecent civil contribution proceedings.                           ’

            nnhhi3oE C0R?N E J*  s o What you are saying is there is
            about th^m/ 10documents.             The lawyers ought to know


            ail                   • Sir, wha t wo u l d b e helpful — we may know
            all a b o u t them    if we knew what she was talking about.        Sir,
            arin t-V^ r y *.86u   n suggestion again which was certainly
            adopted at the        Public Inquiry, we started off with everybody

                                           -25-




                       /
                      having their own separate bundles and then half way through
                   .
                   ’. core bundles were produced-

                          -THE.' CORONER: W e don.* t; w an t to do that ► '                       Eithe^we^SsS'
                      start with single sheets o r agreed...

                                        KINff:^ v T h a t'w a s my-* o p e n in g , + sir*,T. to - com'e-’- W ’
■&-Aa&S.• > Zitffam L s u g g e s tio n to you.- t h a t ' i f t b y^tth e# tim ejrwe'mee t1 * a g a ira ? ittm a y '4 |j^ ^ ^ “
 “ ............... ^ P no t^ b e fa g re e a b le f a s f p e r f e c t ^ b u t f if ^ a g c o r egb u n d ! e p f on 4fo
                   ^ ^ & t wo:ibund les:^ perhap s ,i .fwer e; b r ough t to g e th e rrfwe* *co u Id": e actfp*Jp!!||§
                   ^^^^com m ertt^oaf-it', “’ara.ke;? sugges tio n s ia b o u ts w h a tffm ig h ts b e s !^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
                         in tro d u c e d o r arguments as to what m ig h t be taken o u t, and
                         we c o u ld j u s t have those in c o re b u n d le s .
                                THE CORONER:          Yes,       Miss Norcliffe?

                           MISS NORCLIFFE:   If I could just the point that there
                      has been no attempt at not letting the parties know what
                      these were.   It was decided that in the first instance
                      those documents would be put to you for you to look a t and
                      if you thereafter at this meeting said no documents
                      whatsoever, then circulating bundles to every other party
                      would not have been appropriate beforehand.   That was the
                      reason why this particular thing has been done.

                           THE CORONER:   Can we leave this question of documents
                      for the time being?   I have got to take a definitive
                      decision and to a certain extent I have deferred one or two
                      of those decisions until after this meeting because I wanted
                      to hear what you thought as well as you to hear what I
                      thought.

                           The only thing I would say with regard to documents is
                      that we are going to need, obviously any documents which are
                      put, there has to be enough for the main representatives.
                      There have got to be at least four copies for the jury and I
                      think it is only fair I should have a copy as well.   Don't
                      proliferate documents because I think we worked it out we
                      will need twenty copies if we were going to cover adequately
                      the needs of these inquests.

                                Yes, anything else?                                                              )
                           MR. JACKSON:  Just to come back on the undertakings
                      point.   Perhaps my use of the word "undertakings" was
                      unfortunate.   What I had in mind was precisely what I hope
                      we can do, and agree certain statements within the Taylor
                      Report from my clients' point of view insofar as they relate
                      to the criticisms of Liverpool supporters.   We are
                      certainly happy to liaise with whoever on that point.

                                My second and third points come from the standpoint
                      of   ..
                                                             -   26   -
  is thI?E if°?°NER: •      May 1 j V S t  say the difficulty about that
  J r ! A i f f i I 1fm .8o l ng ito call one hundred witnesses, it is
     5 difficult for solicitors, indeed anybody, to give
  undertakings.as to what they will say, and this I s a
  problem.        I would not be very happy about shutting
  witnesses up m         the middle of a sentence if what.they are
  saying is relevant to my inquiry.             I think that is a
  problem when I was looking at you about giving undertakings.
 suDD orf pr^ Cy m ?J°? p r o b ^em l o r y ° u as the solicitors for the
 supporters.       It is easier for the other parties, but it is
 auitey qnrp°f d l f f l c u l t y which you have got and I am not
 quite sure how we can resolve it at the moment.

      nR * f ACKS0N:   We w i H obviously have to wait and see
 comment     6 ^   prepared to a§ ree before we make any further


      Secondly, sir, from the viewpoint             of a client who may
 Hohh     L a t , these inquests from afar          and coming in.    Am I
 right in thinking there will be a list             available perhaps
 three days in advance of witnesses who             will be called?

      THE CORONER:   That is what I am hoping for and of
 course if I am persuaded by the arguments of your colleagues
 you may get an even fuller list sooner, but certainly I
 would want to try and give a three day provisionally warned
 list, so to speak, so that you would have some idea of who
 was coming.   Not their statements, but their names and, if
 you like, category - supporter, friend or whatever it might


    roH R : W A SrK S 0 N * .,My final point is a question:       whether
 tnere will be a daily transcript available.

     THE CORONER:          I am coming to the transcripts         in a
moment.


         ? S      r V e ° n ’ We are taking a bit longer than I had
anticipated.      I am sorry about that but I think we might as
m u -        °n 3      deal with major items today.     Mrs.
Hciirian, yes.      You must shout because otherwise I can't
hear you.

        MRS. MCBRIAN:        I am   concerned very much about the
        * t h e .^u t -°ff Point,   where you say you are going to
thin*
thing ? h T wday
      that    enC* afteC
                 is__    3 *1 5 *           1 think the most   important


x/n..T H ? ^0R0NER:    N o > Mrs. M c B r i a n , I have got to stop
         1 know it sounds unfair because I haven't stopped the
              y?U f re m o v i n 8 into what I call the question of
evidence.      In fact what you are saying is you want me to
reconsider the cut-off point?


                               - 27 -
      HRS. MCBRIAN:     I would like you to do that.

     THE CORONER:          Yes, OK.   When we next meet for legal
submissions then you can argument at that point on the point
m    m 'd .tor3 lve m e > 1 realise this is difficult for you,
Mrs. M c B r i a n , because you are not a lawyer.    On the other
nand, if you represent yourself you have to be treated as if
you were one and so I have to apply exactly the same, if you
like, rules to you, even though it is harder for you.           At
the next meeting when we are arguing points of law, then by
all means if there is a legal point on which one can argue
that I am wrong about the cut-off point, then let it be
argued.       If     having listened to the argument, I am
persuaded, then of course I will hopefully say so.           If I am
not persuaded I will also say so and we will have to accept
it because that is how it is. Have          I made that clear?

     MRS.   MCBRIAN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:      Was    there something else,   Mrs.   McBrian?

     MRS. MCBRIAN:      No.

     TH1 CORONER:   I am not trying to be unfair to you
because 1 know it is very, very difficult in the context of
this meeting and anyway legal points, but I have got to try
and be fair to the others as well.

     What I was going to say was are there any other points
on the procedural aspects which you need to raise?    I am
not talking about legal points.    I want to stick to
procedure as far as I am able.   Right, I hope I have
succeeded.

      Transcripts, somebody raised it.   It is my intention
    nave next day transcripts, so each day's proceedings
should be available first thing next morning.    There are
two things about it.    I would like to know, and I don't
need to know this minute, but I would like you to write to
me as soon as you possibly can and let me know whether you
anticipate wanting transcripts because we have to plan how
we are going to produce them and we need to know in round
terms how many we want.    Secondly, it is going to be a
jolly expensive exercise for you because transcripts, as you
 now, you get a bill from the city, and it is expensive, but
that is how it is so you have got to think hard.    I am not
asking you to waste your money.

 _   If you know you are going to want a daily transcript
then obviously tell me.   If there are some of you who say
you don t want a daily transcript but there may be the odd
occasion where you may want a day's transcript, then
indicate that to me as well and we will do our best to
oblige.   However, what we will not be able to do is to have

                             - 28 -
 able to rnn h            y where on very short notice we will be
 I can on thf<? U? ? transcriPt-           I want to be as helpful as
 intenHino 5 i              u    y0U to understand that we are
 intending to have them available because I want them for a
      f      - i 7 .will cost you money unfortunately, or
 t h a ^ c l e a r ? ’ ^ depends which wa Y y°u look at it.     Is


 a t r a n s c r ^ r i h 01 -S i r ’ norma lly if the court is producing
 that is s n h f h 0 f6 13 au cost for the Production and then
 individual copy?                                  ° E pers0ns "ho "ant a"


 it
 it.      W
          wee Ewi??°N ER;
               will write    ^to h ayou.
                                     t W6 d °***W e l l »   1 wiU     think about


 copy H it mavNh»C ;h                “     y°U ar® 8° in8 t0 - ^ u e s t the
          ”     u       a f w e were e v o l v e d in would be the
 palatable!^8, ° arg6 w h ich, of course, would be much more


       THE CORONER:          But even that is expensive              as some of
 proceedinph °hhaV6 ^  transcriP ts from the interim
 proceedings because it is laid down in the Coroner's C o d v                        of

when"*youSget^h ome ^°" S 1 9 8 8 ’               "° d °Ubt y°U " i U       look ^

inquests6w i n                         ° n6 ° f the letters how long these
mine    hnf        take.   ‘ W e l l » your guess probably is as good as
intend to     * ^       planninSu t0 start on the 19th November.          We
not think Z       •?? u             c -h6 18th or 19th of December.     I do
we are eoino        f         t flnished by then.         If it is obvious
anofhpr Ha      to finish with a day or we will carry on for
thUi        KM ° r         ’ ut 1 think ifc is unlikely.       We will
£S til P™     • u Q S U m e °n th6 7th 0f J a n uary and carry on
becaJse iflniSh ‘           •      th6r6 are P roblems, of course,
  cause if we have illness, particularly amongst the iurv
b u t T c a n ' f t0o f a H O U r n -     lt d62 ends    the ^   ofdlllss
fall i n          u      5 ° ^ r s e » § lve undertakings that no-one will
unJreJicfahlL P         ^ ly 3?1’ T          thls is a <I“« t i o n which is
vSS          ;   Secondly, of course, I can't say how long
examination nr               are ? oi ng to be with your cross-
the dark tn * n ^ d e e d , your legal submissions so I am in
the dark to a certain extent     as far as that is concerned.

u H t n * L afI1 8 ° in£ t0 t r y ’ as far as 1 ara able, to group
comine at                  p*0ple ^ ° u are saying similar things are
littl! bit.                    m6      Ch 1 think w i U speed things up a

     1 cannot tell you how many witnesses we are goine to
have either, but I would be surprised if it was llss than
think*2      It “ 1 3 rd t “ S t T a ? l0C S I ^ o i r y ^ w h i S h 1: "   17™
think.       It would not surprise me if it isn't more.                     That

                                  - 29 -
 doesn t mean to say they will all be lengthy,               but I expect
 there will be quite a few witnesses.

      Any comments on length? I don't suppose there is much
 one can say, is there?   I a m v e r y conscious, of course,
 that it is difficult for all the families, but it is also
 going to be very hard for the jury, but I don't know what I
 can do about^it.   I have thought quite hard about h ow to do
 it and I can t see any way round it, other than the way I ara
 tackling it.

      Perhaps I should just mention another thing about
 timing.  On the 28th of November we cannot use the Council
 Chamber because there is a Council meeting and I have had to
 agree not to be there.   Similarly, it may be that on the
 ►u  n ! ^ 6 m re ^ We Wl11 not be able t0 use the Town Hall and
 the 9th of January is another Council day when we will
 definitely not be able to use the Council Chamber.         Our
 intention is to start on the 7th but obviously as we get
 nearer the time we will think about it a bit harder.

     I am considering, although I have not take a decision
on this yet, that on the 28th if might be worthwhile
provided we can arrange it, to take the jury out for another
site visit for a little bit longer and let them see the
surroundings and everything else.   Perhaps Mr. Catchpole
you could check with your clients whether they would be
willing to allow us to come?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:                                   would be'“wtttijg   to
allow it at yotir'convenience,            sir.

      THE CORONER:        That would mean we weren't totally
wasting the time and it might be of benefit to the jury to
see the ground again and to refresh their memory.         I know
things have changed a bit because some of the barriers have--"'
dris*aprpeas46danyd-.so o n , but that is just how it is. ....

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Certainly my instructions are that the
ground is available at any time you require it.

     THE CORONER: That's very kind of you.    Thank you
very much indeed.  We will let you know about that a little
bit nearer the time.

      I have dealt with           the dat es when u p r a n ' t s i t  Tf
    u ,.* v i s i t ,  ana i am   h o p i n g w e will be able to sit on the
bth o f D e c e m b e r , it is   only really the 9th of January when
we definitely will not            be able to sit, and, of course, there
will be another day in            February if we go on that long, but I


     I Do intend to call a few experts right at the end.                    I
have not yet formalised my thinking on this so I can't
really tell you more than the fact I will be calling a few
experts to deal with special things, but you must remember
that even the experts, their evidence is going to be
restricted to what is relevant to an inquest.    I am sure
you all appreciate that aspects, say, of civil aspects - I
know the civil matter has been done and in that sense I am
lucky.   Very often what people want from an inquest is the
ammunition for the civil trial, but that does not seem as if
that is going to be necessary.   However, we still have to
take into account that we don't deal with civil aspects as
such.

     listing I think I have already dealt with to a certain
extent. _ It is going to be difficult.  We will do our best
to minimise inconvenience and to make things as sensible as
we can, but I am afraid that witnesses are going to have to
be prepared to be shifted around at relatively short notice
 ecause.it if so hard to predict how long any particular
person is going to be giving evidence for, but we will learn
trom experience as we go along.

     As I have already said the inquests are public so the
press will be there.  We know that from last time.    They are
not nere today because I didn't consider this an appropriate
meeting for them to be here at.   They are not, hopefully,
going to report it and you should not discuss it either
because what I am very concerned about is that when the jury
comes together again it is they who     reach theverdict. It
is not I.   It is certainly not  you    and it     isnot even you
up there, it is the jury that has to make its mind up on the
tacts and I want as far as possible to ensure that that
happens.

     That is about it, as far as I am concerned.   Shall we •
start again with you, Mr. King, and work our way round, iust
in case there is something?

     MR. KING:  I have no further comments now, sir.      I am
happy to know we are going to have a further meeting    for the
legal points.

      THE CORONER:   Oh,   yes, I had written it down and I had
^gotten     it, the order in which you gentlemen and ladies
w“   , e asking questions of witnesses.     As you know I start
off in an inquisition and ask whatever I want.      Strictly
speaking, it isn't a person's witness, but if somebody
represents a particular witness, he asks questions last,
everybody else asks in whatever order I decide, but I would
prefer, I think it was done in Lord Justice Taylor's set-up,
that you agreed amongst yourselves in what order you wanted
to bat.    I am quite happy to be reasonable about that.
Not only am I quite happy to be reasonable about it, you
will probably have already noticed I tend to go round and
then I start again at the beginning because although one has
    to draw the line somewhere I want everybody to feel that
    they haven t been prejudiced because they have gone first
    and something has occurred.   Don't feel that if s o m e t M n a

    r e a s o n a b l e ^ o ’b r a s k e d ! 6330" 1 ^   amenable t0 allow anything

           MR. KING:           I have nothing else.

           THE CORONER:            Anything else?          No.

           ^ we         t0 tbe P°int on another meeting, it
 sounds to me as if there are going to be various legal
               which have to be made.      We could do those on
 the 19th, but then we lose a jury day, so to speak.         If it
 is agreeable to you there is no reason why I should not
            ? ° T ence the inquests - if we met on Friday, the
 Th*t’      I      ? W6 W i U fI,6et in the Council Chamber,
 ihat will be a formal session so if you like the inquests
      commence on the 16th, but without the jury being
d e a l 6w i > h S ^hPly andTsolely for legal submissions.        We can
aboui- Jheni n ° S 6 '             °an give you any rulings or I can think
start               ° Y e r .t h e weekend.   On Monday morning when we
  tart with the jury we can get straight into that.                 Is that
convenient?               Mr. Isaacs?                                      *

sir  hnt n!A hCS: t 1 h e ,
                          s itate t0 say it is                    inconvenient,
sir, but perhaps I speak on behalf of some                        of my learned
friends who, like myself, have commitments                        and whose
commitments have been arranged so that the                        inquests will
llli        £ 6 2 ^ * • F° r my part 1 would much prefer to be
making such submissions as have to be made and to be
the f?r<! t     the submissions that are going to be made, on
the first morning.      I appreciate what you say, sir, about
Irt I T         °l V
               Ury day» but in the context of inquests that
not fn,- 8 ►   f  Su V6n t0 eight weeks, perhaps one day is
not going to make that much difference.

t h a t ? fHE C0R0NER:            What does everybody else think about


f r i o n ^ K RUSSE[;L:   1 would like to endorse what my learned
   l nd has just said.        It is very reasonable, especially
      m8 ot, “S       have clerks with diaries and have sought to
accommodate the start date on the 19th.

m      ► THE CORONER:            In other words,         what you are saying is
that you have booked the 19th, but if „e bring it ?orwfrd it
saying?8                 * ^     awkward for Y°u.           That is what you are


.h . ,HRt RUSSELL: Sir, yes, but subject,                        of course, with
checking with our respective offices.                                      ’



                                       - 32 -
   on t J H 19thR inE ?h           A 1 1 .rig h t .  In that case we will start
   re-arranoo         ^          m o r n i n 8 with legal submissions.  We will
   the 19th       B e f ^ y ?° thatu they c°">e on the 20th instead of
   for vo^.‘ How 1 ™ ,            I
                              Say thaJ t ’ thls ls a difficult question
   going to take’       a i ! y?u Jud8e t!?e legal submissions are
   ®e a|j “ d iction!         "       <5uestlon but =a" you just give


   in the^raorning.          1 "0Uld h3Ve thou8h t >                        we could do then,

          MR.    ISAA CS i       I agree.


  to c o l T . .C. ° R T l l l l ? h i n k eabout     th l \ grobably . * * * the
  what else we need to Hn                   about     that because it depends on
  legal submissions.                          6 WlU      meet     then °n the 19th f°*


  possible for.C theL list- S jr ’.there is o n ly point. Would it be
  on the first nr «        j °5 Wltnesses whom you intend to call

  be sent through          ITX        ^ioCsloUc^rs?                     °" ^                    C°
         THE CORONER:            Yes.




                                                 IfSi d J i S i do it,
             ,               not, we will discuss it on the 19th anri
 you have said?n° ther § ° at m 6 *                    1 have taken                         what


 could'hel^e?           C°0ne o ? y the'factofs'tha? iSfl a "d ”a y b e .>'ou
alreadvC toldl°S °^rsuch aKllst ls this:                            from w h a r ^ h a i e
? W s lderi"f <,“ 1"ela               'ofep e opl eUa s ' p o t e n t i a ^ w i t n e s s e s
                                                                 t'nem?Se S o V i ^ J ^

^ n ^ s s ^ r m H L r ^ r




                                                                            ~     a -   “
I like because I c «             makl I j C S g l e n ^ 1^              “       1 Ca" d ° "hat


s o m e b o d y 1s Z e ' d o ™   “ he’
                                     ‘reason*} ^ e ' d o n ^ h i t                L ^ a S s e

                                      - 33 -
 Joiii S o J M ? . ; : yiS8 somethi"« “hich ™*y be of interest so I
 neithe? £on?n ?             .JUSt for the heck oE it-   However,
 repea tine thi no flWa" u    “ aSte the“  time or ouc “ <”<= i"
 any circulated lich !!aVS y0^ a n y views on the revision of
 names upwards?           downward?    Of course, I might also add


 if T ms,*, KING:     sir> that would be eminently sensible and
 can all a n n L Sft °ne-°5 thf            of a list is tSat we
 w. look down the'list    as'to
              Lue, •‘■isc as to, " "well,
                                     S e f l ^that
                                              h ^ group
                                                   15 P ™ofr witnes<?P<!
                                                             —   l»g a *
 entirely sensible?00'"2              evidence-"      That would be

      THE CORONER:   Does anybody disagree with Mr. Kine's
 comment?   No. Hell, that does make it a little bit elsier
 for me because I was a little bit concerned, maybe from
 I Sould"noJ want     Ih ll^     ^    13 Pu b U s h e d be« m e s   law and

      MR. CATCHPOLE:      Sir,   could I just add that one of the
liltn is8 t h a t f j We C e F tainly see of h a v ing a comprehensive
seeS a lo? if ^ r6 a large number of us who have actually
have had l h a l J      ^ tnes^ es that y°“ may wish to call.       We
nave had that benefit and it may be that we could sav              as a
somtbodJ°elsb V 1 0 U S l y \ 0 n ^ , t0 y°urself that there m a y ’be
somebody else you might like to consider calling, or that as
things progress we could prune it down.


P0intsH0fCMr°NK
points          ?:
       of Mr. King. Th?
                      I twanted
                          13 r!;g h
                                  tot - tackle
                                           That it
                                                 is the
                                                     0ne other
                                                          oE the
                                                               wav
created    p r o b l e m ^ 11 m6 W h ° y? U wanted but 1 can see it does
  e   a         S        because you have got to double-guess me, so
Jill            ?      Can s e e .tha1t*    It is a valid point and I
made.                Very seriously consider the point you have


not a l l S bpMr ? r«a n t iS u .a l l .c l e a r to you? Well, it may
not all be clear to you but is there anything you want to
say on tnese procedural aspects?

19th fnr* ,MCB® IAN:.    Does it mean that we all wait until the
is   to be h e a r d 0     decision as t0 what time the evidence
   to be heard, and        the quarter past three?

     THE   CORONER:    No,   I can tell you this.          We will
o ^ h e I9thaiH y Star W -th evidence on the 20th.   However,
in I h t ^  •       starting so you should be there because
a f ternoon ^
dicernoon     will^Pfl}       w i t b l e S al submissions.
            1 will deal with anything I want to sav to the
                                                            In the

iurv and a£ ythln§        is agreed which we can put to the
the 20th     That w l U P robably start with real evidence on
      th*    That m a y be videos, you see.   We may use the


                             - 34 -
afternoon for the videos but I have got to look at that and
do some sums and decide how best to use the time.

     MRS. MCBRIAN:   So it will be the 19th that you decide
when the evidence will be heard?

     THE CORONER:     Definitely       the 19th,   exactly as you have
been told.                                                    7

     MR. KING:   Sir, I think you have perhaps misunderstood
the question.   I think the lady is asking:   is it the case
that it would only be on the 19th that a decision will be
made as to the ambit of the cut-off time?   In other words,
that that is when the decisions will be made?

     THE CORONER:     Yes, I    beg your pardon, I did
misunderstand you.     Thank    you, Mr. King.

     That is correct.   Obviously I have heard what you have
said and so I will probably be thinking about the matter
between now and then but I will want to listen to legal
submissions on that point on the 19th.    I will then, in the
light of what is said,   and also any further thinking which I
have done, take a view   on it.    I think we will leave it
like that, so the answer is there is no decision on that
today.

     MRS. MCBRIAN:   So we would not be able to prepare any
witnesses about this until the hearing begins?

     THE CORONER:   That is true, but then we are talking
about inquests which will last at least five weeks and
probably eight, and maybe even longer so there is going to
be quite a bit of time to do additional work.

     If I were to change my   mind on this, on     the cut-off
point, if I were to decide   I wanted to alter     it before that
date, then I would let you and everybody else know, but I
don t want to encourage you to think I will    do that. There
are strong reasons for   saying that.    It is not iust
obstinacy.

     OK, ladies and gentlemen, I think that is it.    I am
most grateful to all of you being here.   I hope it has been
of use and that we have made a bit of progress.    It is
going to be a very difficult inquest, I'm afraid.   We will
just have to do the best we can.

     MR.   KING:   Thank you,   sir.
