FILE NOTE   4.5*89



MEETING WITH MR. PURCHQN    4.5.89


I met with Mr. Purchon to dicuss various aspects of the Hillsborough
Inquiry.
1.   I told him I was proposing to recommend   .......... solicitor
     £6 5.00. This was half of the special fee.   I explained that there
     was a bit of a problem because I had initially wanted forensic
     pathologists and one could therefore perhaps argue that they
     should be paid the full forensic fee, but once having seen the
     situation the  ........ pathology in itself was not particularly
     difficult and as we did not use only forensic pathologists I
     thought this seemed to be a reasonable compromise.

     We also discussed morticians, obviously the ones who came in
     especially would need to be remunerated.  I dicussed with him
     the extra fee for Professor Usher and Professor Stephen Jones
     on the 15th when they attended at Hillsborough.  I said I would
     be writing to him suggesting £130.00 i.e. a special P.M. fee
     equivalent for each of them on the day plus of course any
     travelling.

     1 then mentioned to him that I would be speaking to Mr. Podmore
     about getting independent legal advise and the- financing of the
     inquest.  I pointed out that it was going to be lengthy, say
     2 hours per inquest x 95 cases as a budgeting estimate.   I pointed
     out that bearing in mind the Council might possibly be criticised
     because of their involvment it would be rather invidious if I
     had to write to them every time I needed to spend some money and
     that I would prefer if we could set up some sort of system where
     by I could actually spend the necessary cash without having to
     go every time something needed to be done.  Mr. Purchon could
     see the point though he could also see the Council might not be
     entirely happy about giving complete carte blanche.   They might
     want to have up dates from time to time.
     I explained to Mr. Purchon that for instance getting independent
     legal advise set a precedent i . e ............... and in any event it
     seemed sensible to spend perhaps more money in the beginning and
     get it right rather than have a Judicial Review and hove to do the
     whole job all over again, quite apart from the trauma etc which
     this would cause.

     I also felt it was important for Sheffield that we should be
     seen to be doing things correctly.
