                                                                                         M I R . 15


                                                                                                                   )os~
  OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and time raised   2-                           Number


r-T itle     ^                P^"*                          I ’S                        .             d?>O^Q
      ".hide source and any document number i f relevant)


  Receiver's instructions - urgent action — Yes/No ____________________ ___________________
                                                                                                                     Receiver




                                                                                                                        Indexer
  Document registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                 Statement Reader
  Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                        Indexer
  Indexed as indicated                    "V m . O P n \           -

  No(s) o f actions raised

  Examined - further action to be taken                                                                           »/l         SIO




  Further action No(s)                                                                                                  Indexer


  When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                PAULA ANN SMITH




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

                3rd May, 1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                           INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                                                                 Page N o »

                        PROF. ALAN USI-IER Called

                             Bv THE C O R O N E R ............................

                    B   POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK Called

                             Bv THE CORONER ............................

                        POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                             Bv THE CORONER ............................




                    D




                    E




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
3rd May,   1990


       INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF PAIJLA ANN SMITH

     THE CORONER:    Good morning.    Please sit down.    Good
morning, Mr. Fraser.

     MR. FRASER:    Good morning, sir.  Sir, before you
start to take evidence this morning can I raise two
matters on behalf of my Committee? The first is a
question which a number of families have' put to me, both
personally' and in correspondence, and that relates to
the question of the issue of the final death certificate.
Sir, you issued interim certificates immediately following
the opening of the Inquests on the 18th and 1 9 th April
last jrear, but the families are concerned to lcnow when
a final certificate might be issued.   Will it be issued
following these hearings?

     THE CORONER:   If I may explain to you and if 3roU
would pass it on to the interested parties - the position
is that I will not be issuing final certificates, nor
will the Registrar of Births and Deaths be issuing final
certificates, at the conclusion of these hearings.     The
date when those final certificates will be issued depends
upon whether or not the Inquests I adjourn under Section
16 of the Coroner’s Act, in which event --- and that,
if you will remember, Mr. Fraser, is the Section which
deals with cases where either a Clerk of the Magistrates
Court requires me to adjourn, or the Director of Public
Prosecutions requires me to adjourn, because of various
steps which have been taken by those parties ---- if
that happens then I will issue the appropriate forms
and the death certificates will be issued.     If that does
not happen, then the final death certificates will be
issued when I conclude the re-convened Inquests and I
cannot give you a time for that, partly because I do not
know what the outcome of the D P P ’s enquiries and
partly, of course, because we have not yet managed ----
we cannot decide what we are doing until we know what
he decides, so I am Afraid families will have to wait
for that and there is nothing I can do about it.     It is
annoying but that is how the legislation isworded.      I
hope that is clear.

     MR. FRASER:   I understand,     sir.   I appreciate we
are very much ----

     THE CORONER:    I cannot do anything about    it.   It
isnot in my power   to change it.

     MR.  FRASER:No, I understand, we are        in thehands
of the DPP in that respect.

     Sir, the second question relates to the continuity
chart which is referred to in each of the summaries
which the solicitors who instruct me have seen.  It is
identified as the last document in each summary and I
havd had the advantage of having seen one, sir, but of
course the majority of the solicitors have not,  I have
had a number of requests to obtain one.  It has not, of
course, been received in evidence.  Would you explain
for their benefit, sir, whether it is your intention to
issue those charts as part of the documents which you
issue if they apply for transcripts or will those flow
charts, as I call them, not in fact be issued at all?

       THE CORONER:   The short answer is they will not
be issued.    The summaries were prepared and they were
partly prepared, of course, for my benefit, in fact,
that was their primary objective so that I can find my
way around my folders, and I thilik if we had been a
little bit more astute we would have deleted that
paragraph before we let you see it but we did not because
Tire wanted to get them out and by the time we realised
that the paragraph was on, of course, you already had
quite a lot so we decided we would leave it be.    But no
I have thought about the question of continuity charts.
They are really guides for me and we have dealt with
the evidence in the form which we have done and so they
will not be issued.    In some ways I regret it because
an enormous amount of work has been put into those
 charts but that is how it is,   I am not going to issue
them,    I do not think you lose anything thereby either,

     MR.’ FRASER:  I think I am right in saying, sir,
there is nothing in the chart which is not in the summary.
The chart simply presents in visible terms those timings
and positions which are already referred to in the
summary so there is new no information in them,

     THE CORONER:   I would agree with that,  I cannot
think of any chart offhand which contains something
which I would be worried about,

     MR. FRASER:    I am grateful, sir.

     Sir, the evidence you will hear first this morning
relates to Paula Ann Smith,   Sir, P a u l a ’s four brothers
are present in Court,   One of the brothers is a little
hard of hearing.   Could I ask you, therefore, to perhaps
increase the Volume on the microphone so that he hears
everything that you say.   Sir, Pau l a ’s mum has made a
conscious decision not to come to your Court today for
reasons which I am sure you will understand but her
brothers and members of her family are here.        Sir, the
practice that represents them is a member of my Group
and I, thex^efore, appear on the usual basis as their
agent as a member of the Steering Committee,

     TILE CORONER:  Mr, Fraser, just one thing with regard
to his being a little hard of hearing,  I am a little
hard of hearing myself so I know how inconvenient it is.



                           -2 -
Would it be more comfortable if he sat forward perhaps
nearer to you? Would that help? I know that separates
him from his family •.••

     MB. FRASER:   I think, sir, perhaps if a problem
develops we could move to that stage but can we see how
we go ?

     THE CORONER:   I do not know which one it is? If
you caimot hear and you want to come and sit forward,
we have plenty of chairs in the building,  I want you
to be able to hear,

     BROTHER:    I cannot even hear from here,

     THE CORONER:   You c a n ’t? Can we get a chair then
for the gentleman and then he can come and sit near Mr,
Fraser,  I will try to speak up,    I will do my best.

      Ladies and gentlemen, good morning,    I have ignored
you, forgive me.   It is very hot in here,    I do not need
to tell you, we all know that,    I understand we have
already spoken to the engineers and the fans are working
flat out.   It is the fault of the sun.    It is too warm
outside and there is nothing we can do about it but,
gentlemen, if you do become u n 6 omfortable and you wish
to take your jackets off, it is the equivalent of a wig
and. I understand that one is allowed, on occasions, to
take the wig off.   Please feel free to be comfortable,
I do not want you to be uncomfortable.     That, of course,
goes for you as well,   I want you to be comfortable.

      Can I, before I begin, explain to you what we are
going to do so that you can follow the procedure? I
am going to read to you, in a moment, the evidence which
I took on the 1 9 th April, 1 9 8 9 which was the day when I
opened the Inquests so that I could release P a u l a ’s body
so that it could come home for the funeral.       Then I am
going to tell you what the blood alcohol levels were
that Dr, Forrest established and, if Prof, Usher has
finished in another Inquest which he is at at the moment,
he will then give the pathological evidence.       If he has
not finished we will turn to the West Midlands police
Officer who will give evidence, summarise the evidence
for- us and we will slot Prof, Usher in as soon as he is
able to get here.    Now, the West Midlands Police Officers'
evidence is split in two.    The second half is dealt with
by Inspector Layton who deals with what we call the
visual evidence.    He, first of all, describes it when
he stands over there - a little bit complicated when
that happens because there are a lot of references, map
numbers and goodness knows what.       He then walks round
and, on these big plans, he demonstrates and shows us
what he is talking about so it all falls into place.
Prof, Usher has made it so come and sit down, Prof,
Usher,   So it will be much clearer when you have seen



                          -3 -
                        the visual evidence demonstrated,  When that is done,
                        that is the end of the evidence we are taking at the
                        moment.  Is that reasonably clear?  I like to tell you
                        so that you know the sequence because then you know
                        what to expect.  The Jury know it well, do you not?

                             Are you hearing all right?

                    B        BROTHER:    Yes,

                             THE CORONER:    This then is a resumed Inquest which
                        was opened on the 1 9 th April, 1 9 8 9 and on that occasion
                        Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner’s Officer, said
                        the following or signed the document to this effect:

                                "The body which is the subject of this
                    C           Inquest has been identified to DC 1008
                                Akers of the South Yorkshire Police as
                                that of Paula Ann Smith by Michael Smith,
                                her brother,”

                        Which is Michael?    Is Michael here?     Yes,

                                 11 She was 2 6 years of age having been
                    D           b o m on the 2 7 th June, 1 9 6 2 at Liverpool,
                                 SVie      s_a sin c-1 n _woman _Rnrl she_lived at
                                ___________________________________ Liverpool,
                                 She was unemployed.          She died at
                                Hillsborough Football Ground following
                                 an incident there on Saturday, 1 5 th April,
                                 1 9 8 9 , PC 1^03 Jones caused the body to
                                be removed to the Medico Legal Centre and
                    E            there he identified it to Detective
                                 Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                                identified the same body to Prof, Usher,
                                It is the family wish that the body should
                                be cremated,"

                             I think one thing I need to say is that Mr, Akers
                    F   is, in fact, a Detective Constable 1008 Akers,

                             Now, I wrote shortly after this to the families
                        and asked you to confirm that the information and the
                        spellings and so on were correct and, in fact, Walter
                        Smith - that is another brother ---- is that you -
                        signed this form on the 2 5 th April, I do not know if
                        you can remember but you did, and you confirmed that
                    G   all the information which I have read out is correct.
                        Can I just double-check, please, that 'Ann' is spelt
                        without an 'e1? It is without an 'e1, thank you.

                             Dr, Forrest did the blood alcohol levels in the
                        case of Patila and the result in this case was negative.

                             Now, we will turn to Prof, Usher,  Prof, Usher
                H       has already taken the oath in respect of all the


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                 _4-
                                                                 P R O F . A . USHER



                          Inquests in which he is involved so he will start as
                          soon as he is ready.

                                         PROF. ALAN USHER Called:

                                            Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. If you will tell us who you are, Prof. Usher, for the
                    B      record? - A. Prof. Alan Usher, Prof. of Forensic
                           Medicine in the University of Sheffield and a Home
                           Office Pathologist.

                        Q. And this post-mortem report which you are about to tell
                           me about relates to Paula Ann Smith? - A 0 Yes, the body
                           number was 18.
                    C   Q. Thank yoti very much indeed.   Prof. Usher, could you
                           then, please, take me through the relevant pa.rts of
                           the post-mortem findings and tell me the cause of
                           death that you have established? - A. Yes, sir, the
                           body that I examined was that of a fairly plumply-built,
                           young white female, 1 6 5 cms in height, weighing 75 kgs ••••

                    D   Q. Can I stop you for one moment, Prof.  Usher? Prof.
                           Usher, this gentleman is hard of hearing.  Could you
                           shout, please? - A. Do you want me to repeat that?

                        Q. Just carry on. - A. She was in, I would say, perfectly
                           reasonable health for her age.  She was not pregnant.
                           She had, in my view, an average expectation of life.
                           The signs of traumatic asphyxia were well developed
                    E      and, in fact, typical of traumatic asphyxia.  In the
                           event she proved to have a broken forearm and there
                           were several small grazes and bruises on the body.
                           Otherwise it was unmarked.  I give the cause of death
                           as traumatic asphyxia, that is to say, this lady died
                           because she was unable to move her chest in and out
                           to respire properly.  Once the chest was fixed, then
                           she would become unconscious very rapidly, within a
                    F      matter of seconds - 10-20 seconds.  She would not die
                           for several minutes but she would be unconscious
                           during that time.

                        Q. And the crucial thing about that is, of course, that
                           once she is unconscious she does not perceive any pain
                           or discomfort? - A. No, that is right.
                    G   Q. That is not to say that her life is not being lost but
                           she does not realise it at the time? - A. That is right.

                        Q. With regard to the fracture which you have mentioned,
                           in itself, is not generally speaking a life-threatening
                           disorder? - A. Oh, no.

                        Q. Can you recollect - I do not know whether you are able
                H          to say - did it appear to you to have been ante-mortem,
                           peri-mortem or .... - A. I think it was ante-mortem.
                           There was haemorrhage about it and there was also
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                           haemorrhage elsewhere in the body indicative of
                                                                           P R O P . A . USHER



                             pressure during life.

                        Q.    But, of course, you    cannot say whether the fracture
                             occurred before she     lost consciousness or not? -
                             A. No, I cannot.

                        Q. Pathologically that is? - A. Yes.

                                  Mr. Fraser?

                                  MR. FRASER:       No thank you,   sir.

                                  MR. LIMB:      No thank you, sir.

                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:       No thank you,   sir.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:    Prof. Usher, thank you very much.
                             Now, I think you are in nearly all the cases apart from
                             one? - A. Yes.

                        Q. Would it be more convenient for you to come and go or
                           to stay, if I may put it like that? - A. Sir, I have
                           set aside the day for these Inquests but it would be
                           helpful if I could pop into the Department and do
                    D      various ....

                        Q. Well, why do you not do that, Prof. Usher, and may I
                           just ask you one other question before you leave us.
                           As you know, in some cases, the families do find it
                           helpful to talk to the pathologists after the Inquest
                           because it helps.  Would I be presuming if I said that
                    g      you would be willing to do that if appropriate? -
                           A. No, I would certainly be willing to do that.

                         . So if that were to arise we will send you a message to
                           say there is a family that wants to talk to you and
                           we will keep you informed as to when we need you.
                           Thank you. -A. I am obliged, sir.

                                   THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, it is very
                             forttmate that Prof. Usher has his office and
                             Department dovm the corridor, so to speak, so it is
                             VQT~fi very convenient for me because it means if I
                             want him he is here but, of course, it also helps him
                             beceaise he can pop down to his office if he needs to.

                                  Mr. Fraser, do not feel inhibited about saying
                             the family would like to talk to him.  I know Prof.
                             Usher very well and he is more than happy to do that.

                                  MR. FRASER:       I shall feel no inhibition, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:       Thank you.


                    H
                                                       -6 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                          J. KILLOCK



      POLIO'S SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK Called:

               By THE CORONER:

Q. Yes? - A. John Killock, sir, Police Sergeant, West
   Midlands Police.  I have previously taken the oath.

0, Will you remember to speak loudly as veil and, subject
   to that, can you take me through the summary, please?
   A. At 08^5 hours on Saturday, 15tli April, 1989» Miss
   Anne Smith saw her daughter, Paula Ann Smith, leave
   the family home with the intention of travelling to
   Sheffield.  She was to travel alone on a. coach
   organised by the Liverpool Supporters Club to attend,
   the Semi Final football match at the Hillsborough
   Stadium.

   At about 1500 hours Hr. David Hughes was in Enclosure
   3 of the West Stand terracing and was involved in
   severe cx’ushing near the front perimeter fencing.
   A female was crushed up against him and he believed
   died despite his efforts to hold her up.   Mr. Hughes
   later saw photographs of this girl in a newspaper and.
   the newspaper identified her as *Paula from Liverpool*.

   Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
   terracing, Police Constable Paul Wadsworth went into
   Enclosure 3. He lifted a female he now knows to be
   Paula from the terraces and passed her to other
   Police Officers at the exit gate.   Police Constable
   Christopher Yates assisted Po3_ice Constable Wadsworth
   in this action.

   Richard Andrew Parkin, a steward emplo 3^ed at the
   stadium, assisted other spectators to carry Paula
   across the pitch on a hoarding used as a temporary
   stretcher.  I-lr. Parkin had seen Paula lying on the
   pitch at the Leppings Lane end and carried her near
   to the Spion Kop end of the ground where he left her.

   Detective Constable Kodglcinson assisted, other Officers
   to carry Paula from near the Spion Kop into the
   gymnasium.  The Officer did not know the girl *s
   identity but la.ter described an article of clothing
   worn by her from which it has been confirmed ths.t it
   was, in fact, Paula.

   At about 1600 hours Police Constable John Philip Jones
   a.ssumed x’osponsibility for Paula at the gymnasium
   where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

   At 1 6 2 5 hours Dr. Ian Roberts examined Paula in the
   temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.




                          -7 -
                                             J. KILT .OCT-
                                             i— nzrm r

Police Constable Jones later escorted Paula- to the
Medico Legal Centre ancl confirmed the identification
by reference number to Detective Constable Ueigold.

At 2250 hours on Sunda}^ 16th April, 1 9 & 9 t Mr.
Michael Srnith identified the bod}*- of his sister to
Detective Constable Akers at the Medico Legal Centre.

On Monday, 1 7 th April, I9 8 9 , following that identification
by Detective Constable l/eigold, Prof. Alan Usher
carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
the cause of death.

Found in Paula's personal effects was-a ticket
counterfoil for the match.  However, in thecircumstances,
it cannot be established exactly how or when   she
entered the stadium.

     That concludes my evidence,      sir.     There is visual
evidence.

     TIED CORONER:      I have 110 questions.       Mr. Fraser,
any questions?

     MR. FRASER:       No, thank you, sir.

     MR. LIME:       No, thank 3rou, sir.

     MR. CATCIIPOLE:      No, thank you,     sir.

         POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                        By THE CORONER:

Yes? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
I/est Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination has been
made of video film and photographic evidence and Paula
has been identified on the pitch.   Police Constable
TJadsworth has signed a plan of the terraces indicating
the point at which he found Paula and that plan, sir,
is referenced PCT7/1.  I, myself, sir, made an
identification of Paula on a BBC video tape referenced
MAP 7 and timed at 1530:05:00 and, at this stage,
Paula is shown lying on the pitch.   That identification,
sir, was made from clothing initially.

Richard Andrew Parkin confirms that he is shown on a
photograph which has been given the reference number
NGNl/65 and this shows Paula being carried across
the pitch by sxjectators on a hoarding.    He has signed
a plan of the pitch indicating where he found Faula
and that plan is referenced RAP/2.     Sir, Mr. Barry
Smith, Pa u l 's brother, one of Paula's brothers who is
in Court today, has viewed visual evidence in respect
of what we have hoard.
                                                                       ]•!. LATTON



                             Sir, can I refer ycvu to, I think chronologically, a
                             plcin which, has been referenced I’C1'j/'l , which is PC
                             Nadworth 1 s plan.  That is a plan of the terraces, sir.

                        Q.    Yes, we will call that    C218. - A.And then,    sir,   MTJJL
                             2 5 , which is a plan of   the pitch.

                        Q.   That will be C219. - A. And then Ithink,        sir, RAP/2,
                    B        Mr. Parkin1s plan.

                        0 . It is almost identical to yours, is it not? - A. It            is.

                         . But l e t ’s put it in - C220. - A. Sir, if I can deal
                           with the plan PCTf/1, that is a plan of the terraces,
                           this is Enclosure No. 3, this enclosure h e r e , and
                           the point at which PC ¥adsworth has indicated -finding
                           Paula is in Enclosure No. 3 and he has indicated a
                           position h e r e . This line here is the dividing fence
                           between No. 3 and No. 2 so he has indicated a
                           position h e r e . In respect of the plan MTJJL 2 5 , which
                           is a j>lan of the pitch, the point at which we made a
                           video identification on the pitch is approximately at
                           this position h e r e , which is the Leppings Lane end of
                           the pitch.     There is also a reference to the photograph
                    D      NGNl/ 6 5 , which is the photograph showing Paula being
                           carried on the hoarding and that is at this point he r e ,
                           sir, at the Spion ICop end of the pitch which is
                           consistent, as you have heard, with people being
                           carried across in that direction.      In respect of Mr.
                           Parkin's plan, RA.p/2', it is very close to the one I
                           have a.lready indicated but he has indicated a position
                    E      here .

                         .. And that is a recollection, is it not? - A, That is
                            right, sir,

                        Q. And obviously it is difficult to be absolutely spot
                           on with a recollection, is it not? — A, That is right.

                        Q. So he has done remarkably well actually in relation
                           to .... - A. It is quite close, yes.

                                  MR. FRASER:       No questions,   sir.

                                  MR. LIMB:     No thank you, sir.

                                  MR. CATC1IP0LE:       No thank you, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   Now, I have already indicated to
                             you that when Inspector Layton finished, that would
                             be the end of the evidence which we are going to take
                             and, indeed, that is so.
                                    I try and pause at the end of each Inquest and
                             just remember that although we are talking about one
                H            particu3„ar person and, in this Inquest, the only
                             person who matters, as fa.r as I am concerned, is Paula
                              m d , of course, you as her family.  I would like you

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                        _9_
                        to know tliat it does not matter how m a n y Inquests we do,
                        this girl was special to you and I want -you to realise
                        that I acknowledge that, that this is not just somebody
                        else, this is Paula whom you loved and whom you cared
                        about and I an very, very sorry indeed that this tragedy
                        and this loss has happened to the family,      I am pleased
                        to see all the brothers — —— I do not know, there may be
                        more but at least four of you are here ———— which shows
                        something about the way you feel,   Thank you very much
                    B   indeed fox’ being here.

                               Ladies and gentlemen, we are going to rise,  ¥e
                        rise after each Inquest,    I think the next family are
                        in trouble with some roadworks or something so what we
                        will do is have coffee or tea now because I think it is
                        only fair to let them come because they are on their way,
                        \I q will resume as soon as we can depending upon when
                        they arrive,

                               How, the only other thing I would like to say, Hr,
                        F raser   if   later fam ily turns up early, if you know
                        what I am trying to say  .v »   us take them so that we do
                        not throw the whole day out if we can avoid it, Kay I
                        asic you to communicate with me through my Officer so
                    D   that I know what is happening.

                             1H1,            Certainly, sir,

                             TIED CORONER:   Thank y o u ,   ¥e will rise now,



                    E




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                  -10-
