HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                5
      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

- S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sex, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           23rd November, 1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                           INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                        Page

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                                  1

DISCUSSION                                                1

RULING BY THE CORONER                                     5

DISCUSSION                                               14

     M.J.    TISSINGTON Recalled

             By The Coroner                              19
             Cross-Examined   by   M r . Hale            19
             Cross-Examined   by   M r . Payne           21
             Cross-Examined   by   M r . King            34
             Cross-Examined   by   M r . Catchpole       41
             Cross-Examined   by   Mrs . McBrien         42
             Cross-Examined   by   Mr. Russell           47

     A. LINDLEY Sworn

             By The Coroner                              49
             Cross-Examined by   Mr.    Payne            53
             Cross-Examined by   Mr.    Isaacs           55
             Cross-Examined by  Mr.     King             55
             Further Cross-Examined      by Mr. Payne    57
             Further Cross-Examined      by Mr. King     57

     J.R.T.    BARTHOLOMEW Sworn

             By The Coroner                              58
             Cross-Examined by   Mr, Payne               70
             Cross-Examined by   Mr. King                73
             Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien              76


     P. WILSON Sworn

             By The Coroner                              76
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale                  81
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                 81
             Cross-Examined by Mr. King                  84
             Cross-Examined by M r s . McBrien           87
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King          88
             Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien (Cont)       91
             Cross-Examined by Miss Addelmann            94
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale          95

     P .C . LOMAS Sworn

             By The Coroner                              95

DISCUSSION                                              110
                 FIFTH DAY* S PROCEEDINGS

              FRIDAY. 23rd NOVEMBER, 1990

        THE CORONER:   Good morning.     I want to deal with
the submission made by Mr. Isaacs, which to a large
extent is supported by several of your colleagues*
Before I do so, I have obviously considered the matter
and subject to anything that may be said this morning,
have formulated views.      Tha t ’s obvious otherwise I would
not be ready to deal with you.        However, I ihought it
right that you should have an opportunity to put anything
else you wanted and in particular I think, Mr. Catchpole,
you actually rose on Day 2, and you weren’t here.        I
d o n ’t think Mr. Catchpole said anything which was out of
order or, rather which I had agreed wouldn t be said.
Basically you said - I think I understood you correctly
to say that if this was agreed then you would wish...

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, my position is that all the
principal players are in the same boat and I support Mr.
Isaacs submission on the ground that the transcript
should go in, but it is all principal players or none of
them and as far as the two Officers of the club sre^
concerned I would like to adopt Mr. Isaacs’ submission.

     MR. ISAACS:      Mr. Catchpole had been good enough to
inform me before you came into court    that that is what he
had said.

     THE CORONER:   I am grateful.   I think Mrs.
Hamilton at that point was still reserving her position.
Is there anything you want to say, Mr. Maxwell?   I take
it you know what the issue is?

     MR. MAXWELL:    Yes, I have read the transcript, sir,
and our position is still reserved.   We await with
interest your ruling on the application which was made by
my learned friend Mr. Isaacs.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King also rose and .said he had
not yet addressed me with regard - I think you said:

     "Sir, can I   simply say that I have yet to    make any
     submissions to you in relation to .the club or,
     indeed, for example, Dr. Eastwood, on^the
     application which has just been made."

You, of course, said to me quite clearly that you weren't
associating yourself with this application and I fully
understood that.
                                                        2




      MR. KING:   Sir, my position on the club is simply
this:   I haven't heard from ray learned friend here,
although he has indicated to me privately the basis upon
which he fears that the privilege of self-recrimination
wilt be necessary in the context- of the particular
witnesses he has.    However, sir, my position is clear.
Insofar as you rule, sir, that the privilege is available
and is likely to be available, then very little would be
gained by having a witness in the witness box just^
ascertaining the privilege.     If the price of putting the
transcript to the jury of their evidence before Lord
Justice Taylor is the concession that they should not
even have to go in the witness box, then I am prepared to
offer that concession as - and I said it on the previous
occasions, sir - the lesser of two evils from the point
of view of all the evidence being before the jury.

     THE CORONER:    Is there anything anybody else wishes
to say?    I know, Mr. Isaacs, you have given me a very
clear exposition, but is there anything else you want to
add?    A clear exposition of your application and the
grounds for it.

     MR. ISAACS: There was just one point, sir, and it
is perhaps a reiteration of the point I was seeking to
make about the prejudicial effect of a witness going into
the witness box and saying it repeatedly, albeit it may
not be that long because, of course, there would come a
time when everybody would get truly fed-up of the
privilege being relied upon.   That was something that
was said by my learned friend Mr. King when I was here a
number of days ago when he said that from tli^ point of
view of the families they would have liked Mr.
Duckenfield to have come voluntarily because he should be
heard to say, "I shall not answer."   That very clearly -
perhaps it was a Freudian slip on the part of my learned
friend - but that very clearly illustrated in my
submission the real risk of prejudice here that we have a
men - no doubt men and perhaps ladies - going into the
witness box and it could be seen from the jury's point of
view that they would be set up, as it were, to come out
with this same answer, "I am going to rely on the
privilege, I am going to rely on the privilege.    I an
going to rely on the privilege."

     That in itself is very prejudicial so far as the
overall verdict is concerned and that is obviously a
worrying feature of this case which would not apply to
the straightforward inquest with w h i c h ‘you, sir, and most
of us have been concerned in the past.

     MISS SINCLAIR:   Could I just add as a rider to my
position and of course, sir, it is a matter for you, but
if you consider it would be more convenient for the
                                                          3




evidence of all the chief witnesses to be read by^
transcript, we are quite willing for Dr. Eastwood s
evidence to go in in that way.

        Apart from that, sir, the position is as I have
said.
     MR. CATCHPOLEt   Sir, can I rise since I was the one
raised the matter of consistency?    In ray submission it
would be even more invidious to have some of the
principal players not giving evidence at all, wnetner ^
simply to say, "I am not going to answer that question,
and have other principal players having to give evidence.
It is all for one or all for another.

     I would also like to pick up very briefly on the
point made by my learned friend Mr. King.   Sir, this
isn't a normal case in which a witness who relies on the
privilege against self-incrimination is not going to be
able to give any information to this jury.   If these^
transcripts go in, your jury, sir, will be provided with
records of far more detail, far more depth and-far more
greatly analysed of the events that occurred on that day
than virtually any other jury would expect to see
anywhere in the country.   Any case statement is not
going to be the same as having your version of an event
subjected to cross-examination by a large number of very
skilled lawyers.

     In those circumstances I would very strongly urge
you, sir, to look at the benefits of having this
transcript put before the jury.   It can only be done by
consent and the benefit of having it so that your j u ^
can be fully informed to come to a proper verdict in this
case must considerably outweigh the risk of having
witnesses coming in who really could contribute something
to these inquests, who are going to say absolutely
nothing.
     MRS. McBRIEN:    I think the evidence that was given
at the Taylor Inquiry is very different evidence to what
we should be hearing in this court.    We have heard a
number of witnesses giving evidence about the amount of
alcohol that was carried around on their approach to the
ground.  We have heard of insignificant incidents like
fans urinating in gardens.    I think this other evidence
is vital now.   I have read all the transcripts from the
Taylor Inquiry.    I am not satisfied with everything I
have read from that.    I would like a little more please,
sir.

     THE CORONER:   What you are saying is that you want
me to turn the application down?   That is what you are
asking me to do in effect?
                                                   4




     MRS. McBRIEN:   I really would like these witnesses
to be called.   I feel it is essential.

    THE CORONER:    Yes, I have understood you.

    MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you.




           THE CORONER:   There is one small
                                                          5




     THE CORONER:   There is one small point I want to deal
with'which is related but is ancillary and that is in fact
a question which Mr. Payne asked me and to which I gave a
reply. On reading the transcript it may have been
incorrect. I did correct it later on but I want to make
quite sure we are clear. We were talking at that point
about the audio tapes, the PACE statements, and you said, I
had said, X will start in the middle:

   "My present position is that we should listen to the
   audio tape. I think it will be easier than trying to
   listen to transcripts but I fear we are in for some
   pretty heavy stuff when we get to them. If there is
   any change in that I will announce it."

Then you said:
   "Do we understand from that, sir, that the playing of
   the tape will amount to the evidence of the witness
   in chief?"

My response is yes and I describe my normal practice.  In
fact, there is a typographical error in that sentence.
Then later on you say, "Yes, sir". Then I say:

   "So I do reserve the right to ask additional
   questions in chief but I can assure you I shall
   explain all this, Mr. Payne, this afternoon when the
   Jury come."

I think the reply of "yes" was incorrect.  It should have
been "no" because the evidence of the PACE statement is not
actually put in by that witness. It is put in by the
Officer or Officers who introduce it and so it would be
wrong to describe it as the evidence in chief of the
witness. I merely want to correct it. In other words, if
I were to decide we were calling the witness, they would be
examined in chief. The extent of the examination is
another question. I am sorry about that and I hope I have
made myself clear now.
     Mr. Isaacs, as we all know, gave a very clear and, if
I may say so, eloquent position of both the law and the
supporting cases and a realistic summing up of the problems
of anybody in the position of his client, and I will at
this stage confine myself to Mr. Duckenfield, not because I
am excluding everybody but to save time.  I do not want to
list half a dozen or however many other people are
involved. He drew my attention to the rule, Rule 22, and
it is quoted. I do not know if you have noticed it but
they have left the word "not" out and it reads in the
transcript, "The witness at an Inquest shall be obliged to
answer" when, of course, it means that the witness shall
                                                          6




not be obliged to answer any question tending to
incriminate himself. He is quite right. That is the rule.

     In fact, if I can use the term by reference in
particular to the Wes.tlnahouse Electric Corporation case in
which the Rio Tinto Zinc company were extensively involved
(and I will probably refer to this as the RTZ case for the
sake of brevity) I am not going to repeat everything he
said but on page 29 of the transcript, for instance, there
is a reference.  It is a quote actuallyt

   "Well, the European Commission already know about
   this, and so you are not going to make your position
   any worse*.

as an argument for allowing the production of the documents
in that case. There was an identical case but I accept it
has a major similarity and it can be used I am sure. Later
on the Master of Rolls says, "No one is bound to furnish
evidence against himself.” Still later on he again says:

   "Once it appears that the witness is at risk then
   •'great latitude should be allowed to him in judging
   for himself of the effect of any particular
   question'."

     So the first thing one has to decide is whether or not
there is a risk because clearly if there is no risk then
the whole issue falls to the ground. I am quite satisfied
that there is a risk of self-incrimination in respect of
witnesses in the class of Mr. Duckenfield. Whether or not
that risk will turn into a reality is not in fact for me to
decide. Mr. Isaacs outlined the various parties and also
some of the others chipped in. I think you, Mr. Russell,
listed one or two others, private prosecutions and so on.
I am satisfied that it would be unrealistic to say that any
questions which a witness were asked here which might n o t (sic)
expose him to a risk of further proceedings elsewhere;
therefore, he would be entitled to exercise the privilege
and as the Master of the Rolls says it is up to the Court
to exercise - the witness should be given great latitude in
deciding what question falls within that class.

     In the Rio Tinto Zinc case the document - I do not
know the nature of the documents in detail although not
very relevant, - the point, as I understand the case, was
that the Commission knew about the alleged infringement
because they had been told by Friends of the Earth and
possibly by others. This is on page 32-G of the
transcript, and again I am quoting:

   "As the commission had knowledge from the ’Friends of
   the Earth' documents for a considerable time of the
   existence of the cartel and had taken no action,
   there was no real risk of such proceedings if the
   documents in the possession of the RTZ companies were
   disclosed.”
     I want to come back to the question of the transcripts
right at the end and so I will not deal with the
transcripts at this stage. There is a distinction, as I
see it, and I will just mention this briefly, between the
transcripts which we are talking about in this case and the
documents which were referred to in the RTZ case and that
is, whereas in the RTZ case the information had come from a
third party, or possibly several parties, the principals
had not made any disclosures- RTZ had not gone to the
Commission and said, "This is what I say". With regard to
the transcripts it is rather different because the
transcripts are actually a record of what the principal
party has said to Lord Justice Taylor.

     Secondly, in reading the judgments one of the points
which was made was that the information, although it had
been disclosed to the Commission by presumably Friends of
the Earth, was not in the public domain at that point in
time. If it were disclosed in the proceedings on which the
issue was arising then Rio Tinto Zinc would be putting the
documents into the public domain and, therefore, they would
become usable and indeed could be used against them.  I
think this is another distinction in that the transcripts
are already in the public domain. It is not that they have
been put privately to a prosecuting authority but they were
publicly presented and are freely available to anybody who
wishes to obtain copies.




                               /I do not think.
      I don't think there is any need for me to go through
the rest of the argument except to say the following:

      (1) I entirely accept that Rule 22 applies and that
any witness whose conduct could be called in question is
entitled to exercise his privilege and not only privilege
I think it is probably better to say his right.

      (2) I accept that there is a potential risk of criminal
prosecution and that therefore prima facie people in the class
which we are thinking about, Mr. Duckenfield, will be able
to exercise that   right if a question is put to them which
is incriminatory   in nature.

       (3) To use Mr. Isaacs' illustration of evidence above
and below the line, evidence given by the individual which
may be incriminatory in nature in this Court might well
be below the line and be additional to anything which is
already in the public domain.    That is not to say, of course,
there m a y not be evidence below the line, and I have just
retained    that expression, from other people which may as
I say fall below the line but we are not thinking about that,
we are thinking about the individual giving evidence himself
which moves it into a different category, or put it another
way, which adds to whatever evidence there is against himself
and I have quoted it, the person does not have to give
evidence--to convict himself out of his own mouth and that
is only right and proper.

       (4) The question of prejudice.  The rule is not designed
to prevent prejudice arising but I was obviously concerned
about this because it would be quite wrong to do things which
are out of proportion and which cause more damage than they
do good, but I have.considered this point very carefully,
or as carefully as I am able and I have to say this, three
things about it.   I think there are three.

      Firstly, if there is any prejudice or if there were
to be any prejudice it will be simply in this Court.   Now
that is an important point because whatever powers if any
I have and the jury have we certainly have no powers of
prosecution, we have no powers of committal and indeed
we have no powers of naming any person and the rules, I have
forgotten the rule number now but we can find it, is quite
clear, that when the verdict is framed it must be framed in
such a way that nobody is identified.  Not only is it in
the rules it is in the Act as well, so whatever prejudice
there might be it will be in this Court.  It would have no
effect, as I see, either on Prosecuting Authorities or
on other Courts.

      Thirdly, and this is I think an elaboration of
Mr. Catchpole's evidence, that if some give evidence and some
don't it certainly is arguable that the prejudicial effect
may be even greater if one does that, if you exclude some
and call others.  That is not to say that they have got to give
                                                          9




evidence because they may exercise their privilege, but if
they /are not here to do it then the prejudicial effect may
be, if anything, even greater, and in any case not giving
evidence in itself, or not attending, has a prejudicial
effect.   Now the value of that is a matter of opinion as
to which is greater, which is not.

      Finally, of course, on the question of prejudice I
appreciate that Mr. I s a a c s said that however careful the
direction one did not know, you know one might not be able
to wipe it out, but I have weeks ago already been considering
this very question.   I sort of headed it in my mind "Right
of silence" and the need for some very clear directions to
the jury on what it means and what effect it has, so although
I can see the force in Mr. Isaacs' argument with regard to
prejudice, I am not persuaded that that in itself is sufficient
reason for me to accede to his application.

      So I have given you what I have agreed with, Mr. Isaacs,
and I     think it will be. obvious by now that I am going to
turn the application down and I will now give one or two
reasons why I intend to do that.

      I am not actually sure that I need to give any reasons
but I      want to give one or two reasons but I want to say that
I am not saying that     this is an exhaustive list of every
conceivable argument    that one could produce.

      The first one, and I think this is an exceedingly
important one as far   as I am concerned is this: whilst it
is entirely true that any individual has the right not
to incriminate himself, individuals do not have that right
insofar as they are giving evidence in respect of others.

      Although I am trying to run this Inquest as closely
as I would a standard Inquest, the term which I have used,
it is different because there are so many parties whose
conduct may be called in question and if I were to accede
to the request not to call these witnesses in order that
they might not incriminate themselves, I am also excluding
the opportunity of asking them things which they are well
compellable, they would not be able to exercise the
privilege, so I could ask (a) to tell me about (b) or (c)
or (d) as the case may be, and that I think is a very
important point.

      The second one is that because of the nature of the
evidence which we will hear I feel it is right that the
person or persons involved should have the. opportunity if
they wish to respond.

      I realise that Mr. Isaacs made it perfectly plain
that they did not wish to exercise that right, they were
more than content not to have this advantage, but I think,
we don't yet know the full nature of the evidence, we
have not heard it, we have hardly begun, and I think it
                                                        10




is right they should have an opportunity to respond, if they
wish, subject to ail their rights about self-incrimination.




                          Thirdly
                                                       11




     Thirdly, I think it is vary important that justice
should be seen to be done.  I asa entirely aware that we
are not a court, a civil or a criminal court, so please
don't think that power has gone to ay head. That is not
the point, but on the other hand it has always been ay
feeling that if we are going to have an inquest-- then we
need to have the people present and available and in the
box, so that they can be heard.   If they wish they can
exercise whatever privilege they have, but they are there
and justice can be seen to have been done.

     Fourthly, if I were to accede to the application, it
started off with Mr. Duckenfield, and quite rightly
everybody else who had anybody who they could conceive
aignt be - with the exception, of course, of Miss
Sinclair, and you have reserved your position - and
indeed, Mr. Hale isn't here because I guess he has decided
taat he doesn't want to avail himself of this, though he
didn't when he made his submissions actually say that, but
nearly everybody else said, "If one nas it, all nave it”,
and indeed Hr. Catchpole very rightly said, "It's ail or
nothing".

     It seeas to me almost it is an untenable situation I
tnink if we exclude by decree, so to speak, all the
principal players in the events, and not only the
principal players who we can think of at the moment,
because once I have decided, if I had acceded to the
application, anybody and everybody who has the slightest
thought that he might be incriminated would inuaediately
say, "Well I don't want to come and give evidence thank
you very much, there is an element of risk".  Whether they
would or they wouldn't I don't know, but I think it is a
possibility.  It aay not be the best of points but it is
one that I have considered.

     I have already mentioned ay feelings, I suppose, that
one cannot exclude prejudice, and indeed that there may
possibly be increased risks of that if one had
differential responses — Dr. Eastwood, say, and
Superintendent Marshall, if they decided, or if your
people decided, whatever I had said, that they were coming
anyway - but that is, of course, not a fundamental point,
it is not a legal point, it is just a feeling.

      It is also that it is contrary to ay noraal practice,
and I believe it is contrary to the legal practice of saost
Coroners.   Hot all, I think soae Coroners don't call
witnesses whose conduct is likely to be called into
question, but I norsaally do and I think the majority do as
well.

     I think that is sufficient as far as ay thinking is
concerned. As I have said already, it is not necessarily
an exhaustive list.   I now want to turn to the question of
the transcripts, because I have been thinking about what
you said, and indeed to a certain extent what I have said
as well, at the business aeetiag, and with vary great
respect I ara (a) not so certain whether the concession
which you have offered is, in fact, a concession and (b)
whether it is one that you could actually make.

     I say tnis because I have already indicated that Lord
Oiplock, on page 39 of our transcripts, refers to the -
let's see what it says - I said 39, I think it is page 32
actually - at 33G:

     "I do not think that your Lordships are entitled to
     dismiss as fanciful the risk that if the documents
     relating to the cartel were produced at the trial in
     the Virginia proceedings and cante, as they then
     would, into the public doaain, the resulting
     publicity in this sensitive political field /aight
     result in pressure on the commission to take action
     against the RTZ companies, speedier and severer
     action than they might otherwise have done."

tJow as I have already alluded to, I asa not entirely
convinced that one could argue that these documents are
not already in the public doiaain, and if they are in the
public doaain then that argument falls to the ground.

      The second thing is - and again I have already
alluded to this - is that there is a difference between
the transcripts, in that they were siade by the parties,
they spoke publicly in themselves, and therefore
tneiaselves put the information into the public domain, as
opposed to the RTZ situation where the documents had in
socse way or other, or the information had in soma way or
other been obtained by people who didn't like RTZ and who
were trying to get something done, but RTZ had never ^ade
any admissions in that respect.

     Thirdly, it is I think arguable, and it ;nay be that
we will have to discuss this at aaotner point, that" the
evidence given at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, say witn
regard to these principal characters, could be presented
to this Inquest either by calling the shorthand writers,
or somebody who was there wno could say, "Yes, that is
what I heard".   In other words, very sisiilar to a PACE
statement.   Please don't jump to the conclusion that I
have decided that is what we are going to do because this
is a point which I have to think about very, vary
carefully, and this is a point where I a;n very conscious,
and I have always been very conscious, of the vary
prejudicial nature which that sort of document, that sort
of step rnight nave, and not only that - and this is an
important point and I have still got to think about this,
                                                            13




and it may be that some of you may want to help me on this
at soma point in the future - bearing in mi ad the format
of Lord Justice Taylor*s Inquiry, and tne way in which the
evidence was taken and the procedures, it is different to
the way we are doing it here.   For a start we are taking
everything on oath, and it may be that despite what I have
said about public domain and so on that by hearing the
transcripts, if I were for instance to call - let us just
name Mr. Jones - and say, "Mr. Jones, would you cope? You
were there were you? Can you read me the transcript? Is
that what was said?'*, if I were to do that it may, in
fact, elevate that transcript into a different class, and
move it, in using Hr. Isaacs' terms, below the line.

     Mow, I have got to think about that because whilst I
am very concerned that everything that is right and that
is necessary to the Jury - and I have already, as I say,
turned down the application for that reason - it is also
true that I have to do it correctly and fairly and
properly.   So, cay position then with the transcripts is
that I don't think that you can actually make a
concession.   I think that they are in the public domain
and they are different in nature from the documents in the
RTZ case. Nevertheless, although they are in the public
domain they may, in fact, be in such a form that they
cannot be used in these proceedings without consent, that
is, of course.

     Finally, and this is only a very trivial finally, I
suppose, the point about concessions and saying we will
put these in or we will not put them in, strictly speaking
don't apply of course at an inquest. All of us, including
myself, I think fell into the trap that we forgot that we
were actually dealing with an inquisition rather than a
normal adversarial situation in a civil trial, where it is
perfectly normal for one party to say let's do it this
way, and everybody says that's a good idea and we go
ahead.

     I have tried to give you a few reasons about it but -
I ought to say one more thing and that is that, of course
-— well, I have said it, so forget that.   I have tried to
give you a few reasons - whether you agree with .them or
not - it was a very difficult problem for me because in a
sense you all agreed with it.  I know you changed your
minds slightly but on the day you did actually agree. You
said it is better than nothing, and of course it is very
hard for me to say, well if all of you agree, way don't I
agree as well, but I am satisfied in my own mind that I
have actually taken the right decision. Whether you are
satisfied is another matter.

     I hope I have made myself clear.   Yes, iir. Isaacs.
                                                        14




      MR. ISAACS:   Sir, there is only one matter arising
out of that and that is this, and it is a procedural
matter rather than anything else and it may be you will be
able to help me. sir, you know and perhaps you have seen
soiae information recently in the press, about the
difficulties that Mr. Duckenfield and others have so far
as the costs of representation are concerned.

     THE CORONER:   I understand that.

       HR. ISAACS:  You know that as a result it will not
be possible for me at the present time unfortunately,
although that may change come December 14th or December
2 0 tn, but at the present time it is not possible for me to
be here every day to represent Hr. Duckenfield's
interests.    It is obviously important that when Mr.
Duckenfield does come to answer to your sumaoas, to give
evidence before this Jury, that I be here and I do hope in
those circumstances you might be able to give me
primarily, and him therefore, some accoEuaodation as to the
date upon which you intend to call him. That is all I ask
on his behalf.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, I think I can reasonably
safely say if I can judge by the rate at which we have
been going that there is absolutely no prospect of Hr.
Duckenfield being asked to give evidence, or indeed any of
the principal characters - with the sole exception of Hr.
Marshall, and I want to talk to Hr. Hale about that but he
isn't here at the moment so I can't - until almost
certainly January time, lie are not talking about now,
because we have got so many witnesses, and it has always
been ay practice, I tend to take witnesses whose conduct
is going to be called into question at the end. This is
not because   — this is because I think that is right,
simple as that. So yes, we would certainly give you as
mucn advance warning of a bracket when it is likely that
he will be called, and give you as much warning of days
and dates as I possibly can.

     MR. ISAACS:   I am very grateful, sir, because as you
probably realise I have other commitments as well. I
can't keep myself free for the one, two, three or ten days
that Hr. Duckenfield may be required by you, sir.

      THE CORONER:   I quite understand, iir. Isaacs, and as
far as I am able I will do ay very best. As you
appreciate, today we tried to fit this in to accornaodata
you, and when I say you, if there was a representative for
one of the other people I would atteapt to do exactly the
same.   I don't want to prejudice anybody - it is a bad
word - I don't want to disadvantage anybody more than is
absolutely necessary.   I hope tnat is helpful.   Mrs.
Mc3rien.
     MRS. HcSRIEN:   I know I can't persuade you to 3 0 in
the other direction, but would I be able to give some of
my thoughts about what has been said this morning, at .
least do that? Vie are not going to hear Hr. Duckenfield
in this Court but I would like to ....

     THE CORONER:    Hrs. McBrien, you have completely
misunderstood.

     HRS. HcBRIEN:    I am sorry.

     THE CORONER:   What I have said - perhaps I was too
wordy - let me repeat it for you. What I have said was I
don't agree with Mr. Isaacs - forgive rae for putting it so
bluntly - I don't agree with Mr. Isaacs.   I do want to
call Mr. Duckenfield, ilr. Marshall, Mr. Jackson, all the
rest of the people involved unless there is a specific
reason.  If somebody was desperately ill then, of course,
that sight be a different matter.   I am not going to
imperil their life just for the sake of form but generally
speaking I intend to call them, okay?

     HRS. McBRIEM:    I am awfully sorry about that.     Thank
you, sir.




     THE CORONER:    But, Hrs. McBrian ....
                                                            16




     THE CORONER:   But Mrs. McBrien, let me just say
this to you.   I intend   to call thembut that is not to
say that every question  which is puttothem they will
answer because they_will   be entitled to say, I don t
want to answer that."
     Perhaps I could also say this to you, Mr. Isaacs and
to Mrs. McBrien:  you were illustrating the problems of
the prejudicial nature about question, objection, .jury
out, back in, whether it is upheld or not.            I don t
envisage that happening in fact.          It might do but I
don't think it is likely.     I am also confident on tne
whole that if it is clear that questions are being asked
which are incriminatory that the learned barristers and,
indeed, Mrs. McBrien and s o l i c i t o r s o f course, as well,
will realise there is no point in going down a road wnere
you are going to get a thousand "Nos , so to speak.              It
is common sense and in any case I probably would stop it
because I am not sitting here for weeks just hearing
somebody say, "That's an incriminating question.              We
will cross the bridges when we come to tnem.

      Have you all understood what I have said now?           Yes.

     MR. MAXWELL:  Sir, I wonder if you could give the
same consideration to the position of the Sheffield City
Council, who are the certificating authority and who
probably do not have any contribution to make in large
tracts of the evidence?

     It would be of assistance to know, although I
appreciate it would be unreasonable to ask you to say at
the moment, but to know whether the contribution tnat
they can make is likely to be in 1990 or also in 1991.
What I would ask, sir, if it is possible, is for you to
consider the logistics of this difficult task of
organising the inquests in order to say when in all
likelihood Sheffield City Council are likely to be
involved in the evidence.

     THE CORONER:    I am glad you said it is a difficult
logistic task and in fact I am finding it is an^
exceedingly difficult logistic task because it is so
difficult to estimate the length of time that witnesses
are going to take.    However, the same applies as to hr.
Duckenfield.    I have scheduled them, so to speak,
towards the end of the proceedings so it is highly
unlikely. . Unless something extraordinary happens, which
I cannot predict, or' that we suddenly get through
witnesses at the rate which is completely different to
anything we have seen at the moment, I cannot see myself
getting anywhere near to them unti 1 1991.
/     I cannot at the moment be any more precise than
that.    That applies to your clients as well and to yours
and to yours, because as I tried to outline to the jury
and in fact to you, what I am trying to do is to work my
way, so to speak, in towards the ground, through tne    ^
turnstiles, into the terraces looking at what nappened m
the terraces from supporters, police officers, various
other people around* Then when we have done that, start
looking at the structure, so to speak, the buildings, tne
licensing and anything else which I consider to be
relevant, so we are talking about 1990/91.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, that is very helpful and of
course we will endeavour to assist you in whatever way we
can.   It will also assist us in organising our affairs.
Sir, you will, of course, be aware that you have tne ;
power to adjourn the inquests were any occasion to arise
where the conduct of a person not present was called into
question and I would hope that would be borne in mind if
any party was absent in the reasonable expectation tnat
that party's affairs were not being enquired into until a
later date.
     THE CORONER:    Well, that is a very difficult
matter.   I don't think I could agree to that. ^ *.aR1
very sorry*   I know this puts everybody in a difficult
position but it is impossible for me to - supposing I
call a witness whom I anticipate is going to tell me
nothing other than "X" and he then makes some comment
about - if I may use Mr. Catchpole as 'an example - the
size of the gates, or the lettering above the doorway, or
something which might be calling the conduct^of your
party into question.    I cannot adjourn the inquests.  I
have got to press on otherwise we would be adjourning tne
inquests every five minutes.

     So, yes, if I am getting to the point where I know
that I am going to call witnesses from the Sheffield City
Council, or where I know - take, for example, if I was
calling Dr. Eastwood, then I would expect you to be here
because it might well be very relevant wnat he might say
and it might well be calling your clients' part into
question, but I certainly could not agree to do it
generally because it is an impossible situation.    You
have to judge whether in fact you have to be here. ^ I am
taking the inquest generically.   All the evidence is
relevant.   You have to decide as best as you can - it is
hard, I agree - whether on a particular day the evidence
which is going to be here is of such a nature as to
demand your presence.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Thank you, sir.  _I wasn't asking^
you, sir,    agree in advance or to give any undertaking.
                                                    18




'I was merely reminding you of a power of which you were
 obviously fully aware.
     THE CORONER:   I am aware of it, but my present
intention is to adjourn as little as possible because we
must conclude and unless there is some change m rate it
is going to take a good long time without adjournments
and, indeed, we may h a v e some because if somebody £
ill we might be in trouble, but we will cross that bridge
when we get to it as well.
                  (Short adjournment)
                                                                                    19




                                                                         M. J. TISSINGTON
(Jury> p r e s e n t )

     THE CORONER:   Before I call Mr. Tissington, I
mentioned yesterday we were getting a new street plan and
we will just put it up. We will give you the number,
C.284.
                    MICHAEL JOHN TISSINGTON - Recalled

                                     Bv THE CORONER;

Q. Mr. Tissington, before I let the lawyers ask you
   questions, we have now got the plan which shows where
   Wardsend Road is.    Can you just point out where it
   is? It is just off Halifax Road. That is where you
   were taking the minibuses? - A. Yes.

Q. You are still on Oath. - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:               I have finished and we will now turn to
Mr. Maxwell.
        MR. MAXWELL:             I have no questions, sir.
                         C r o s s - e y a n n n « a fl   bv MR. HALE:

 Q. Mr. Tissington, I am not going to ask you any
    questions about the rescue operations, not because I
    am not interested but because there will be many
    other witnesses later as the Coroner has indicated.
    You have been in the Force for some years? - A. I was
    in the Force for 32 years.

 Q. So you have.experience, have you, of making
    arrests? - A. Yes, specific type of arrests.

 Q. You were in the Detective Branch mostly? - A. For the
    majority I was in the CID.

 Q. Have you done much work in dealing with football
    crowds? - A. No, only as a young PC.

 Q. It is just unfortunate you are the first Policeman or
    ex Policeman we have got. I will be very brief.
    When you did have experience of making arrests and so
    on, was it your experience that people would do as
    you asked them or sometimes did they want to do
    something different? - A. No, I think in those days
    they did what you told them.

 Q. That is some time ago? - A. I would say about 27
    years ago.
                                                          20




                                             M. J- TISSINGTON


Q. Do you go back far enough, Mr. Tissington, to the
   days before the breathalyser? - A. Yes.

Q. In the days when we used to ask people to walk a
   white line or lift their finger to touch their nose
   and so on? - A. That is so, yes.

Q. Was it always possible to tell by those tests whether
   somebody was unfit to drive a motor car, for example?
   - A. I obviously do not think it was as satisfactory
   as today1s .

Q. I was going to come on to that. It was obviously
   found to be an unsatisfactory method? - A. Yes.

Q. Because then the scientific method was introduced? -
   A. That is correct.
Q. Was the reason for that because different people
   respond differently to different amounts of
   alcohol? - A. I think that is correct as well, yes.

Q. It is probably common knowledge, is it? - A. Yes.

Q. Within your experience it was not always possible to
   tell just by looking at someone or by how they
   behaved? - A. No, I would agree.

Q. Going back to those days, I will be very brief, did
   you ever have to arrest somebody who was completely
   legless, as the common parlance has it, who was
   totally incapable of standing up? - A. Very often.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Hale, I will let you finish this
question but can you then move on?

     MR. HALE:   This is going   to come up again but if the
ground is laid here it will be   quicker in the future.

Q. Would such a person be easy   to arrest? - A. If he was
   completely legless, yes.

Q. At the other extreme if you had a person completely
   sober and very respectable, would such a person be
   easy or difficult to arrest? - A. If he was sober?

Q. Yes, sober and apparently responsible? - A. I think
   that depends on the individual.

Q. In the category the legless one would the easiest to
   arrest. With the apparently sober person it might .
                                         M. J. TISSINGTON


depend on the man. He might be more difficult? - A.
It would depend on the man and it would depend on the
manner in which you attempted to arrest him.

There is another category in between, that is, people
who are neither completely legless nor completely
sober. What are your prospects of arresting somebody
without trouble? - A. They are probably the dangerous
animal.
     THE CORONER:   I am sorry? - A. They are
probably the dangerous one.

            Cross-examined bv HR. PAYNE:

Mr. Tissington, I want to ask you some questions
please about the Police preparation for this event.
You have told the Coroner and the Jury you were in
charge of a serial which was allocated to supervising
the unloading of Liverpool minibuses in Wardsend Road
North? - A. Correct, sir.

Do you know in preparation for the event there was
drawn up something called an Operational Order? - A.
Yes.
I am holding a copy of the Operational order here in
my hand and it runs to 81 pages of detailed
instructions and the distribution of the Order goes
down, if I may put it that way, to sub-sector Chief
Inspectors. Were you personally given a copy of this
Order? - A. Not personally but I do know we had
access to them and I recall reading the vast majority
of that Operational Order prior.

You have read it? - A. Yes.

I want to ask you some questions about where you
fitted into the Order. You have told the Coroner and
the Jury that your Inspector was Inspector Ellis? -
A. Yes.

Who was in charge of your serial over you, right? -
A. Yes.

Your serial is listed as No. 38? - A. I thought it
was 36 but if you say 38.

36 was the first of the three serials under the
command of Inspector Ellis? - A. I could not exactly
remember.
                                                        22




                                             M. J. TISSINGTON   .


     MR. PAYNE:   I wonder if it would help, sir, if this
witness were to see a copy of the Operational Order whilst
I am asking him questions about it?

     THE CORONER:   I am very reluctant at this stage.
This Operational Order will come in, I expect, later but I
do not suppose you have got twenty copies available of it,
have you?
     MR. PAYNE:     Ihave some copies of it, sir.

     THE CORONER:   This is the very thing I want to avoid.
Are we going to get the Jury to read 81 pages of
Operational Orders?

     MR. PAYNE:   I do see the difficulty about it but we
felt it would be helpful to the Jury if we could see where
this witness - and I fear this will apply to other
witnesses as well   - fitted in to the Police preparation for
the event becausewe understand that some criticism has
been made in the past. Some criticism has been made about
the preparation and certainly for our part we would like
the Jury to see what the Police did to try to prepare
themselves for this event and we would like to illustrate
that by bringing it to life through the witnesses by
fitting their part on to the Operational Order. It is not
just on paper but it applies to the live witnesses that the
Jury are seeing,
     THE CORONER:   Mr. King wants to say something.

   MR. KING:   I support the application that the
Operational Order should be before the Jury.  If my learned
friend wishes to put it in to show what preparations were
made then certainly those I represent want to put it in to
show what preparation were not made and obviously those are
very important matters for the Jury.

     THE CORONER:   I think the Operational Order was one
of the documents which I did actually think we would have
to have, come what may, at some point.  It was just that I
thought we would have it later. I do not mind you putting
it in. I have not got it available today but you have some
copies.
     MR. PAYNE:   I was not sure what your attitude would
be but I think we have got enough copies.

     THE CORONER:   Some of your colleagues will already
know of it.
                                                          23




                                             H.   J. TISSINGTON


      MR. PAYNE:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:   May I just turn to the Jury for a
moment? We are going to finish up with mountains of paper.
We are going to put them in as documents. We are not
expecting you to read every word of it because the lawyers
or I will pick the bits out which are relevant and we will
sort of dip into them as we go along. Are you happy with
that, Mr. Payne? You are not suggesting that we read 81
pages?

      MR. PAYNE:   Oh no, no.

     THE CORONER:   That does not mean to say that we
cannot find the relevant sections. I think what we need
are copies for the Jury. I suspect that the lawyers, if
they have not already got a copy of it, know of it.

     MR. PAYNE:   May we give the Jury copies and perhaps
they would be kind enough to share that one per row?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, Operational Order, C.285.  It is
headed "FA Cup Semi Final, Saturday, 15th April 1989,
Liverpool v. Notts Forest, F Divisional Operational Order".

Q.        MR. PAYNE: Mr. Tissington, I am certainly not
     going to go through the 81 pages but before I dive
     right into the middle of it, has it got a back sheet
     on it which is not photocopied very well? It has got
     the Press to the Police on it and it has got the "FA
     Cup Semi Final, Saturday, 16th April 1989, Liverpool
     v. Notts Forest" and at the bottom of it "F Division,
     Operational Order"? - A. Yes.

Q. On the next first page, "South Yorkshire Police, F
   Division, Operational Order Fl/89, 16th April 1989,
   FA Cup Semi Final, Liverpool v. Notts Forest,
   Saturday, 15th April 1989" and it gives the
   distribution. It has obviously got to go to a lot of
   people.  If one's eye runs down the column, fourth
   from the bottom, in the Police the sort of lowest
   rank for wide distribution is sub-sector Chief
   Inspectors? - A. Yes.

Q. Then it goes to lots of other people. Then over the
   page after the headings it gives information.  I am
   not going to ask for this to be read at the moment
   because this may come up later on but just turn over
   the pages. The information goes on page two with
   subheadings of intention and then method, paragraph
   three, dividing the event into three phases. Then
                                         M. J. TISSINGTON


giving the command of different sectors to different
Officers as one looks at 3.2.4 and down towards the
bottom of page two under 3.3 pre-match briefing.
Over the page, X am now on page 3, at the top of the
page there is 3.4, reporting for duty. 3.5 is
briefing for match day. 3.6 is ground security. 3.7
Criminal Investigation Department. Over the page is
3.8 dog section. 3.9 is the mounted section. 3.10
is control room. 11 is traffic control. 12 is
travel and policing arrangements. 12.2 is route
signing. 12.3 by train Liverpool. Now this applies
to you and so it is helpful perhaps just to highlight
this:

    "Broadly speaking, Liverpool supporters will
    travel on special trains and alight at ,
    Wadsley Bridge Railway Station where they
    will walk the half mile to the ground under
    Police supervision. Service trains will also
    be operating to Midland Railway Station for
    supporters using this. Service will travel
    by special South Yorkshire Transport buses
    under escort to the Leppings Lane end of the
    ground where they will alight. Details of
    train arrival and departure times and duties
    relating to that are shown as Appendix K.
    Then by train Nottingham Forest and then by
    coach Liverpool..."

This is your department:

    "Liverpool supporters who travel by coach
    will be encouraged to use the M62/M1
    motorways leaving the latter at Tankersley,
    Junction 36 — "

Now I pass on because I do not want to dwell on
things which are not directly relevant and then
3.12.10 by coach Nottingham Forest. 3.12.13 by
Transit van Liverpool. Liverpool supporters who
travel by Transit van or similar vehicles will be
encouraged to use particular motorways leaving at a
particular junction. However, it is not feasible to
attempt to channel such vehicles through one check
point and it will be the duty of all serials outside
the ground to check these vehicles and .their
occupants as outlined in Appendix N. Over the page,
6, by Transit van Nottingham Forest. That is
3.12.15. 3.12.17 sporting events, Control of Alcohol
Act as amended. A precis of the Act is included.
                                                    25




                                         M. J. TISSINGTON


Private vehicles from Liverpool. Then running one's
eye down the page, private vehicles Nottingham
Forest, coach and Transit vans, return journey, coach
and Transit vans in general- Page seven, parking
restrictions, removal of vehicles, car parking, South
Yorkshire Transport buses, Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club official car park. Page eight, parking
Police vehicles, obstructions other than by vehicles,
railway property, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
ground regulations. 3.14.2 gives a specific list of
jobs for what a Policeman has to do if he is to seize
property under the ground regulations. Over the page
to page nine, licensed premises, emergency and
evacuation procedures. Down towards the bottom of
the page, administration, prisoner process. Over the
page, and I am on page 10 now, ejections, Court
appearance. Page 11 is missing or found children,
found property, uniform, transport for Police
personnel, refreshment and maps.




                             /Page 12.
               "   ’   ■        '                         26

                                    M.J. TISSINGTON


   Page 12:
   complaints, communications" and page 13:  "Video cameras,
   overtime, reporting off-duty".  Now that is the introduction.

         On the next page, we now go to the numbering in the
   bottom corner, "Appendices".  This gives a list of all
   the different appendices that we are concerned with.

         So over on to page 15 we now embark on the appendices
   and now I will aim straight for your part of this and that
   is at page 43. Page 43 in the bottom right-hand corner.
   Now here we have got sub-sector 14 under Inspector Ellis,
   and he has got, if one looks in the left-hand column,
   he has got Serial 36. Then the ® is the list of people
   in Serial 36 and then one runs down the left-hand column
   of this page and we get Serial 37 under Police Sergeant
   Venables and then over the page we have got Serial 38,
   Police Sergeant Tissington? - A. Yes.

Q. That is your Serial there, Mr. Tissington? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. The particular instructions for your Serial are given:
   "Mini-bus reception Wardsend Road N o r t h " . Now just
   forgive me if I take you through this please.

         "Phase 1: before the match. This Serial will
         supervise the unloading of Liverpool mini­
         buses in Wardsend Road North.  Police Constables
         will ensure that supporters leaving the coaches
         do not possess items prohibited by the ground
         rules, banners, weapons, missiles ©r alcohol.

         Phase 2: during the match.   Refreshments at
         Claywheels Lane.  Half-time will be picked
         up by the South Yorkshire Police coach and
         taken to Leppings Lane near to Catchbar Lane
         for standby duties.

         Phase 3: after the match:   take up a position
         with Serial 20 in front of the North Stand on
         the perimeter track to prevent a pitch invasion
         and ensure the safety of match officials and
         players.

         Note:  this road will be subject to no parking
         cones and only mini-buses etc. will be allowed
         to park .   Barriers will also be available
         for erection at the entrance to this road to
         control entry."

   Mr. Tissington, you mentioned in your evidence yesterday
   that you attended, you and your Serial did in fact attend
   the pre-match briefing? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did that take place on the morning of the match? - A. Yes,
   in the North Stand.
                                                           27


                                   M.J. TISSINGTON


Q. Ip the Stand. Was your Serial allocated to a particular
   place to sit? - A. Not a specific seat but yes a particular
   place in the Stand.

Q. I think that was planned for as well.  If you look at
   page 80 in the bundle, this is Appendix T. If one looks       —
   at the top left-hand box of entries under "Seats"
   Seats 167-178? - A. Yes sir.

Q. One runs one's eye down that lot until one comes fourth
   from the bottom you get "Row 25, 10 P.C.s, Serial 38"? - A.
   Correct sir.

Q. That is your Serial.  So the plans included an allocation
   of your seating place for the briefing? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Right, now I am not expecting you to remember in detail
   what was said but I want the jury to imagine a scene.
   Now we have got all these Policemen in these Serials and
   I think I am correct in saying that altogether there are
   64 Serials altogether. We have got them all seated in
   the Stand on the morning of the match in their allocated
   seats. Were you then addressed by a senior Officer?
   - A. We were addressed by several senior Officers.

Q. In broad outline, I am not asking you in detail, but
   in broad outline what did they tell you? - A. The ground
   conditions; how they wanted the match policing; how it
   should be policed; safety of people; the criminal
   investigation aspect of it obviously/ pickpockets what
   have.you. A great emphasis was placed on no one coming
   into the ground with drink and weapons.

Q. And after you had been addressed by senior Officers
   you then all dispersed to your allocated tasks, did you?
   No, perhaps I am taking it too quickly? - A. More or less,
   yes.

Q.    It is my fault.  Your Serial was one ofthree allocated
     to sub-sector 14 under Inspector Ellis? -A. Yes.

Q.    So after    you had the big briefing in    theStand what
     happened then? - A. I believe all our Serials had another
     briefing, you know, of our own making.

Q.    "All our serials", that is the three .... A. The three
     Serials. If I remember correctly.  Yes, I remember now
     I did not think of this before. We came out of the
     Stand underneath the Stand. Obviously there is so many
     people about you want to keep your Serials together.
     We had another briefing of all three Serials.

Q.    Was this    by Inspector Ellis? - A. I think it was his
     idea but we all participated in it.
                                                             28

                         M.J. TISSINGTON


Q.    Right. Can you go back then to page 43 in the bundle
     wlxich is your particular group of Serials? - A. 43 did you
     say?

Q. Page 43 sir. So those concerned in this particular
   briefing would be Serials 36, 37 and 38? - A. Yes, that
   is right.

Q. Under the command of Inspector Ellis? - A. That is correct.

Q. Now the distribution of this Operational Order did not
   go down to your rank clearly? - A. No.  It is possible to
   see this.  It is just for distribution purposes that it
   says on to Chief Inspectors and that was readily available,
   to any Officer.  It was not taken with us on the day
   I am sure.  I never had a copy of that.  I saw a copy
   at the Police Station prior, it may have been several
   days prior or a week prior, I can't remember, but I
   certainly saw that order.

Q. You have seen it in preparation for the event? - A. Oh
   yes.

Q. Some time before the day? - A. There was a copy.     In
   fact there were several copies in the CID office.

Q. Right, now a moment ago we read through the particular
   jobs of Serial 38 which are on the next page, 44, your
   list of jobs, so at the briefing with Inspector Ellis
   do you remember in broad terms what was said? - A. Yes,
   that second briefing we basically went through, we were
   all obviously working close to one another. We were
   just across the road from the other Serials who were at
   the Railway Station and it was mainly emphasising
   that no one was going to go away from where we were
   with any weapons,    if it was possible to check everyone,
   but it was only possible as they came out of the vans.
   We more   or less checked the vans before anyone got out
   and we decided on this policy. This, now I remember
   was the reason for our second little briefing that
   it would be easier to contain them in the van, check
   what was in the van and make sure rather than get them
   on the street where they could more or less disperse
   if we were inundated with vans all over the place.
   It did not work out like that but we did in fact stick
   to this policy and we searched each van and we decided
   if there was drink in the van it would stay in the van.
   We had no power to confiscate it but they weren't going
   to take   itwith them.

Q. So thissounds, Mr. Tissington, correct me if I am
   wrong, this sounds as if this is a further detailed
   briefing by Inspector Ellis of how exactly you are
   going to put into effect the instructions which are
   given here in the Order? — A. It wasn't.  It was our
                                                     29

                              M .J . TISSINGTON


own little, probably other Serials did it, I don't know,
but we decided that we would have our own little briefing.
I had completely forgotten about that until now.  It was
behind the gymnasium.  I remember it now.

So after that did you then disperse or go down to your
station? - A. We did.

And you have described what you did there. Now just looking
at page 44 the particular instructions for your Serial 38.
After the list of phases, Phases 1,2 and 3 there is the
note about only mini-buses being allowed to park, so those
were the instructions? - A. They were.

Now you have told the Court that in fact the way the
situation developed was slightly different to what had
been expected? - A. Yes.

So at that point you used your initiative, did you, and
went and spoke to Inspector Ellis?  - A. No, I went
over the radio to the Control Room and told them that
there was not the volume of mini-coaches arriving that
we were expecting.

Now just a minute, which Control Room is that? - A. In
the ground I went to because I remember speaking to
Goddard.                                             ^

Is that the Police ....   A. Controller.

Yes, is that the box with the windows looking over the
ground? - A. Well I assume it was there that day.  The
radio I had was to that point.

So your question went in to Police Control to ask whether
you could depart from this instruction? - A. Yes.  It
seemed silly that there was available space there.
Halifax Road was very busy and we could start filtering
cars in at that stage. We did leave sufficient space
should mini-vans still arrive but it seemed ridiculous.

Do you actually happen to know who dealt with your
enquiry at Control.  You got an answer back? - A. I got
an answer back that "Yes, if I thought it was alright
to carry o n " .

Can you give an approximate time to this exchange? -
A. No. Certainly well after 2 o'clock because I thought:
"Well surely if we are going to get any-more mini-vans
they are going to be the ones that have broken down.
If someone is coming to this match they are going to
be here by now". That is the reason I said one expects
people in cars rather than buses to be late.
                                                          30

                      M.J. TISSINGTON


Q. We understand your particular problem.   Nov/ from the
   point of view of the Control Box getting your enquiry in
   did you have a radio yourself? - A. Yes.

Q. Did the other Sergeants? - A. Yes.

Q. So that is three radios in sub-sector ....   A. The
   Inspector, each Sergeant had a radio.

Q. Were you able to communicate yourself directly with
   the Control Box? - A. No problem, no problems, through
   straightaway.

Q. Your message went straight through? - A. Yes.

Q. Then they had givenattention or gave attention to your
   particular request? — A. I mean I would say it was more
   or less straightaway.  There may have been a second's
   delay/ someone turning round and asking:  "Can they
   park cars there instead of buses?" and the answer was:
   "Yes".

Q. They had of course to know what you were talking about?
   - A. Oh yes.

Q. They had to know who you were and where you were and
   what the request meant? - A. Yes.

Q. Then that was varied as you said. Now can I just ask
   you another question then about variation of these
    rules. Apart from following the strict instructions
   which are laid down in this Operational Order,
   Mr. Tissington, if some unusual development took place,
    something which was not foreseen and not exactly catered
  ■ for by these rules, did you have the latitude to use
    your own discretion to cope with the local situation
    as it developed? - A. I would think any Police Officer
    has got that latitude in the initial stages. He has
    probably got no one else to turn to and so you obviously
    use your initiative in the initial stages, but now where
    everyone has got radios you are not long before you can
    check that and as I say we only allow so many vehicles
    in allowing for that contingency of other vans arriving.

Q. Okay. One of the things that is not mentioned parti­
   cularly in this Operational Order is the question of
   confiscating cans of drink if people are carrying large
   numbers of cans as you have described in your evidence.
   Now that is not covered here.  It says . that you have
   got to "ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do
   not possess items prohibited by the ground rules" and
   one of those things is alcohol, but you have told the
   Court that there were large numbers of people carrying
   alcohol, not only single cans but also, I have forgotten
   what the expression is, packs.  Is that right? - A.
   That is right.
                                 M.J. TISSINGTON


Q. You have told the Court that you did not confiscate
   that? - A. We didn't.

Q. Now then just explain why you weren't able *•••     A. I
   think again coining back to using your initiative.   I
   think if we had started walking up to someone and
   saying:  "We are having those six cans of beer" I think
   we should have had some problems on our hands.     I think
   it was a different ball game by saying:   "You are not
   taking them out of the van, lock the van u p".

Q. What makes you think, I know the jury may very well
   understand this for themselves and appreciate what the
   position is but I want you to give it in evidence.   On
   an occasion such as this when people are excited and
   looking forward eagerly to the match and are carrying
   something which according to your instructions they
   ought not to be, what is it then that stops you from
   interfering? - A. I think the sheer volume of people
   at that time.  I mean how many could we contain?
   Because so many were carrying cans of beer.  How many
   could we practially contain and how would we have
   contained them where we were and it was commonsense.

Q. Now Mr. Tissington I want to turn from the planning
   of the event and the way you coped with your job to the
   more painful part just for a moment about what happened
   when you arrived at the scene of the disaster and I
   only want to ask about one small subject and it is this:
   you have told the court that when you first went down
   the tunnel and into the pens your impression was that
   there were still some players on the field? - A. Yes,
   purely an impression.  If you said to me:  "There could
   not have been" I would have to agree with you.  I got
   the impression that there were players there.

Q. The relevance of this is to try to fix the time of
   your arrival in the pen? - A. Yes, I have given so much
   thought and time was irrelevant, totally irrelevant.

Q. Yes, quite. - A. I am afraid I thought about that and
   I have thought about it many times and I certainly
   sat thinking about it last night and I just cannot
   assist you in any way.

Q. The memory which you gave to the Court yesterday was
   of one player being pulled away by another by his
   tracksuit? - A. Yes, but you know was it a ball boy?
   I have an impression of someone in a tracksuit.   That
   is why I thought players were on the pitch.

Q. Okay, so we have got the qualification to your evidence.
   What I want you to just follow for a moment is this:
   you came down the tunnel; you are confronted with the
   pens which were very crowded.  Do you know which of
   the pens you went into? - A. Oh yes.
                                 M.J.   tissington


Which one? - A. I went to the right of the railings.

That is Pen 3? - A. Yes.

And where did you go? - A. I more or less went down the
side of the railings to the front.

Just a minute ....

     THE CORONER:      Do you want the picture?

     MR. PAYNE:      May I just follow his evidence through.

To the front? - A. Yes.




                          Q . Right down
                                                               33

                                                 li. J. IISSIuGTOa




Q. Sight down to the front? - A. Right as far as I could
   go.

Q. So you were able to get through the crowd? - A. Oh,
   yes. W~e dodged and weaved but we didn't have to force
   our way down. As I- recall the vast majority of
   supporters were in - there was like a naif circle, and
   you know, I am only speaking from memory but we were
   able to get right to the front.

Q.   Yes. You say HweM -who is that? - A. Hell, there were
     other Officers following.  I brought ten or so Officers
     through the tunnel when we were requested by another
     young PC to come iamediately.

Q.    I am not asking you to put a number, but what number of
     Policemen should the Jury be thinking about are able to
     make their way through the crowd right down ...? - A. I
     grabbed hold of about ten and then I know that
     Inspector Charles - in fact, you know probably there
     were about 20 or 30 in all, because John Charles casae
     down, Inspector Charles.    I know he went to ray left,
     the other side.

Q. So it is a considerable number of Policemen, and were
   they also able to make their way right down to the
   front? - A. There were already Police Officers there.

Q. Where? - A. In that — - you know, around the front of
   the pitch.  There were some already in there.

0. But I am trying to find out how tightly packed this
   crowd was.  If you could make your way through down to
   the front .... - A. It was tightly packed but away frora
   where the victims were we were able to get through*   I
  .recollect thea being to my right in like a naif circle.
   That was crowded.

Q.    wThen you made your way down a fence is that the fence
     between the two pens? - A. That's right.

Q.   Between Pans 3 and 4? - A. Yes.

Q.    So the people were in a half circle   to   your risht? - A.
     Yes.

Q. tias where they were tightly packed? - A. Yes.

0. Sut you ware able, there was enough space for you to
   get down tne side? - A. i,Te got down but we didn't just
   walk down, wa nad to dodge between people, probably
   shove somebody out of the way, I am not saying we
   didn't do tnat. The intent was to gat to those people.
                                                               34


                                              M. J. IISSIHGTON




Q. were some people in that half circle area so jammed
   tight together that they couldn't nova? - A. I think at
   first, yes.

Q. At first when you arrived? - A. Yes.  I think there was
   some Officers, you know, more or less preventing them
   coming towards the victims. There were spectators
   assisting.

Q. The victias by now were on the ground? - A. They were
   on the ground.

Q. There was a pile of people? - A. There was a pile.   I
   can only describe it as up to the level of the wall.

Q. Thank you.

         MR. ISAACS;    Ho questions, thank you.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. KIKG

Q.   You had a radio? - A. Yes.

Q.   Therefore you were able to communicate witn       the     control
     at the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. As I understand your evidence, when you realised that
   there weren't as many minibuses arriving as you had
   expected you were able to communicate that, I think you
   said to - was it Inspector Goddard? - A. It was
   Sergeant Goddard, yes.

Q. And   that time was well after 2 p.m.?   - A.Yes.

Q. Was it your impression from the fact that not as many
   minibuses had arrived, that fewer people had arrived by
   that time than you were expecting? - A. Mo, I can only
   speak for the number of minibuses.  The Halifax Road
   looked packed with people and cars but tnere wasn't the
   volume of minibuses.

Q. Did you communicate that the volume of minibus traffic
   was less than you had expected?  - A. Yes.

Q. You indicated that whenever you  felt that you wanted to
   take a different course than your instructions you were
   able to get permission, in affect? - Ai I only did tnat
   once.

Q. But that was the purpose of the communication? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Because if you aava clear instructions and you are
   going to do sosnetning differently, p e m a p s "disobey”
                                                             35


                                             H. J. TISSIiiGTOI*




     thern, it is better to get the go-ahead frop a senior
     Officer, isn't it? - A. Yes.   It is co^aonsense.

Q. Yes and no one is criticising you for that. Tell me,
   when you say you saw supporters with a large number of
   cans of drink - and I assume you aean by thatalcohol?
   — A. I assuaed it was alcohol.

Q. I take it froca your evidence that you had therefore
   made a conscious decision that you would not follow the
   order you had been given, the order being to confiscate
   it? - A. Yes, I accept that.

Q. Tell me, did you radio through to control to say,
   "Look, there is an awful lot of people around with cans
   of alcohol but I don't think I'd better confiscate
   because there may be sotae trouble"? - A. Uo, I didn't.

Q. When you gave evidence yesterday you indicated again
   that there came a time when you were struck by the fact
   that people were going to the seai-final lata? - A. I
   thought that.

Q. Yes, and I think you were saying, you were talking
   about 2.30, about 2.45, is that right? - A. Yes, there
   were still a lot of people about then.

Q. t/hat instructions had you been given at your briefing
   as to the time to expect people to arrive? Had you
   been given any? - A. I can't recall.

Q. Had you been given any instructions to tell control as
   to raatters which gave you. concern as to the lateness of
   people arriving? - A. Wo, I didn't tell control.

Q. I know you didn't, but did you receive any
   instructions? - A. No.

Q. So you didn't receive any instructions specifically to
   keep an eye on the time people were arriving? - A. :io.

Q. When you saw these people coaing down to the ground
   late, as you put it,, how many people are you talking
   about? - A. That- is very hard. That is very aard to
   give you a specific answer tnere. There were far too
   siany people at that tiae, I thought.

Q.   Are you talking about hundreds? - A. Oh, yes.

Q*    Qid you at that stage radio through to control and say,
     "Hello control, I ought to warn you, hundreds of people
     are arriving at a much later tine than wa expect"? - A.
     Ho.
                                                          36


                                            H. J . TISSIilGTQH



Q. May I go ahead now to the first time you realised that
   you might be needed at the ground, that is after,
   apparently, the disaster had occurred? - A. Yes.

Q. Your evidence as that you had set out at about quarter-
   to-3 to 10-to-3, you got to the bottom of the hill, and
   you heard a radio uiessage and the message was to stop
   public transport froia going down Leppiags Lane. That
   is what you thought you had heard? - A. In essence,
   yes.

Q. And then you were told to go to Leppings Lane end? - A.
   Not iae specifically. They were asking for all
   available Officers to go to the Leppings Lane end.

Q. Because there was crowd trouble? - A. In essence, yes.

Q. At that stage what did you understand by the phrase, at
   that stage, "crowd trouble"? - A. Well, I was obviously
   thinking that there was fighting taking place.

Q. when you arrived at the ground, and you say tnere were
   a lot of people around, and you recall Inspector
   Charles, Inspector Meek, a lot of supporters, and you
   went through the gate, the big gate we call Gate C, you
   say, "Ue stopped immediately in front of the tunnel"? -
   A. Yes.

Q. "We" is how many? - A. A good 20, 30 Officers.

Q. Who was in charge of those 20,30 Officers? - A.
   Probably Inspector Charles.

Q. was Inspector Charles physically with you among that
   group? - A. Yes.

0. i/as he giving you orders? - A. Not specifically.  I
   recall hia saying something about - because as we got
   to the tunnel either there was one victia brought out
   and then several others - and so we saore or less
   automatically formed a circle around them so that they
   could receive treatment.   Of course, we didn't know the
   raagnitude of it.

Q. I understand that because your evidence was, "tu’e.
   assumed there had been sorae fainting"? - A. Yes.

Q. what I am interested in is that when you stopped
   immediately in front of the tunnel was that just an
   automatic response because you had arrived at the
   tunnel or because somebody told you to stop at the
   front of the tunnel? - A. I think John Charles said,
   "Just stop here", and tnen of course the first two or
   three victims came out.
                                       M. J . riSSIHGTQH



And you assumed fainting? - A. Yes.

So at that stage you hadn't a clue as to what was
happening on the terraces on the other side of the'    -
tunnel? - A. Oh no, I hadn't personally, no.

And you weren*t given any information by any senior
Officer? - A. No, I think there was another Inspector,
there was Meek, and I think he was the one who was
acting as a go-between and trying to find out
specifically where he wanted us.

But you yourself received no information as to what was
happening on the terraces? - A. Not at that stage.

And when you went down the tunnel and you went in
there, was that because of this young Officer coming
out screaming to get in there? - A. A young Officer
came out of the tunnel, as you say, and asked for as
many personnel inside the ground as possible.

To get in there? - A, Yes.

You didn't have any specific duty to do when you got in
there, you just went in there, very properly? - A. Yes.

Before you went in there you weren't given any plan of
campaign as to what to do when you got in? - A. I don't
think there was time to do that.  I don't think there
was time at all.  It was an instant reaction from
everyone there.

I understand that totally.  It is not a criticism of
you at all, this. This is trying to find out what you
had been told and what was in your mind and I think
anybody in your position would have done exactly the
same. You went down in there not knowing what to
expect on the other side of the tunnel, that is
correct? - A. Not knowing to expect what we did.

Yes, not knowing precisely what you were required to do
when you got in there? You didn't know yet? - A. I
don't think, it wasn't for the want of Charles or iieek
trying to find out.  I mean obviously you want to know
where we are wanted and that, but you know, ray
recollection, everything happened so quickly but I am
sure that John Charles and Inspector Ueek were trying
to find out just what was required.

I am sure that is right.   I am just trying to establish
you as an Officer on the ground, as a foot soldier in
effect - I am not criticising you for that., but you
were in the more junior positions than those over you
and it is not a criticism.   You as the foot soldier
                                                           38


                                             li. J. TISSIHGTOiJ




     didn't know what was going to confront you when you got
     through the tunnel? - A. Oh no.

Q. And when you got onto the terraces you didn't know
   until you got there what precisely your job would have
   to be when you got there? You couldn't have known? •-
   A. Mo.                               '

Q. I want to if I nay, to try and identify the time with a
   bit more precision because you indicated that you
   remembered an Officer organising a chain for passing
   out the victims? - A. That is correct.

Q.    And I had a note that you recall that one of the
     Officers you saw at that time was somebody by the name
     of Nesbit? - A. Chief Superintendent Hesbit, yes.

Q. So when you were in a position to see Chief Inspector
   tiesbit was there? - A. I can't recall seeing Chief
   Superintendent Mesbit immediately we went to the front
   of the terrace.   I can't recall that. My recollection
   is Chief Superintendent was of him with other Officers
   trying to pull down the fence, but I think - well I am
   certain - that I had, prior to seeing him , carried
   several victims out, so it is that way round.

Q.    Can I just try and jog your memory because obviously we
     may well hear from other Officers, but that the Officer
     who organised the chain which you have described was
     Chief Superintendent Nesbit? - A. No, no, not the way I
     saw it. That was Superintendent Greenwood.

Q. All right. Well, we are going to hear evidence you
   see, so I am giving you the opportunity to coalmen t on
   what I aia putting to you.

          THE CORONER:   Can we just put this question
     again, so that we have got it clear,  what you were
     putting to him, if I may, was that the chain was being
     organised by Chief Superintendent Wesbit:

Q. And what you are saying is that in your recollection a
   chain was being organised by Superintendent Greenwood,
   is that right? - A. I recollect that Superintendent
   Greenwood was doing that more or less right frora the
   start and that victiras were going both ways, and tnat
   wasn't Nesbit. He may have been there.•

Q»        M3. XING:   Ue are going to hear a whole body of
     evidence so it is only right and proper that I should
     direct your attention to something which may be of
     importance, and to try and clarify it with you.    I will
     put it to you very siniply so you c?»n consent on it:
     prior to the arrival of Superintendent Nesbitthere was
                                                            39


                                            M. J . TISSIMGTOtl



     no organised chain of rescue at all? - A. Ho, I
     wouldn't agree with you there.

Q V I understand you don't and you are entitled to say
    that, and we are going to hear a whole body of
    evidence, but when you were there you say that you saw
    Officers tearing down the fences? - A. That was after
    we had probably taken several victims out and I recall
    these Officers tearing the fence down.   One of those
    was Chief Superintendent -Jesbit but prior to that I had
    seen Superintendent Greenwood.

Q. The tearing down of the fences was - well, we will be
   able to see a video.  I don't know, have you had a
   chance to see the video? - A. No, I haven't.

Q. You haven’t, so be it.   I put it to you so you can
   coEMaent on it, that the initiative for tearing down the
   fences came, in fact, frosa spectators, froa fans? - A.
   That saay be so. That raay be so - I don't know about
   that.

Q. And that, in fact, the picture which one would see
   would be of the tearing down of the fences, not by
   Police Officers in the initial stages, but by fans? -
   A. You may be quite right.

Q.    ^   THE CORONER:   Sorry, I didn't hear - ne may be
     right, did you say? - A. He may be right there.

Q.        MS. KING:   Who did you understand, if anybody,
     was in charge of the rescue operation which you were
     involved in? who were you taking your orders fron? -
     A. First of all, in the first stage, Superintendent
     Greenwood, and there was another Superintendent there
     and I, in fact, got theia mixed up - I didn't know
     either of them by name at the tine - and then Chief
     Superintendent Nesbit.

Q. I don't suppose you ever looked at your watch at all? -
   A. Ho.

Q. But your recollection is that there were a large nu;nber
   of people on the pitch when you first went into that
   terrace? - A. Oh yes, there were people on the pitch.

Q. And we are not just talking about players, we are
   talking about ordinary spectators? - A. Yes.

0. Could you indicate, perhaps with the plan, how far on
   the pitch they were stretched? - A. I have no idea.

Q. what was the impression you gained? - A. There was
   quite a few people facing us and they were on the
                                        il. J .   TISSIiiGTOri




pitch, but I mean for a start I am a good four foot
below the pitch, and just wasn't — — I was conscious of
people being there, but there was a prime aim.

vias the picture which presented itself to you one of
quite a chaotic scene on the other side of the
perimeter fences onto the pitch, or were people just
standing around, or what? - A. I am sura there was, but
you just wasn't conscious.    Nothing aeant anything to
iae at that tiiae other than getting those victims out,
nothing, and there is a lot of things, obviously, I
can't remember because all we were concerned with was,
could we get thea from under that pile.

And what was the seans by which they were to be got       out
onto the pitch?  What was the route ’which they were
being taken?




   - A. Initially we were going backwards ....
                                                                          .“V-


V.                                                                       41



                                                   M. J.    IISSINGTON



              - A. Initially, we were going backwards through the
              tunnel.   The tunnel became blocked and that is when - I
              had seen Superintendent Greenwood prior, but then I
     B        became conscious of him organising this chain and saying,
              "We have got to do a chain."

         0. How were they getting out via this chain? - A.. We were
            lifting them out.

         0. Over what? - A.   We were lifting the top victim, passing
            him on and then   through the gate.

         Q. Through the gate? - A. Yes.

         Q.   So the means by which the victim was to be got out on to
              the pitch was through the gate? - A. Initially and then I
              believe via the fence that was down at that stage.

         0.   So initially the only way in which they could be got out
              would be through the gate? - A. Or through the tunnel,
              which we did, but the tunnel became blocked.
     D
                         Cross-Examined by HR. CATCHPOLE;

         Q. Mr. Tissington, as we have heard you are an Officer with
            very considerable experience during your time with South
            Yorkshire Police? - A. I was.

         Q. You are the first ex-Police Officer to be called.   this
            may seem a very obvious question, but in general a Police
            Officer is concerned with two things: the first is to
            ensure public safety? - A. Correct.

         Q. The second is to ensure public order? - A. Yes.

         Q. If you turn to page two of the Operational Order you have
            in front of you, paragraph 2.1 under "Intention", we sea
            that that general obligation is reflected for the
            policing of a football match.   It is the intention of
            the police to allow this match to take place and to
            ensure public order and safety both inside and outside
            the ground? - A. Yes.

         0. You, of course, were outside the ground, but in carrying
            out your duties those two principles would have been
            paramount in your raind? - A. Yes.

         0. It is second nature to you after such a long time in the
            Police Force? - A. Yes.

         0. It would not have mattered whether you were positioned
            anywhere on that day, those two principles would have •




     H
                                                           42



                                        M. J. TISSINGTON


   dictated the course of action you choose to take in any
   given situation? - A. Yes.

              Cross-Examined by MRS. McSRIEN:

0. Mr. Tissington, what time did the first lot of fans set
   off from the car park where you were stationed? - A. Do
   you mean on foot?

Q. Yes.   When they parked... - A. I think the first van
   load was about 11.30.

Q. What time did Superintendent Nesbit - was it
   Superintendent Nesbit? - A. Yes, Chief Superintendent
   Nesbit...

Q. And Superintendent Marshall, they called at the car park.
   Do you know what time that was? - A. Chief Superintendent
   Nesbit came round at midday and Superintendent Marshall
   was actually very closely...   I cannot actually recall
   who came first, but I know it was a very short period of
   time between them.   He was on foot.

0. They checked the mini buses for weapons and drink, I take
   it? - A. They didn't.

Q. They didn't? - A. No, we did.

Q. You did. - A. They didn't do that. That was asked of us
   specifically by Superintendent Marshall.   He
   specifically asked and, of course, we were already doing
   that, but he specifically asked it.   He did not
   personally do it, no.   He probably only stayed with us
   five to ten minutes.

Q. He said there were 17 mini-buses parked at one stage in
   the car park? - A. I think we only had 17 if I recall.

Q. Those mini-buses were not allowed to carry alcohol, so
   you told the court yesterday.   They wouldn't have any,
   anyway? - A. No.   I said there appeared to be two types.
   There seemed to be the official van with the official
   driver who did not have any alcohol on board at all.    I
   mean, there may have been the odd can, but there were not
   packs of alcohol. • Some of the unofficial forms of
   transport, because you could tell which they were, they
   had improvised seats, I think some may have been
   builders' vehicles or something like that, they certainly
   had some alcohol.   I referred to one in particular that
   even had the bar stools and the little tables.

0. In the Operational Order I think it did suggest that only
   mini-buses should have parked in that place? - A. Oh,
   yes.
                                                              43



                                          M. J. TISSINGTON


0. So'there would not be the problem of these other
   improvised vans being checked at all? - A. No, I think,
   with great respect, it referred to, and included, the
   other, type of vehicle.  I don't think there was any
   dispute there.

           THE CORONER:   Can I just just say that what it
     actually says is "...mini-buses etc."     That is what it
     says.    You can have a look, page 44.

          THE WITNESS:   With great respect, madam, I don't
     think that was in question at all that that is what it
     was intended for.

0.        HRS. HcBRIEN:   Yes.   I just thought it may have
     given you a bigger problem, that with these improvised
     vans they may not keep to the rules as much. - A. Mo.

0. When you checked the vehicles did you find any weapons at
   all? - A. No, we didn't.

Q. None at all?’- A. No.   I think we prevented a couple of
   buses taking some banners on poles.   We advised them
   that they weren't going...   They could take the flag if
   they wanted but they weren't taking the poles.   There
   was no problem.   They agreed.

Q. They obviously were not aggressive people?   They weren't
   going out for trouble, they were just going to a match? -
   A. The ones I spoke to, we had quite a bit of banter with
   them.   You have got to get that rapport going and you
   are off to a good start then, but I m sorry, I keep
   coming back to this question of alcohol, why they have
   got to carry so much.   It might be the age groups today,
   I don't know.

0. It wasn't the ones from the mini-buses who were carrying
   alcohol to the ground because they didn't ha^e any, did
   they? - A. Not the official ones.    They were proper
   mini-buses with correct seats.    It appeared to me - they
   may have been the mini-bus company rules that no alcohol
   would be carried on their coaches.

0. Yes, I believe it is because my son travelled on a coach
   and no alcohol was ever allowed on that coach.     I do
   know that and I think this is the general rule. - A. I
   must accept what you say.    That certainly was...    I am
   out- of touch with things like that.   That was conveyed
   to me on the day and I thought there was obviously a rule
   because why are they not carrying it.    It was the people
   who got out of the official ones who asked where they
   could obtain a drink more or less, and it was those who
   we said, "If you use our loaf, go through the back door
   of that public house and you will be all right."
                                                           44



                                        M. J. TISSINGTON


Q. So'how many mini-buses of these improvised ones were
   there? - A. I think it was a balance of about 50%.

Q. Quite a lot then really and you could not approach those.
   As you said earlier it would not have been a wise thing.
   - A. We did approach the coaches.    I told the chaps it
   would be far easier to check who had got tickets while
   they were sat there in the coach, or in the van, rather
   than let them get on the street and walk away.   Before
   they get out of the van let's have a look at their^
   tickets, let's have a look round the van, and we did. We
   looked round each van and as I say I can only recall one.
   There may have been others but I wasn't there.    I can
   specifically recall one where where they had got quite a
   large banner on two large poles and said, "I'm sorry, but
   you are not taking that to the ground."    However, I
   personally did not check every van but I was there when
   they got the tables out, the chairs.    I was there with
   the banner and I was there on several occasions when they
   had got quite a few packs - quite a few.

0. Did they object when you told them they couldn't take
   this banner down? - A. Well, there was the usual, but
   there was no...

Q. What about tickets?   Did you find anybody there without
   tickets? - A. Of the people we checked from the vans
   every one had a genuine ticket.

Q. If you remember, please, what time you heard the
   announcement that the match had been stopped? - A. We had
   actually left our position.   That is all I can say. We
   left between quarter and ten to. We had left our
   position.   There were still a lot of Officers on Halifax
   Road, but it was obvious that we were not going to be
   employed up there any longer and we were actually near
   the bottom of Halifax Road when I heard that.

Q. Were you going off duty then? - A. No, we had been on
   duty since 8.00 or 8.30. We were going for some
   refreshments and then as a stand-by.   We were going to
   Claywheels Lane where there was a police depot for
   vehicles.    It is our transport place where a meal would
   be provided and then our brief was any stand-by.    If no
   problems we were going into the ground for the end of the
   match.    You see Officers round the perimeter of the
   ground after the match.

0. Can you remember what time you got to Leppings Lane, the
   main perimeter gates? - A. Again, madam, I cannot
   remember the time.   Time became irrelevant.   I am
   terribly sorry.
                                                               45


                                            M. J. TISSINGTON


0. And the distance away when you heard the announcement?
   Do you remember what distance away from the main gates
   you were when you heard? ~ A. We were not near the main
   gates. We were near 'to the bottom of Ciaywheeis Lane,
   but that is only a very short distance from the ground.
   It is the bottom of Leppings Lane, more or less.
   Ciaywheeis and Leppings Lane join on an island, more or
   less.

          THE CORONER:   Mr. Griffiths, could you just p u t t h e
     pointer on Ciaywheeis Lane, to see where the Officer is
     talking about:

0. You were at the corner there, weren’t you? - A. Yes.
   They don't actually join, but they virtually join there
   on a large traffic island.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   How long would it normally take you
     to get to the main entrance down that...? — A. Minutes.
     In fact at one stage we were running there.

Q. When you got to the tunnel...   You went through Gate C
   and you got to the tunnel entrance and you found two
   bodies lying there, the ones you thought had fainted. -
   A. They weren't just lying there, they were being
   attended to by police officers.

0. They were? - A. Oh, yes.   I thought at the time it was a
   case of loosening their tie and get some air round them,
   a fainting job.   They weren't just lying there.

Q. They were being attended to? - A. Oh, yes.    Then I
   believe a couple more came and we formed a circle more or
   less them. There were quite a few people milling about
   there and coming up the tunnel and _sa_what we did was
   just form a circle round them so they could receive
   attention without being interfered with.    That is all we
   did.   They were being attended to.

0. I don't suppose you would know if those particular ones
   recovered or not? - A. No.

0. Did you wonder why the tunnel was so congested that day?
   Did you wonder why there were so many people in that
   particular area?

          THE CORONER:   That is not an improper question,^
     but...   I will just remind you what he said.    He said
     that he went down the tunnel, it wasn't congested.    It
     got congested later on when they were bringing the people
     out.   He cannot possibly say anything about the
     congestion earlier because he wasn't there.
                                                                   46



                                          M. J. T I S S I NGT ON


        ' MRS. McBRIEN:   We don't know the time, do we? ^ We
     have not established any times, so yes, I see the point.
     Some people could have moved out of there.

          THE CORONER:   I will put the question for you and
     then you can tell me if I have put it right:

0. I am right, that when you first went down the tunnel,
   having paused outside and went up, you could get through
   quite easily? - A. You and I would have walked down, or
   got through that tunnel.

Q. Then you were able to get back out with about eight to
   ten different people? - A. I personally?

Q. Yes, you personally.    Then for some reason it blocked up
   and you could not get back out? - A. I recall with one
   Officer trying to work on a victim.   We got him out.   We
   were actually working on the steps but we were trying to
   give him heart massage on some steps and he was not laid
   parallel on the steps.    He was laid down, which was
   doing no good whatsoever.    It was then that we could not
   get through the tunnel.    I had been going and going and
   going, just taking them and handing them more or less to
   other officers and running back in.    We were trying to
   revive this poor chap and we were doing no good
   whatsoever where we were, in the position, the location.
   We decided we were going to take him out.    I remember
   him, a big, heavy young fellow.    We were going to carry
   him.   There were a couple of supporters with us as well
   actually and we could not get;    We looked up and
   suddenly we could not get through that tunnel.     That is
   the first time I became aware.    I didn't see it slowly
   fill up.   I am wondering at time whether it was real.
   I was walking round in a dream.

0.        MRS. McBRIEN:    You don't know what time that would
     be, when it blocked up? - A. I am sorry, madam, I haven't
     a clue.   If you told me it was ten minutes to five I
     would agree with you.

0. You do mention there was a pile of victims when you were
    able to go into the pen, you do mention that.   Did you
  • give an order or did somebody in higher office than
    yourself give an order so that they would keep the tunnel
    open?   If you had got down it and you say it was
    possible in the beginning, would it have been wise to
    continue to keep it open? - A. I don't think in all
    honesty that whoever gave an order under those
    circumstances would have kept those fans from trying to
    get out of those terraces.   I think if you had mounted
    the second battalion of the Grenadier Guards there, I
    don't think they would have stopped anybody.
                                                                  47


                                              M. J. TISSINGTON


     I,'and you, wouldn't have obeyed any order.    I certainly
     wouldn't if I had got - my children are grown up - but if
     I had got young people in there I would not have obeyed
     any order and I have been used to taking orders since I
     was 17 years of age, but I wouldn't have done.    I would
     have disobeyed anybody and woe betide anybody who tried
     to prevent me from getting out.

     That is just as it is conveyed to me.    It is just my
     feelings.   You can't describe to the people in this room
     what was going on.    I am sorry.   Yes, there may-have
     been an order.   I can remember the gentleman behind you
     shouting through a megaphone, probably 99% of what he
     said went through that ear and out of the other, but I
     can remember him just continually shouting, "Form a
     chain. We have got to have a chain."     That i s ■what
     sticks in my mind.    He probably gave many, many other
     orders, I don't know.    I cannot recall that. We had one
     intent and that was to get to those victims.

Q.. At the time was an announcement given by a senior officer
    that there was an emergency, that people should remain
    calm and be as helpful as possible by making the exit
    routes clear from the area that was the troublesome area?

Q.        THE CORONER:   Just a minute.   Just answer the
     question in this form: did you hear any order from any^
     senior officer that people should stay calm? - A. I can't
     say that I did in all honesty.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   You do think it would have made a
     difference to the way you were working...    If somebody
     in higher office would have given this instruction out it
     would have made your job much easier for getting the
     victims out through the tunnel? - A. If we could 'nave
     kept the tunnel open, I agree with you.

0. And the people calm.   I think people would have
   responded if someone in higher authority would have given
   that order, knowing that people were dying.

             THE CORONER:    I don't think you need to answer
     that.

             MRS. McBRIEN:    I'm sorry.   Thank you very much.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

0. Mr. Tissington, yesterday, late afternoon, you described
   in fairly graphic terms a Superintendent virtually
   hanging off the fence.   I think those were the words you
   used? - A. That was my impression.
                                                               48


                                            M. J. TISSINGTON


    O. You tried to identify that Superintendent yesterday and I
       think you said it was either Superintendent Greenwood or
       Superintendent Hurray? - A. At the time I knew both their
       faces.   I had never worked with them.   I didn't know
B      their names.   Obviously I have identified them since.

    Q. The officer you describe virtually hanging off the fence
       was in fact Superintendent Greenwood I understand from
       the evidence you have given this morning? - A. That is
       correct.

    Q. You have described a few minutes ago the order that you
       heard ringing through your ears to form a chain, "We have
       got to have a chain," the words you used a few moments
       ago? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did those words come from the person virtually hanging
       off the fence or from somebody else? - A. Ye<s.  The
       reason I say hanging on the fence...   I made my
       statement from a tape recording the following morning.
       I took the dog a walk and just took the tape recorder and
       spoke into it what happened.   That was my recollection
D      of this man, because he was above the rest of the people.
       That is why I say he appeared to be hanging as they he
       had hung himself on the fence, shouting through a loud
       hailer and those were the words I heard, "We have got to
       form a chain.   It's the only way."




                Q. When you were asked questions....
G




H
                                                 A. LINDLEY


Q. When you were asked questions this morning by my
   learned friend, Mr. King, you said that the routes
   initially used to remove victims - I think you said
   to get victims out - was through the tunnel and
   through the gate? - A. Yes.

Q. It was later that the route via the fence was used,
   is that correct? - A. That is the way I see it, yes.

Q.   Can I also be clear about this; when you were inside
     the enclosure initially the person from whom you were
     taking your instructions to use those routes was
     Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Initially, yes, that
     is correct.

Q.    At the end of your evidence yesterday afternoon you
     said words to the effect, "If he had not taken hold
     of the situation we would not have done it”. I hope
     I do not paraphrase your words too inaccurately but
     who are you referring to there because in the
     preceding parts of your evidence you had referred to
     both Chief Superintendent Nesbit and Superintendent
     Greenwood? - A. I think forming the chain and getting
     some semblance of order, I am referring to Mr.
     Greenwood.

Q. When you said words to the effect, "If he had not
   taken hold of the situation”, the person you are
   referring to there is Superintendent Greenwood? - A.
   In the initial stages, yes.

     THE CORONER:   You have had, I am not going to say a
hard time actually-because I think I have tried to examine
you properly and I think that everybody has done the same
but nevertheless, of course, it is a traumatic time for
you, particularly because you are the first Officer or ex
Officer on the scene and so I am exceedingly grateful for
what is a clear exposition of what you perceived, what you
saw and what you did. Thank you very much indeed.

     By the way, just in case there is any misunderstanding
what I said to Mr. Tissington was not intended to put any
value on his evidence. I was just speaking to him in a
purely personal capacity. Somebody has got to be first and
it is always hardest for that person.

                    ALBERT LINDLEY (Sworn) '

                        Bv THE C O R O N E R :

Q. You are Albert Lindley? - A. Yes.
                                          A. LINDLEY


Of                   in Sheffield? - A. That is
right.

Mr. Lindley, I apologise that you have been kept
waiting but you can see it is not very easy to get
the timings right.  You live at                    a nd
you have lived there for 52 or 53 years? - A. Yes.

So you know the area well? - A. Yes.

I am right in saying that____________________________
there are 27 rented garages or thereabouts? - A. Yes,


You are the Secretary of the organisation and you are
responsible for looking after those? - A. Yes.

The entrance to the garages is off Leppings Lane ? -
A. Yes, that is right.

It is not off                .   To get in you go in
off Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

On the 15th April 1989 you and your wife went to the
garages, is that right? - A. That is right-

At about twelve o'clock? - A. That is right.

The reason why you went was what? Why did you go? -
A. It was to stop the cars from coming on parking.
To stop the supporters bringing their cars on and
parking.

Any other reason? - A. To stop the fans and all the
people from coming on and urinating.

I take it that that happened before on previous
occasions? - A. It happens every match.

So you know you have got to do something about? - A.
Yes.

You went at twelve. Is that the time that the
supporters usually start arriving? - A. Yes, they
usually start at about that time.

Did you have to send a few away? - A. Yes, quite a
few. We send them to the toilets at the top of
Parkside Road, the toilets at the bottom of Parkside
Road, and tell them to go into the ground if they
have got tickets.
                                         A. LINDLEY


How long did you stay guarding these garages? - A.
Until after three o'clock.

On the whole did these supporters who came on and
tried to park or tried to urinate, did they go when
you told them to move? — A. Most of them. One or two
just ignored us and they performed in front of my
wife. They were not bothered.

How many would that be, just one or two? You have
just said one or two and I want to be sure that that
is what you mean? - A. There were one or two odd
ones. They went away but when they came down in
fives and sixes we just could not do a thing about
them. We just had to let them carry on.

Are you saying that when they came singly or only
just a couple of them they would take notice of you
but when they came in groups of five or so, if you
told them to scram they just did not bother and they
just went ahead? - A. That is right.

How many supporters in total wee-ed, if I can use
that word, on your forecourt would you say? - A. It
is difficult to say.

Was it 5, 50 or a hundred? - A. Around 50.   Round
about 50.
Were they from twelve to three, do you remember? - A.
That is right.
That is a three hour period. Was it more or less the
same throughout the time or did it change with time,
the people who came or the problems you had? * A. Now
and again it went a bit quiet and then there were
quite a few came down as if a coach-load had come in
and parked on Herries Road.

They came in batches? - A. That is right.

I want to take you on to about three o'clock.   Did
you have a watch on? - A. No.

Did you know whether the match had started? Can you
tell from where you are whether the match starts? -
A. Yes, from experience there is a roar from the
crowd on the ground and we knew from that crowd.
                                                          52




                                             A. LINDLEY


Q. Prom the roar? - A. From the roar of the crowd we
   knew the players were coming out of the tunnel on t o _
   the field. That is my experience.

Q. When you hear the loud roar you know that the players
   are coming out and that the match has either started
   or is about to start in a few minutes' time? - A.
   That is right.

Q. You cannot see it? - A. No.

Q. Did you hear this roar on the 15th April 1990? - A.
   Yes, we heard the roar.

Q. What happened after that? - A. My wife and I said,
   "It sounds as though that is it" and it did go quiet
   in the lane. There was not much traffic, not many
   supporters coming along, and we noticed that the
   Policemen at the other side of the road, bottom of
   Eskdale, began to move his barriers a bit. Then all
   of a sudden after a few more minutes there was a
   terrific surge of bodies along Leppings Lane. There
   seemed to be hundreds of people running along
   Leppings Lane intent on getting to the ground. We
   stood and watched them. We were amazed. We stood
   and watched them and to describe it, it was just like
   putting a lid on a boiling kettle when they got to
   the ground. I do not think any Policemen, no matter
   how many there were, they could not have stopped
   them.

Q. I want to get this quite right. You are saying you
   heard the roar of the crowd which you took to be the
   start of the match or the players coming out? - A.
   That is right.

Q. At that point it was fairly quiet, are you saying, or
   not? - A. Yes, it was fairly quiet.

Q. Leppings Lane was relatively empty at that point? -
   A. Yes, therewere not many people there.

Q . After that there was a large crowd of people there
    running down Leppings Lane towards the ground with a
    view to getting in. Is that what you are saying? -
    A. Yes.

Q. You say thesei people were in hundreds. We are not
   talking about five or ten? - A. No, they were
   literally hundreds.
                                                           53




                                             A. LINDLEY


Q. Thousands or hundreds? - A. I would not say
   thousands.

Q. You would not? - A. I would imagine say a large choir
   or a battalion of soldiers or something like that.
   There were quite a few hundreds.

Q. Did they wear colours, Liverpool colours? - A.
   Predominantly.

Q. They went past you and then you went back home? - A .
   Yes.

Q. You switched the TV on and then you went back home? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You switched the TV back on and you heard what
   happened later, is that right? When you got in
   actually did you switch the TV on straight away? - A.
   We stayed around quite a few minutes because we
   wondered what was happening and we stood there
   watching. Then we saw people coming out distressed.

Q. So you actually were still on the road when people
   were coming back out? - A. Yes, and they were looking
   for telephones. We spoke to them and they were
   asking where they could telephone from. We took a
   few into my home and I took their names and
   addresses. We could not get through to Liverpool to
   their friends and relatives. The lines were all
   blocked. Everybody were ringing. Somehow Liverpool
   had got to know. They were ringing Sheffield and
   Sheffield were ringing them and nobody were getting
   through anywhere.

Q. The lines were all blocked. Everybody was using the
   telephones? - A. That is right. I took a few names
   and addresses and numbers and telephoned.

Q. Have you ever seen such a large group of numbers
   arriving in that way at that time before? - A. Not in
   that manner, no. Normally up to that match the
   Police escorted larger numbers from the station down
   to the ground. That is the only time we saw large
   numbers but that day it was not like that. They just
   came on in dribs and drabs.

                Cross-examined bv MR. PAYNE:

Q. Mr. Lindley, I wonder if you could help by looking at
   the map which is on the screen to show whereabouts
                                                           54




                                              A. LINDLEY


     you were standing by the forecourt of your garages? -
     A. Yes.
Q. The Officer is pointing to a place which is where we
   think you were? - A. That is about the entrance to
   the car park.

Q. Is that about where you were standing? - A. Yes.

Q.        THE CORONER:    That is on the northern corner we
     will call it of Bickerton Road and Leppings Lane.
     Would you agree? - A. Just a little bit further on
     from the corner of Bickerton Road.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:   Further on towards the stadium or
     towards the roundabout? - A. Towards the roundabout.
     About fifty yards there is about four shops and there
     is the car park.

Q. Mr. Lindley, using your own words and taking your own
   time, explain what you mean by your reference to
   "like putting a lid on a boiling kettle”? Describe
   what you are trying to explain? - A. We could see it
   looked as though there was trouble. There was a
   large number of people outside the ground and we
   could see the Police trying to do something with
   them. It just looked as though there was something
   boiling up into trouble and we said, "There is going
   to be trouble there" and, of course, this surge of
   people came along. That is what it looked like, a
   lot of people outside the ground, massing, moving
   around, going around, and all trying to push towards
   the turnstiles and then this surge of people came
   along and just pushed them on. They just joined them
   and started pushing. It was just awful.

Q. For how many years have you been guarding these
   garages on big events? - A. About eight or ten years
   now.

Q. Have you ever seen so many people arriving just
   before the kick-off? - A. No, never so many.
   Normally we get three or four cars round about five
   to three, just on the last two or three.minutes.
   They just come in, dump their cars on the side and
   then off they go. The number of people are usually
   finished by about ten minutes to, five minutes to
   three unless there was a late train of course.
                                                              55

                                     A. LINDLEY


    Q. Now you have fixed the time, you have helped the Court to
       fix the time of this surge of people by talking about the
       "loud roar"? - A. Yes.  These people that came along the
       lane must have heard the roar.  They must have been
       somewhere near the roundabout when they heard it and just
g      that few moments on they came. —

    Q. How long after that was it that the first people started
       coming out of the ground distressed? - A. Oh I could not
       say exactly just a few minutes, not a long time, just
       a few minutes because we were busy sort of flabbergasted
       and we were just watching all these people milling round
       the railings round the turnstiles and I could not tell
       you the passage of time, say five/ten minutes.


                    Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

    Q. Mr. Lindley, just one or two questions, if I may, just
       so I can picture it in my own mind and for the jury.

             From where you were standing you could see the
       Leppings Lane entrance? — A. Not unless we went out into
       the road a little and then we could see the entrance to
       the ground.

    Q. And did you do that? - A. Yes.

    Q. Very well, and what you saw before there was a crowd of
       people was a lot of people around the entrance to
       Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

    Q. Then the roar goes up? - A. Yes.

    Q. And then a crowd of people come down Leppings Lane towards
       where the crowd is already standing? - A. That is right.

    Q. Did that crowd that came down Leppings Lane fill the
       street? - A. Oh yes, right the way across the road.

    Q. And were they walking or were they running? - A. Running.
F   Q. Fast? - A. Fast.

    Q. Were you still watching as they got to the Leppings Lane
       entrance? - A. Yes, we walked out into the road a little
       to see what was happening and that is what we s a w .

    Q. And they just surged into the back of the people who
       were already there? - A. Yes.

             MR. ISAACS:   Yes, thank you very much.


                      Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

    Q. Mr. Lindley, where you live and where you could see the
                                                          56

                                  A. LINDLEY


     ground, are there usually Police Officers at the end of
     the side roads to stop people going down? — A. Yes.

Q.    When you came out at the time you have told us about
     where were those Policemen then? - A. Well I just cannot
     remember exactly.   I don't think they came on at
     12 o'clock those Policemen, they came on after that
     round half-past-12 to 1 o'clock.   I don't know.

Q. Yes, but when you told us about being conscious of a
   lot of people coming into Leppings Lane, that time, much
   later on, you have just been telling us about it? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there any Policemen at the end of the side roads
   then? - A. Oh yes, yes.

Q. There were? - A. Yes.
Q. Could you tell us where they were? I don't know whether
   it is possible to show us on the plan? - A. They were
   at the bottom of all the roads that lead into Leppings
   Lane.

Q. Can we start with the other side of the road say
   Eskdale Road? - A. Eskdale Road, yes.

Q. Were there any there? - A. Yes, barriers across
   Eskdale Road to stop the cars from coming off Leppings
   Lane and going down Eskdale Road.

Q. Were the Officers still there when you came out to go
   into the road to see what was happening? - A. Yes.

Q. So this great mass of people will have run past those
   Officers? - A. That is right.

Q. Apart from Eskdale Road were there any Officers at the
   bottom of, well first of all Bickerton Road? - A. Yes.

Q. And were there Officers at the end of Fielding Road?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And Officers at the end of Vere Road? - A. Yes.

Q. And they were just standing blocking anybody's route
   into the road to stop people getting in? - A. I didn't
   notice the ones what they were doing at the time at
   the top of Vere Road and Fielding Road, I could not
   see them at all but I assumed that they were still there
   because that is what they usually do.

Q. Was there anything to prevent this group of people
   you have described going along Leppings Lane? - A. Oh
   no, no.

Q. You say that this group of people were able to go all
   the way along Leppings Lane to reach the turnstile area?
   - A. That is right.
                                                              57

                                      A. LINDLEY


Q. And if the Officer can just point out on the model, if
   you point out the perimeter gates to the turnstile area
   you say this group of people joined those perimeter
   gates? - A. Yes.

Q. And there was nothing to prevent them getting them?
   - A. Nothing at all.

          MR. KINGt     Thank you very much.

           THE CORONER:    Mr. Lindley, thank you very much
     indeed. Oh sorry.

           MR. PAYNE:  So sorry. I wonder if, Mr. King has
     asked questions about the Police stationed at the
     side roads which they were blocking off and he asked
     a question about those Policemen being there when this
     crowd ran past.  I wonder if I might ask a question
     arising out of that?

           THE CORONER:     By all means.

           MR. PAYNE:     Thank you very much.


               Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q.    You follow what you are being asked about, Mr. Lindley.
     You are being asked about the crowd of hundreds running
     down Leppings Lane when you think they must have heard
     the roar? - A. That is right.

Q.    And you are being asked about the Policemen who were
     guarding the side roads? — A. Yes.

Q. Now-from what you saw could those Policemen have done
   anything about it, about the crowd running down the
   road? - A. No.

Q. Why not? - A. Well I would not like to stop a charging
   bull or something like that.   The crowd was too big,
   too heavy. They were intent on getting on the field
   and nobody, nobody could have stopped them.

           MR. PAYNE:     Yes, thank you.

           MR. KING:  Sir, might I just ask a question
     arising out of that?

           THE CORONER:     I try to be fair.


                Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Lindley, I accept entirely those two Officers could
   not have done anything.  I asked you before whether
                                                             58
                                    A. LINDLEY


     there was anything to prevent people getting further
     down Leppings Lane and you said not. What I had in mind
     was this, you did not see a cordon of Police Officers
     blocking off the area approaching the perimeter gates?
     - A . No.

Q. Just to show what I mean, if     the Officer were to take
   his indicator and move a good     few yards back down
   Leppings Lane and say there,      there was no cordon of
   Police Officers across there     to prevent them getting
   through? - A. No.

          MR. KING:   Thank you very much.

           THE CORONER: Anybody else?     (No response)
     No, you are content.

           Mr. Lindley, I can say it again now that thank
     you very much indeed for coming. As I say I am exceedingly
     sorry that we kept you sitting around for so long but I
     do appreciate it and I think it has been helpful to the
     jury. Thank you very much.

           MR. KING:  Sir, might I also say on behalf of
     those I represent, I know not whether Mr, Lindley
     actually assisted any of those afterwards, he may, he
     may not, but having heard his evidence of having
     people in his house, giving them assistance, can I
     say on behalf of those families their gratitude for
     showing such help on that occasion.

           THE CORONER: Thank you very much.  It is very
     kind of you. You heard that, Mr. Lindley, did you?

           THE WITNESS:  Incidentally, a lot of those people
     came back afterwards.

           THE CORONER; Did they.     That is rather nice,
     isn't it. Yes, thank you.


                JOHN RANDOLPH TOM BARTHOLOMEW Sworn

                          By THE CORONER:

Q. Now then, you are J o h n ■Randolph Tom Bartholomew, I
   believe.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.       Parndale Road, Hillsborough in Sheffield? - A. Yes.

Q. Can we see where Farndale Road is on the map.  Do you
   want to just point to it? It is one of the roads off
   Leppings Lane, isn't it? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. In fact it is the first one I think from the roundabout?
   - A. The first one, yes.
                                                              59

                                    J.R.T.   BARTHOLOMEW



Q.    Can you see it, it is right near the roundabout    about"
     there. Is that correct? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you see? - A. Yes.

Q. On Saturday the 15th of April you I think had been working
   in the morning at a bakery.  Is that in Claywheels Lane?
   - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. And you f inished at about lQ-past-2? - A. Yes *

Q. You then walked down Claywheels Lane, down various roads
   which brings you into Penistone Road North.  Is that right?
   - A. Yes, that is right.

Q.    Then from there you turned into Leppings   Lane.   Is that
     right? - A. That is correct, yes.




                           Q . And home
                                                          60


                                         J. R. T. BARTHOLOMEW




Q. And home? - A. Yes.

Q. How, having left work at 10-past-2, what time did you
   get hose? - A. It is usually about six or seven minutes
   walk.

Q. So maybe quarter-past or just after? - A. Yes,
   something like that.

0. Did you see anything in that walk --- did you see any
   supporters, let's start off .... - A. Ga yes, plenty of
   supporters.

Q. There were loads of them? - A. Yes.

Q. Were they distinguishable as supporting any particular
   team or not? - A. Uell, they had all got red and white
   scarves and pullovers and shirts on. A lot had got
   "Liverpool" across the front, and the scarves, and I
   presumed they were all from Liverpool.

Q. And were they walking or making their way towards the
   Leppings Lane road? - A. The biggest part of them, yes.
   A lot were sat on the walls, on Clay Wheels Lane
   itself.

Q. On Clay Wheels   Lane? - A. Clay Wheels Lane, yes.

Q. Uhat were they  doing when they were sitting there? - A.
   Well, when I walked down they were all jumping up
   asking me if I had any tickets to sell, and I said no,
   I hadn't, and as I got to tae junction of Clay Wheals
   Lane and Beeley Wood Road there was a large group
“ discussing the    price of tickets, and across froci
   there,there was youths stood in the public house, like
   a car-park, all drinking from pint glasses.

Q. WTiat is the name of the pub? - A. The Gate Inn on
   Penistone Road.

Q. So you say as you were coming down —   snow us where
   Clay Wheels Lane is on tnat map. How high up - turn
   round - how high up is the bakery where you were
   working? - A. It is approximately 150 yards from
   Penistone Road.

Q. I see, so it is not that far.     You see where it says
   the word "'.forks” , is tnat it? - A. That is our works.

0. That is it? - A. Yes.

Q. And it is along that bit of road that the youngsters
   were sitting on the side of the wall? - A. Yss.
                                                          61


                                       J. R. T. SARIHQLuaEa




Q. And I think you said they asked you for tickets, is
   that right? - A. Yes, there were a lot asking me for
   tickets.

Q. How many? - A. well, first off there wasn't a lot
   there. They had just got off the coaches and a lot had
   gone but as I got further towards Penistone Road I got
   to the biggest majority of the crowds, and they was all
   asking for tickets there. On Beeley Mood Road there
   was people walking in front of sie and they just
   urinated at the side of the wall without any hesitation
   whatsoever. They never even looked round to see if
   anybody was watching them. They just did it and that
   was it. They were carrying cans of beer and soae ware
   drinking frora wine bottles.

Q. Thank you. Can you try, I know it is very, very
   difficult, but what I ara trying to find out is when you
   say people were asking you for tickets that could have
   been five, or it could have been 50 or it could have
   been 5,000 for all I know. Khat I want to know is
   approximately - I ara not asking you to tell sie exactly
   how many people because obviously you don't know, but
   what sort of range are we talking about? - A. I could
   have sold 50 tickets easily, no trouble.

Q. Okay. Then you walked into Leppings Lane, into your
   house, and I think your friend Mrs. Sweet either was
   there or she came? — A. She was already there.

Q. I think it was your intention after a while to go out
   and have a look at the Police horses? - A. That is
   right, yes.

Q. Because Mrs. Sweet, I think, particularly liked the:n? -
   A. She loves them, yes.

Q. So you got hone, you got changed, you got ready and
   what tiiae did you set out to go and look at the horses?
   - A. Approximately 20-to-3.

Q. You had done this before in previous years, I take it,
   or previous snatches? - A. tfe do it at all the bit
   football matches.

Q. When you got out you say you set off up Leak Road, is
   that right? - A. Leak Road is the road 'tnat runs
   parallel with F a m d a l e Road and it also leads into
   Leppings Lane.

Q. I see, and does your house front both roads or what? -
   A. iio, there is Farndale Road, then a row of houses and
   than Leak Road.
                                                            62


                                       J.   R . Y.,' BARTHOLOMSy




Q. So for some reason you didn't walk up Farndale you
   decided to walk up Leak, is that right? - A. There is a
   little gennel opposite niy house, that cuts in between
   the gardens.

Q. I see. So you walked up Leak Hoad and you got onto
   Leppings Lane, right? - A. Yes.

Q. And I take it you then turned left? - A. That is right,
   yes.

Q. What struck you as soon as you entered Leppings Lane? -
   A. What struck us as being very unusual, even for a
   serai-final, was the asiount of people still getting to
   the ground. There was hundreds and hundreds of them.
   You couldn't walk on the pavement because it was
   absolutely choc-a-bloe, and there was people walking in
   the roads. There was probably just enough roota for a
   bus to go through the middle of Leppings Lane, both
   sides.

Q. Yes. Anything else at that tiae? Did anything else
   strike you? - A. Yes, as soon as we got into Leppings
   Lane we could see people stood on the walls of people's
   gardens, and as soon as we walked in they jumped off
   and came rushing down the road to us, about 20,
   probably 30, all asking for tickets. Ue said no, we
   hadn't got any, and they was all carrying cans of beer
   and drinking. The supporters that were coming up
   Leppings Lane, they thought no more of just kicking
   cans into the air, throwing thesn in front gardens ana
   shouting and singing songs, their own songs what they
   sing at football matches, containing terrible swear
   words.  It is unrepeatable what they were singing, you
   know.

Q. Did you decide you could go on or did you decide you
   would turn back? - A. ilo, we carried on.

Q. Although all this was going on you didn't feel it was
   risky for you to go on? - A. Not at that time, no.

Q. l/ere there, in fact, apart froaa the tine, the nuiabers
   being high in relation to the tixae, was the crowd in
   itself any different to any other large football crowd?
   - A. It was certainly noisier, the crowd.

Q. It was noisier? - A. Yes.

Q. But you did n ’t feel threatened by it? - A. I didn't
   feel threatened, no.
                                   J.   R . T . BARTHOLOMEW




So you carried on towards Leppings Lane, up to the
entrance, because you assumed that is where the aorses
would be? - A. Yes*                       --

And what happened then? - A. Ue got to soae waste
ground where the gentleman was just talking about - the
previous witness.

The garages? - A. Yes. We saw two or three youths jump
into a person's front garden and urinate at the side of
the privet, no hesitation again. We carried on and all
the time people were coming out asking for tickets,
from the side of the causeway edge, and when we got to
Vere Road the crowd seemed to slow down and we had to
like shuffle forward.  You couldn't walk, it was that
densely packed. We got to within 15 yards of the gate,
probably opposite a sweet shop there is there, and we
cam to a standstill.   So I said to Connie, "There's no
way can we get through there, love.   iJe'll go across
the other side of the road", opposite side of Lappings
Lane, but all the time we was trying to get out of that
crowd we were being slightly moved forward by pressure
from back, and we passed a land-rover and eventually
got to the other side of the bridge, and we looked up
the lane and it was just a mass of red and white
colours, and faces, you know.

When we got to the other side of the bridge, everybody
came from the parapet of the bridge asking for tickets
again, which we said we hadn't got. We were getting a
bit fed up of it by that time, but we noticed everybody
that was sat on the bridge, there were some sat, soae
laid on the floor, and they was all drinking alcohol
again. We carried on to the other side of the bridge,
going away from the ground, and I said, "Let's climb up
this bank-side, we can see what's happening now",
because you could hear screaming and shouting. There
was real panic in that area, because nearly all of
Leppings Lane was blocked off. The wnole of Leppings
Lane was blocked off completely.

You could see Police Officers in the crowd because it
was a lovely day, and you could see the badges shining
on the hats, you know.  It was hopeless.  Everybody was
pushing forward to get to the turnstiles.  You could
see people stood at the turnstiles but not going in
because they was that tightly packed they couldn't
move. There was young people being lifted up a metal
partition wall and the Police Officers on the top of
that was lifting them up and passing then over into the
ground to stop them being crushed.

Anyhow, we got to this large hill,'it is about 20 foot
higher than the road surface, 40 yards away from the
                    r . --   . .r. . .     A       .. • -—           . - ... ..   - .v.’ '’. *"        *-<■   -'
    .-_-^ -     —                ...— ■-L ^    .   ... ....... ■.*                 J'■ ■ _ . "     ,' "■



                                                                                                  64

                                                                J. R. T. BARYllQLOMEw




              turnstiles and 40 foot higher than the turnstiles, and
              it was just absolute pandemonium, you know, and as we
              got to the top we heard an announcement and I said it
              sounds as though that Policeman is asking, you know,
              and it said, "Yhis is a Police message. Yhis is an
              urgent message to the Liverpool supporters, would you
              please stop pushing forward, people at the turnstiles
              are being crushed'*. It was clear as the day, we could
              hear that very clear. Ha repeated this message three
              or four times every minute we was there.  It had no
              effect at all on the crowd, none at all, and all the
              tine people were still packing in.

              A little bit after that you could see a Police Officer
              on the right hand side of the turnstiles what we was
              looking at, nearest to the river, he went into the
              crowd, probably half-way between the perimeter gate and
              the wall, and he appeared to be like cutting the crowd
              off to stop the pressure on people at the front.

        Q. Yhis is an Officer on foot or on a horse? - A. On a
           horse - there were several horsemen there. Yhat didn't
           have aiuch effect. Yhe horse started moving sideways
           with the pressure. Anyhow, he just raised his hand and
           I don't know whether, I can't remember if it was two or
           three other Police Officers on horses, they came
           through the crowd and positioned the horses head to
           tail across the entrance. Yhat just held the crowd a
           little but people were rushing down Leppings Lane and
           they were disappearing, and I thought, 'well, they are
           going under horses' bellies and the heads". Yhey were
           going under the norses and the horses were just pusiied
           out of line. Yhat had no effect at all.

              I said to Connie, "If nothing's done here somebody is
              going to be killed". You could see what was happening.
              Just as I said that the gate on the right hand side,
              the nearest one to the river -— oh, before that - I ani
              jumping ahead a bit - the gate nearest the sweet snop
              in the left hand side of the turnstile, it started
              moving like that, but faster, and it should have opened
              like that, and I assumed they was trying to push it
              down to either get into the ground or alleviate the
              pressure.

              A bit after that the gate on the right hand side did
              open, really fast, and the people funnelled in like an
              egg timer, you know. Yhat took a lot of pressure off
              the crowd and people on the left hand side, realising
              what had happened, tney all started making for that
              gate, and then suddenly the gate on the left opened up
              and they all started funnelling in that one. Within
              three minutes, I would say, or probably four, the
              majority of the crowd had just disappeared into the



H
                                     J.   R . T . BAilTHOLOMEU




ground. Whila they was going, I could see Police
Officers probably snouting, "Coae this way", to get the
pressure of those still at the turnstiles because they
were the last to aiove you know. They were first in and
last out, and after they had gone there were still a
lot of people stood there* I don't think they could
niove because they were badly crushed.

Can we just snake sure we know which gates we are
talking about? It is probably easiest if you look at
the aodel. The gate near the sweet shop which you said
ws aoving in and out, was it that gate which is being
pointed to there? - A. That is the one that was being
pushed.

That is Gate A. And then which was opened wide, was
that Gate C, the one .... - A. That is at the sice of
the river, isn't it?

It is Gate C - yes. The one that was aoving in and out
that you saw was the one that was opened second, Gate
A? - A. Yes.

tfe know the names.   You iaay not know the naaes of
these? - A. No.

That was a very, very clear account you have told ae.
I just want to pick up one or two little things and try
and get a few timings.    I think you said that you set
off froca honse at, was it 2Q-to-3? - A. About 2Q-to-3,
yes.

And when you were standing on this elevated area
looking down and you saw the Police land-rover in the
first instance, or at least when you crossed Leppings
Lane and saw the Police land-rover. - A. Yes.

How many minutes after you had left did you sea that
vehicle? - A. The Police vehicle?

Yes, the land-rover? - A. We could see it all the tiae.

As soon as you walked out of Leak Road, are you saying?
- A. when we got to the top of Vere Road going in to
look at the aorses, you could see the white of tne
landrover.

That is what I a.n trying to find out. How long did it
take you to get froa your house to Vere Road? Hoi/ many
minutes are we talking about? - A. Probably seven or
eight ainutes.
                                                               66


                                             J. R. T. SA^TIiGLOtiEU




    Q.    I see, and you could see that. When you were at Vere
         Road could you hear any announcsnent at taat point? -
         A. I couldn't hear i t at that point, no.
B
    Q.   Has there a lot of noise frora the crowd? - A. Oh   yes,
         it was terrible. It was deafening.

    Q. And then you actually heard the announcement made when
       you were about 40 yards from the turnstiles and a
       little bit higner up, is that right? - A. We first
       heard the announcement asking the;n to stop pushing when
       we was at the other side of the road.

    Q. So you were still        - A. We were still on ground
       level.




D




E




F



                  /Q. I wonder whether.

G
                                 J,'R. T. BARTHOLOMEW



I wonder whether that is not the ideal thing to see.
Let's see if we can find a better picture.  Could we see
255?   Now this is an aerial view.   Can you make out the
features there? - A. Yes.

If you have a pointer ready, can you first of all^point
out where the perimeter gates are, Sergeant Griffiths?
Do you agree with that? - A. That is the perimeter gates,
yes.

The sweet shop is about there, is that right? - A. Yes,
that's right.

Now tell the Officer where he should put the pointer to
show where the police Land Rover was stationed? - A.^ If
you move your pointer about an inch from the sweet snop.

Would that be about right? - A. Just^slightly forward
please.   Yes, that is about the position there.

So it was more or less in line with the sweet shop? - A.
Yes, just about there.

But somewhere on the road? - A. There is a very wide
pavement edge there, the road sweeps away from that.

You came across there, didn't you?    You were walking
from the sweet shop across the road,' that was your
intention? - A. Yes.

When you heard the announcement   at ground level, where
were you? - A. If   the gentleman moves diagonally across
to the parapet of the bridge.

Do you want to go   up to him and do it? - A. Yes, please.
That is where I first heard the announcement.

So the pointer is now pointing to the - is it the western
end of the bridge on the northern side of the picture?
Actually, it must be the eastern side if the south is
over there.   The eastern side, or, if you prefer it, on
the left hand side.   That is where you first heard it? -
A. Yes.

Where did you actually go?   Is the area where you went
to look on that picture? - A. Yes.   Although it looks
flat here, actually this ground here... •

Is up. - A. Yes, but we were stood there.

What you-are saying is you walked across the bridge in
fact towards Catchbar Lane, but obviously only just
across the bridge and up the embankment? - A. That's
                                                            58



                                   J.   R. T. BARTHOLOMEW


   right, yes, but between the first message and getting
   there he was repeating the message all the time.

       THE CORONER:   Mr. Jones points out that I shouldn't
  have referred to north because strictly speaking it is
  the wrong way. Can we try and define it not by...    We
  will define it by top, bottom, left, right:

0. The first position then where you heard the announcement
   is at the left hand side of the bridge? - A. Yes.

0. As seen from the bottom of the picture and then the
   position where you climbed the bank is on the right hand
   side of the bridge up a little slope? - A. Yes.

Q. Again at the bottom of the picture? - A. Yes, that's
   right.

Q. Did the message you heard, you have given us^the words,
   did it change or did the officer or whoever it was who
   gave the message change the wording at all? - A. Yes,
   when the police officers formed a line, a barrier, like,
   to stop the crowd going, the chap in the Land Rover
   changed his message to, "Will the Liverpool supporters
   please move by the horses," or something like that.

0. You said absolutely nothing seemed to happen?    No
   response? - A. No response whatsoever, no.

Q. You have described very graphically how the people were
   being squashed.   Are you saying there was actual pushing
   from the back? - A. Oh, yes. As we slowed down, we
   couldn't go any further, you had to put your arms out to
   prevent yourself being pushed on the floor and people
   were putting their arms in you and pushing-yau out of the
   way to get through.

0.. So what you are really saying is there were some people
    at least who were trying to get through to get to the
    front a bit faster? - A. That's right, yes.

Q. When you said the big gate opened - Gate C - any idea
   what time that was? - A. The first gate?

Q. Yes. - A. I would think it was just before 3 o'clock,
   five minutes to three roughly, approximately.

0. Did you hear the roar of the crowd? - A.'Yes, I heard the
   roar of the crowd and I said, "Connie, it sounds as
   though they have kicked off."   You could hear people
   inside the ground cheering.

Q. Did you see anybody come down the road after the roar of
   the crowd at all?   Did you notice whether there were any
                                                            69



                                     J. R. T. BARTHOLOMEW


     additional... - A. Oh, yas, there was converging on the
     turnstiles from both the top of Leppings Lane and the
     bottom of Leppings Lane.

0. What I am interested in is whether you saw a particular
   crowd come down after the roar of the crowd was heard? -
   A. There was plenty of - I did not see a large crowd come
   down.   There were that many c o m i n g down, nice and
   steady, you know, altogether like, but we did not see any
   large numbers of crowd.

0.    It was your impression that the police horses were trying
     to hold the crowds back, is that right? - A. Oh, yes, you
     could see what was happening.

Q.    On this side of the perimeter gates or on the far side of
     the perimeter gates, can you remember? - A. I think there
     was a mini-bus parked there and then there was the
     parapet of the bridge on the turnstile side.     Yes,
     that s it.     The police put the horses across that way
     and towards the sweet shop.

Q. So on the outside of the perimeter gate? - A. Trying to
   block it off.

          THE CORONER:   Mr. Bartholomew, I think we have to
     stop because everybody needs to have a bite to eat.   I
     have to ask you to come back after lunch.

          We will come back at ten minutes past two.

                     (Luncheon adjournment)
                                                         70




                                         J. R. T. BARTHOLOMEW


     THE CORONER:   Just a couple of things. I could not
help noticing when you were cross-examining Mr. Mountain I
think it was, and you asked how many people he employed in
his pub, that you put to him that six bar staff pulling a
thousand pints each was quite a big task and by the sound
of the laughter people could see the point you were making.
What we are doing, because we think there may be something
about that evidence that we want to check, is we are going
to have a go at probably the licensee and ask him whether
he or she can come along and tell us his side of the story.
Be prepared for Mr. Salt or Mrs. Salt to come along.

   MR. KING:   I am disappointed. I thought you were going
to say we were going to have a practical experiment!

     THE CORONER:   It was Mr. Ollerenshaw who was the
gentleman who gave the evidence.
             JOHN R. T. BARTHOLOMEW - Recalled

                Cross-examined bv MR. PAYNE:

Q. Mr. Bartholomew, you mentioned to the Coroner that
   you and Mrs. Sweet have often been out to look at the
   horses at big matches? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Can you tell the Jury how long this has been going
   on? What period of time are we talking about? » A.
   Eight years and nearly every home match we go to see
   the horses. She is a real horse lover, you know, and
   there is that many different Police horses come.
   Usually on match days in the league you can walk past
   there and there is no crowd. You can see it with
   great ease.

Q. Is this the picture then, that for about eight years
   you and Mrs. Sweet have been going out and looking at
   the crowds and the horses? - A. Not the crowds, just
   the horses.

Q. It is, in fact, the crowds that I want to ask you
   about. Have I got the time right? You went out for
   the walk down Leppings Lane at about twenty or
   quarter to three? - A. Yes, approximately.

Q. At this time there were hundreds and hundreds of
   people walking down Leppings Lane? - A. Towards the
   ground, yes.

Q. Out in the road? - A. Yes.
                                       J . R . T . BARTHOLOMEW


Leaving just enough room for about a bus to go down
the middle? - A. That is right.


I want you to compare this with other big events
which you have seen at the Hillsborough ground. Do
you understand what I mean? - A. Yes.

At about this time, about twenty minutes or quarter
of an hour before kick-off, have you ever seen so
many people arriving at the ground at that time? - A.
No, I haven't. At that time I haven't, no.

      THE CORONER:   Did you say no, you had not? - A.
No , I hadn't .

     MR. PAYNE:   You are talking about eight years
of watching big events? - A. Yes. I have lived there
thirty years. That is the biggest crowd at that time
of the day that I have ever seen.

You have told the Coroner and the Jury about the
Police message that was given out from the Land Rover
asking the people to move back? - A. Yes.

Which did not seem to work? - A. No.

Prom where you were at that time you were at the back
of this big mass of people, were you not? - A. I was
not at the back. I was at the side.

At the side? - A. The opposite side of the road.

Where you showed us on the map? - A. Yes.

From where you were could you see what was happening
to the people at the front of the crowd? - A. Not
from that particular front I could not because I was
level with them, you see. It was later on in the
afternoon when I saw the crowd from the vantage
point.

When you were a bit higher up? - A. Yes, which was
only a few minutes later.

The Police message, you heard the words shouted to
the crowds over the loudspeaker? - A. Oh yes.

That people were being crushed? - A. Yes.
                                                           72




                                          J . R . T . BARTHOLOMEW


Q. I know you say it did not have any effect on the
   crowd? - A. It did not seem to have, no.

Q . What were people doing at the back of the crowd at
    that time? - A. They were just pushing into the
   'crowd.

Q. I do not know what evidence later on the Jury are
   going to hear but where you were, for the sound of
   the announcement to get to you, it had got to come
   from the Land Rover and across the road where you
   were standing clear of the crowd? - A. You see, where
   we were, how can I put it---

Q. I am sorry to interrupt you and I beg your pardon but
   what I want to find out is, from where you were do
   you think the crowd could not hear what was being
   said? - A. I wouldn’t think so. It was in their
   earholes more or less, you know. That Land Rover was
   completely surrounded by people.

Q. They were closer to the Land Rover than you were? -
   A. They would be touching it. I was 40 yards away
   and I heard it as plain as the day.

Q. You had left home at twenty minutes or quarter to
   three. By the time you got down there and were
   outside the ground it must have been getting near
   kick-off but can you be more accurate than that? - A.
   We set off at a slow walk but with the momentum of
   the people we had to keep up with them because we
   were getting.pushed. So I would imagine it would be
   ten minutes to three-ish or near that time.

Q . When you got to the bridge you have told the Coroner
    that there were some people sitting? Whereabouts on
    the bridge were they? There is a photograph which
    has been very helpfully put up on the screen? - A.
    They were all sat on the pavement on that side of the
    bridge.

Q. They were sat on the pavement on the side of the
   bridge opposite to the entrance? - A. They sat on the
   floor.

Q.        THE CORONER:   I did not hear the answer. Could
     you repeat it? - A. They were sat on the floor with
     their backs to the bridge. There were some stood as
     well but mainly they were all sat.

      MR. PAYNE:   Yes.
                                                            73

                                  J . R . T . BARTHOLOMEW


Q. Did they carry-on sitting there all the time? - A. Oh yes.
     /                                     ;
Q. I suppose it was obvious to you that there was no way
   that those people at that time could get into the ground?
   - a . Well the majority had not got a ticket. They were
   asking for tickets all the time you see.    _ .

         MR. PAYNE:   Yes, thank you.


                      Cross-Examined by MR KING:

Q. Mr. Bartholomew you live round her and you are familiar
   with the layout of Leppings Lane? - A. Oh yes.

Q. Can you help us then. If you look at the model one can
   see the Leppings Lane turnstiles can't we? - A. Yes.

Q. You can confirm, can't,you, because you live there and
   you have seen them, they are set in an arc, they go in
   a semi-circle across the mouth of the ground at that end.
   Do you see what I mean? - A. Yes.

Q. Then if the Officer follows me, you see there is a major
   division across that semi-circle, and the Officer is
   indicating there, into two sets of turnstiles. Do you
   see? There is a much larger set on one side and a smaller
   set nearer where you are sitting? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. That smaller set is A-G, though you probably don't know
   that, but those are the turnstiles which take you into
   the ground if you are going to be standing on the Leppings
   Lane terrace. Do you understand that? - A. Yes.

Q. And in front of that arc there are perimeter gates. I
   think the Officer will show us those perimeter gates
   you see? - A. Yes.
Q. And those perimeter gates can be shut or they can be
   opened. I don't know, do you ever go to a football match
   yourself? - A. Not very often.
Q. I won't ask you about going to other matches. If you are
   coming down Leppings Lane from the direction of a round­
   about we have heard about, that is from the direction of
   I think it is probably Halifax Road? - A. We call that
   going up the lane.
Q. Well if you are going up the lane you get to the edge
   of the houses and then you turn into the arc, don't you?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Now another way of getting to those turnstiles is from
   over the bridge the opposite way? - A. Yes.
                                                           74

                                   J.R.T. BARTHOLOMEW


Q. So the layout is that you have got two routes all converging
   on ,that arc. Do you see what I mean? - A. Yes.

Q.    It is a bit like a funnel, isn't it, where you have got
     two sides coming closer and closer together? - A» Yes.

Q. Now if the Officer allows the route to be shown with his
   stick, if you go through the perimeter gates leading to
   the smaller range of turnstiles, A-G, you see the area
   he is pointing to? - A. Yes.

Q. And that is also divided off, isn't it, by a metal fence?
   - A. Yes.
Q. So you have got a quite, I would say very small confined
   area immediately between the perimeter gates and the
   turnstiles through which people had to go if they want
   to stand on the terrace. Do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q.    Now from your vantage point when you had a good vantage
     view was the situation this, that that area, that is
     between the perimeter gates and those turnstiles A-G was
     absolutely jam packed? - A. Yes.

Q. I don't suppose you could move? — A. You could not move,
   no .

Q. Now when you were at the vantage point were the perimeter
   gates open? - A. Well I could not see those gates at this
   side because there is some big trees and the big parapet
   of the bridge was blocking my view.

Q. Were you ever able    to see? - A. No.

Q. Do you remember when you said there were Police Officers,
   a number of horses in a semi-circle in front of the gates?
   - A. You could see those because they were outside the
   gates.

Q. Where were you when you saw those? - A. On top of the hill.

Q. Are you able to say at that stage whether or not the gates
   were open at that stage? - A. I think they must have been
   open because the Police came from that side of the river.

Q.         THE CORONER; Because what, sorry? - A. The Policemen
     on the horses came up from the main entrance to the ground
     up the side of the river.

Q.         MR. KING: So the impression you got there was this,
     how many horses are we talking about? - A. Probably five
     or six.

Q. And behind them is the perimeter gates which seemed to
   be open? - A. Yes.
                                                           75

                                 J . R . T . BARTHOLOMEW


Q. The people on the other side of the perimeter gates, that is.
   the people approaching this jammed massed group already
   by the turnstiles, how far did they stretch' into Leppings
   Lane? - A. They just about blocked it all off.

Q. Did they stretch across the pavement into Leppings Lane?
   - a . Oh yes, the road was completely blocked.

Q„ So you have got this picture of, whatever time you are
   there on your vantage point, of a solid mass of people
   in front of the turnstiles A-G, the small bank? - A. Yes.

Q. In a small funnelled space; the perimeter gates and then
   another mass of people immediately stretching out into
   Leppings Lane? - A. It was just one solid mass, yes.

Q. At that stage it was totally out of control, wasn't it?
   - A. I would think there was no control over it.  I don't
   think 1,000 Police could have controlled that lot.

Q. At that stage? - A. Yes.

Q. Because you can only speak of that stage? - A. Yes.

Q. At that stage when you are on your vantage point do you
   see any Police horses within the perimeter gates, within
   the area A-G? - A. Yes, I saw two Police horses in there.

Q. In there? - A. Yes.

Q. And they would be trapped, I suppose? - A. Well I don't
   know whether they were trapped.   They were trying to
   split the crowd up into two sections.

Q. But it was absolutely jam packed at that stage so they
   could not possibly have achieved that at that stage?
   - A. Well I noticed one Officer in particular was moving
   very slowly but surely into the middle.

Q. There must have been a crowd of people jam packed around?
   - A. Oh there was, yes.

Q. Have you yourself ever been through those turnstiles?
   - A. No.

Q. So you can't help us on how long it takes to get one
   individual through them. You have not had that experience?
   - A. I have been through other turnstiles on the ground
   but not through that one.

Q. Did it look to you that there was any prospect of all
   the people you saw jammed in that area outside A-G,
   that narrow area and taking the people on the other side
   of the gates getting in the ground before kick-off?
   - A. Oh no,no.
                                                                   76

                                     J . R . T « BARTHOLOMEW


          MR. KING:    Thank you very much.
      ✓

                 Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Mr. Bartholomew, you said you saw a person being lifted
   up out of the crowd at the turnstile-area, he was being
   lifted up, prevented from being crushed.    Did you see a
   Police Officer go to investigate the incident? - A. There
   was a lot of people being lifted out of that area over
   that   partition and on to like a balustrade at the top
   and the Police Officers were lifting them over out of the
   crowd.

Q. So there was a Police Officer ....        A. There was two
   Police Officers on the top, yes.

Q. Did you hear an announcement at any time for a postponement
   of the game? - A. No, no.

Q. The place was completely blocked with people at the          main
   gate but you did not  hear an announcement? -A. No,          I
   did not hear anything like that, no.
        <
Q. Calling for more time? - A. No.

          MRS. McBRIEN:    I think   that is all.     Thank you.

           THE CORONER:   Is there anything else?  (Noresponse)
     Thank you very much. I am most grateful to you for being
     here this afternoon.   Thank you.


                      POL. SGT. PAUL WILSON Sworn

                            Bv THE CORONER:

Q. Now you are Paul Wilson I think.        Is that right? - A.
   That is correct.

Q. You are Police Sergeant 2403.       Is that right? - A. 2408,
   that is correct.

Q.    And you are or at least in April 1989 you were       stationed
     at Doncaster I believe? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And you were in charge of the Serial which was numbered
   28? - A. 28 sir, yes.

Q. The purpose of this Serial was to seal off some of the
   side streets of Leppings Lane.  Is that right? - A. That
   is correct.

Q. Perhaps you could describe to me just briefly how you
   were intending to do this job? - A. There were barriers
   across the mouth of each junction bordering Leppings Lane
   from Penistone Road at the roundabout end. at each junction
   right up to the ground.
                                                           77

                                   P. WILSON


Q. So Farndale Road, Bickerton Road, Fielding, Vere, Eskdale
   I think it is? - A. Yes, that is right,

Q. Those roads we are talking about? - A. And    there were two
   Police Officers on each junction.

Q. The purpose of doing this^ what was the reason? - A. The
   purpose behind it was to prevent supporters from going
   down the side streets as I understand had happened in
   previous years and causing nuisance, damage and distress
   to the local residents.

Q. I take it the Officers were there to reinforce the barrier
   in the sense that there was a living presence, not just
   a bit of metal standing in the road. These are moveable
   barriers? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you probably also attended    the briefing in the
   ground, did you? - A. I did.

Q. And you arranged for your Serial to take up their
   positions at about guarter-to-12, is that right, or a
   bit earlier or a bit later? - A. Yes, I arrived on my
   point about quarter-to-12.

Q. Any idea what time the Officers at Bickerton Road ....
   A. I was actually on Bickerton Road at quarter-to-12.

Q. At that time were supporters arriving already or not?
   - A. They were arriving in very small numbers.  There    ,
   were a few supporters walking down Leppings Lane towards
   the ground in very small numbers at that time.

Q. Were they actually heading into the ground or what were
   they intending to do as far as you know? - A. At that
   point they were walking towards the ground.  They carried
   on walking towards the ground.

Q.   No problems? - A. No problems at all.

Q.    This carried on till when at that sort of level?- A. Until
     between half-past-12 and 1 o'clock they started to arrive
     in large numbers.

Q. And what was the position then? - A. Well by about 2 p.m.
   Leppings Lane was completely full with Liverpool
   supporters.  I had a restricted view from where I was
   behind the barrier, restricted by the buildings on either
   side but the view I got was that Leppings Lane was completely
   full of people.

Q. And when you say "completely full" are you meaning the
   pavements or are you meaning the road where .... A. The
   pavement, the road, everywhere".  They were sat on walls.
   Some were stood talking to us.   Some were sat in the road.
   There was no traffic of course, the traffic had been
   stopped.
                                                             78

                                   P. WILSON


Q. At what time was that would you say? - A. Before we got
   there so I don't know.

Q. Before quarter-to? - A. Before quarter-to-12 the traffic
   was stopped.

Q.    Are you sure about that? - A. Iam fairly sure.  I don't
     recall any traffic coming along Leppings Lane after I
     got there.  I may be mistaken but I don't recall it.

Q. What you are saying is that you thought it was stopped
   and you don't remember any traffic? - A. That is correct.
   Certainly by the time that the majority of supporters
   started to arrive the traffic was certainly stopped.
   It would have been impossible for any traffic to get along
   Leppings Lane anyway at that point.

Q.    And did you speak to any of the supporters? - A. I   spoke
     to quite a few of them, yes.

Q. Were they all Liverpool supporters or not? - A. They were
   in the main Liverpool supporters.  There were a few
   Nottingham Forest supporters.  Some of them had got lost.
   There were a handful that had somehow managed to get
   tickets for the Liverpool end, but in the main they
   were Liverpool supporters.




                               Q. As far as
                                                P. WILSON




As far as you were concerned what were they like? ware
they talking, were they friendly, unfriendly? - A. Yes,
initially they were all very friendly.    It was good
mifiiourad, we were talking to thea, having a bit of a
joke with tnent. Up to the point where they began to
caove off to the ground it was still in fairly good
humour.

Yes.  Did you have any problems from 2 o'clock onward?
- A. Froa 2 o'clock onward there were no real problems.
About half-past-2 the road alaost cleared. There were
just a few stragglers about then about 20-to-3 they
seemed to cooie, a cro**d of supporters, I don't know
where they carae froa. They cane along Leppings Lane
froa the direction of Penistone Road.    I can only
describe thea as a horde of supporters, is what I saw.

How many — in round terms? X know it is very difficult
and you didn't count them. - A. I would say hundreds
probably.  It is difficult to say because there was a
wave came first and then a lot behind them.  It is
difficult to say in numbers exactly but there were
hundreds.

Did you notice anything about these supporters at all?
- A. Many of the;a were drinking as they were running
down the road. Many of then were carrying bottles and
cans. Some were throwing thens down as they were
running.  Some were pouring it out onto the road as
they were running. One thing tnat did strike rae about
it at the time was that they weren't shouting.

They were not? - A. They    were notshouting.  There was
very little noise coming    from thea, otner than tne fact
that you could hear theia   running. They seeded very
intent on getting to the    ground.

Could you see the Leppings Lane entrances froeu where
you were? - A. Hot from behind the barriers I couldn't
see the entrance. My attention was drawn to a problem
at the by a radio message that I heard.  I can't recall
the exact nature of the message but it was that there
were problems at the Leppings Lane entrance.

And what did you do then, if anything? - A. At tnat
point I moved out into the middle of Leppings Lane
where I could see the entrance to the football ground.
The first wave of the croivd had gone past me by that
time. There were still .-aany more running along
Leppings Lane.  I could sea that the entrance to the
football ground was packed solid right back to the
road.  I don't think I could see right to the
turnstiles but I could see tne funnel snape going into
the ground, and it ^as packed right back to the road
                                               p. WILSON




with supporters.   There were quite a number of
supporters railling about at the junction witn Leppings
Lane, and I think it's Wadsley Lane, in front of the
ground.

Of course you are not a Sheffield aaa, are you? — A. I
an not a Sheffield man so I aa not too familiar with
the layout. There were supporters still coming along
Leppings Lane. Having seen the situation at the
entrance I turned round to face the supporters that
were coming towards me and at one point I was stood in
the middle of Leppings Lane with ay arms outstretched
shouting at thea to slow down.  It was obvious tnat
they couldn't go anywhere when they got to the ground.
It was a futile gesture really.  It oay saesi a little
silly now but at tne tise it was the only thing that I
thought that I could do to try and slow down tne
supporters that were aaking their way to the ground.

I moved out of the road to the side because I was
having no effect whatsoever and at that point I heard,
again by my radio, heard of the trouble inside the
ground, and there was a call for all available Officers
to go to the ground, and so I aade ay way to the
Leppings Lane entrance.

IJhen you heard that message, the second caessage, were
there still people coping out? — A. There were still
supporters still coding down Leppings Lane, yes.

But in what sort of numbers? - A. Fewer nunbers*    They
were more the stragglers of the oiain body.

So you are saying that you actually stepped into
Leppings Lane and you held out your arss? - A. I did,
yes.

You are quite certain about that? - A. Absolutely
certain.

It isn't something that you are saying because you
tnink in retrospect you wished you had done?  I just
want to be sure .... - A. I did that.  I an absolutely
certain that that is what I did.

Did you see whether any of the other Officers ..:ignt
nave done the sasie or not? - A. I was on *ay own at the
time.   The other Officer tnat had been with me nad gone
to the entrance to the football ground.    The two
Officers who had been on Eskdale Road barrier had, as I
had iaoved froia behind ay barrier they nad also come out
into the road and tney had gone towards the entrance,
so at tnat tine I was on 3iy own.
                                                      81


                                               P. tflLSQH




I think after that second radio message -which you
heard, your radio was on, but you couldn't understand
what was going on, is that right? - A. That is correct.
I had had some difficulty with my radio earlier in the
day, transmissions and messages received were not too
good.  I don't know whether- that was peculiar to lay set
or whether it was the order of the day.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Ho questions, thank you, sir.

             Cross-Examined by i»S. HALE

when you saw the crowd coming down Leppings Lane and
running and so on, and you thought to stop them, did it
occur to you to get the barriers that nad been across
the side roads and try to put those across Leppings
Lane? - A. It didn't.

ifould it have been any good if you had? - A. I wouldn't
have had time anyway and I doubt that it would have
been any good. They were running, ily personal opinion
is they would have run straight over them.

            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

when you stood with your arms outstretched to try to
restrain the crowd, you did that because you could see
that the entrance to the ground was jam packed with
people? - A. That is correct.

What about the people running down the road? ware they
in a position to see the same? - A. Certainly, most
certainly they were, yes.

After they had run down the road what did they do when
they arrived at the jam packed crowd? - A. They just
added on to the back of it. They were just adding on
behind all the time. It was building backwards into
the road.

And what was the behaviour of the supporters? - A. At
what point?

When they reached the crowd? - A. I was about 150 yards
away so I couldn't really say. All I could see was
that they were adding to the back of the crowd.

I want to ask the same question - sorry if it is a
repetition - as fir. Hale, but if there had bean a co­
ordinated attempt to try to stop this crowd running,
these hundreds of supporters, wnat effect do you think
that would nave nad? - A. To stop then would have
needed a considerable barrier.   I think that we would
                                                             82


                                                     P. WILSOd




     have had something short of a riot if we aad tried to
     stop theia with Police Officers.

Q. The time of this event that you are speaking about, the
   time you gave was about 20-rainutes-to«*3? - A. That is
   vfhen it started, yes, I would say.

Q. For how long then did this extra arrival of people
   running go on? - A. Several minutes.   I couldn't say
   exactly but several sainutes.

Q. So by the tise they arrived at the back of the crowd,
   about what time are you talking about? - A. Probably
   about lG-to-3, I am not sure.  I c a n ’t be exactly sure.
   I don't mean 10 minutes to get from where I was to the
   back of the crowd, I aean from the first sight of them
   coming to the tail end getting to the crowd was
   probably 10 minutes.

Q.   So this crowd was arriving at the turnstile area,     you
     are saying, ait about 10-to-3, are you? - A. About    that
     I would say.

Q. You can't be exact? - A. I can't be sure, no.        I don't
   recall looking at my watch at the time.

Q. I want you just to look please at the operational
   order, just to identify what your orders were, in order
   just to illustrate the planning that had gone into the
   part of your job. It is C2S5, page 38. You are Serial
   23? - A. That is correct.

Q. Police Sergeant 2400 Wilson? - A. That is a misprint - .
   it is 2408, but that is correct.

Q. It should be 2403? - A. .Yes.

Q.   Just go to the previous page, page 37. - A. Yes.

Q.    Which starts off the Sub Sector, which     includes you? -
     A. Yes.

Q.    And in charge of this Sub Sector at the top   of page37,
     we can see is Inspector Selwood? - A. Yes.

Q. So he was your Inspector, was he? - A. He was ay
   Inspector, yes.

0. And nis Serials, then, start at the top of page 37 with
   Serial 35, right? - A. Serial 26.

Q.   Sorry, 26, and they are responsible   for public order at
     Parkside Road/Ca tcnbar Lane, then there is Serial 27,
     Penistone Road/Leppings Lane, and then we get you, 28,
                                                              83


                                                      P . wILSUfi




   over the page on page 38, and you are at Penistone
   Road/Lappings Lane? - A. Yes.

Q. And then there are some more specific instructions
   under "Phase 1". Just read out your instructions, will
   you? ~ A. "Phase 1 (Before match) This serial.will be
   responsible for m a n n i n g the barriers to be placed at
   the mouths of the following roads to prevent any
   supporters gaining access.        It is essential that access
   be prevented to all but residents. At similar events
   in the past, considerable daniage has been caused by
   groups of supporters before, during and after the
   gasae".

Q. And than it gives the roads that you have got to block
   off? - A. That is correct.

0, And then "Phase 2” , w h a t w e r e your instructions, during
   the match? - A. A. During the aatch, "Remain at
   locations to prevent supporters who are unable to enter
   the ground gaining access to these roads".

Q. And "Phase 3"? - A. After the satch, "Remain until all
   crowds have cleared and consent to reaove barriers is
   given by the Sector Inspector.  It is essential that no
   vehicles be allowed into Leppings Lane until all
   supporters have cleared the area".

Q. And on the margin over to the left, first of ail there
   is the list of your Officers in your serial, under your
   cossiaand? - A. Correct, yes.

Q. Then it tells you that your seating for the briefing is
   on Appendix "T" plan? - A. Yes.

Q. Then it gives you instructions about your aeals as
   well? - A. Yes.

Q. You told the Coroner that you attended the briefing
   inside the ground on the aorning of the game? - A. Yes.

Q. You went to the seats which had been allocated to you?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And you were addressed by senior Officers? - A. Yes.

Q. And after that you deployed to your particular area,
   did you? - A. We had a snort break to have soae
   refreshment before we started and then we deployed to
   our areas, yes.

Q. Thank you.
                                                          84
                                                           I

                                                 P. WlLSOH




                Cross-Examined by MR. KIHG

Q. Sergeant, I just want to clarify your evidence about
   the state of the road and whether it was shut off from
   traffic* Are you telling us that it was shut off frosi
   traffic froia an early time in the afternoon? — A. I
   don't recall seeing any traffic travelling along
   Leppings Lane from the time that I arrived there, about
   quarter-to-12,   I don't know what tiae the traffic was
   actually prevented froa travelling along Lappings Lane.

Q. There is a difference, isn't there, between whether or
   not you see traffic and whether or ao soaeboay has
   given an order, "Shut traffic off. Stoo traffic coming
   in"? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you aware in this matter that Leppings Lane was
   eventually shut off fron traffic by order? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you know when that order was carried out? - A. I
   don't know.

Q. If you were hazarding a guess froa the state of the
   traffic when would you have expected it to have
   happened? - A. I would have expected it to have been
   carried out about the same time that I arrived     atay
   point. That    would be about the time that other
   Officers arrived at their points and although I had not
   had the benefit of seeing the full order - I had only
   seen the one   page that relates to ay sector, I   would
   imagine that   somewhere in that order there are
   instructions for another section to close off Leppings
   Lane.  I can say no more than that.




      /Q. If you had been in charge .
                                                            85

                                         P. WILSON



Q. If'you had been in charge yourself on the day in Leppings
   Lane, would you yourself have wanted Leppings Lane
   stopped, cut off from traffic? - A. At what point?

0. Did there ever come a point... - A. Oh, yes.

Q. ...when you said to yourself, "Ue have got to stop the
   traffic"'? - A* Yes, thee was a point when traffic
   wouldn't have been able to travel on Leppings Lane,
   whether it was closed off or not.

Q. What time in your recollection do you say that time
   arrived? - A. I would say probably round about one
   o'clock.

0. I am now only going to give you an opportunity to comment
   to see if we can fit your evidence in with other evidence
   we may hear.   If we were to hear that around about 2.30
   when you say the road was more or less clear, that an
   order was put into effect to stop traffic, that wouldn't
   make any sense on your evidence would it? - A. No.

Q. We have to hear the whole body of evidence before we can
   piece together this puzzle, but I want it so we can
   remember your evidence when we hear the other evidence.
   Do you know who was in charge in Leppings Lane as far as
   the general overall control of traffic, officers and so
   forth at the time you were stationed there? - A.
   Inspector Sellwood was in charge of-my sector.

0. Do you know a Superintendent Marshall? - A. I didn't know
   him personally before this date, no.   I know of him,
   obviously.

Q. He was the senior officer who was on foot in Leppings
   Lane on the day? - A. That is correct.

0. If he had at some point after two o'clock caused the road
   to be stopped from traffic, and it may well be that the
   evidence may be - I can't give evidence - it may well be
   that it is going to be the evidence that it came into
   effect at about 2.30.   On your evidence there would have
   been no point in that because the road was clear? - A.
   You have lost me, I'm afraid.   I don't sea the point you
   are trying to make.

0. The point I am trying to make is to test the accuracy of
   your evidence, Officer.   It's unfair in. a s-anse, because
   we have not heard all the other evidence.    However, on
   your evidence there would be no point in closing the road
   at 2.30, put it as simply as that? - A. Yes, that's
   right.
                                                              86

                                              P . WILSON


Q. On the other hand, if we were dealing with a situation
   wh6re it was necessary to close the road at 2.30 then
   your picture may be wrong, that your recollection is just
   wrong? - A. My recollection of events is certainly not
   wrong.   My recollection of times may be slightly out,
   but my recollection of events■is-.certainl'y not wrong.

0.* You yourself   had a radio? - A. I did.

Q.   Did the other officers, as far as you know, who were
     stationed on the side roads have radios? - A. No.    Only
     the Sergeant in charge of each serial had a radio.

0.   Your job was simply to stay at the end of each road or
     the side roads? - A. Yes.

Q. There was no exercise put into effect in Leppings Lane to
   filter the fans coming down Leppings Lane towards the
   ground, was there? - A. None that I am aware of, no.

Q.   Were you on duty in 1988? - A. No.

Q.   So youcan't help us on the difference between 1988 and
     1989? - A. No.

0. I will just concentrate for the moment on 1989.   In 1989
   there was no attempt made, and you would not be at fault
   in this respect you just do what you are told, there was
   no plan afoot to filter the fans to control their flow
   down Leppings Lane?   From the very beginning I'm talking
   about now, not late on. - A. All I can say is not that I
   am aware of.   I obviously aware of the full extent of
   the full operational order.

Q. As far as you could see at the time when you say this
   group of people came past you, whatever time that was,
   Leppings Lane was already jammed packed full at the
   ground end, on your evidence? - A. I can't say that.
   From where I was stood behind the barrier, when I first
   saw the wave of supporters coming down about twenty to
   three or whatever time that was, I could not see the
   entrance to the ground.   It was only after the first
   wave, if you like to call it that, had passed me and
   perhaps half a minute had past, I don't know, I heard a
   radio transmission regarding problems at the Leppings
   Lane entrance.   Then I stepped out into the centre of
   the road and then I could see that it was jammed packed
   to the road.

0. So they were joining a situation which was already jammed
   packed, in effect? - A. I don't know.   I couldn't see
   it.
                                                               87


                                             P. WILSON


    0. That looks as if that had been the case when you stepped
       out into the road? - A. Maybe, yes.

    Q. Well, it is fairly obvious, Officer, with respect, from
       what you could see? - A. I can only say what I could see.
B      I couldn't see whether the entrance was packed or not.

    Q. So be it. As far as your duties were concerned, and as
       far as you know other Officers in your serial, it was
       simply to stand at the end of the road? - A. That is what
       it was, yes.

                   Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

    0. Sergeant Wilson, I was just going back to the point where
       you said people were running down the road and drinking
       at the same time.   Have you ever tried running and
       drinking in one go? - A. I have not, but I can assure you
       that some were attempting to drink whilst they were
       running.

    Q. I would imagine   it is quite a difficult thing to do? - A.
       I would imagine it is.
D
    Q. You said you didn't see any traffic... Before 11.45,     no
       traffic.   I am   sorry, I am getting a bit muddled. -A.
       After 11.45.

    Q. I have read that the traffic was stopped at 2.30 in the
       afternoon. - A. I can only think there must be some
       confusion of which end of Leppings Lane we are talking
       about.   I am talking about traffic coming along Leppings
       Lane from the Halifax Road end.   There was certainly no
       traffic.  Traffic would not have been able to pass along
       Leppings Lane from about one to two or two-thirty.   It
       would have been impossible because the road was — — --
       completely blocked by Liverpool supporters.   They were
       sat in the road. They were stood in the road.    They
       were eating take-aways.   They were drinking and the road
       was blocked.   It was physically impossible for any
       traffic to travel along Leppings Lane at that time.

    0, What time was that? - A. Between about one and two to
       two-thirty by the time it cleared.

    0. It's confusing me, this, because I have read that
       Superintendent Roger Marshall requested that the road be
       closed about 2.17, I think the time was.

             THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, it is very difficult
       because you see you know quite a bit about this matter.
       We, that is, the jury, haven't heard the evidence yet.
       Nov/ it may well be that when Superintendent Marshall
       comes along, or, indeed, the next Officer or ten Officers
                                                        88


                                       P. WILSON


from now, they will say that the road was open and it
wasn't closed until half past two.   What this Officer is
saying is that as far as he knows and as far as he
remembers there wasn't any traffic in that road from
quarter to....

     THE WITNESS:   From about quarter to twelve.

     THE CORONER:   He also says that in his view -
whether it had been blocked or not - traffic could not
have passed between one and half past two.   You have got
to accept what he says because he can't tell you whether
what you are asking him is right or wrong because he
doesn't know.

     HRS. McBRIEN:   My learned friend Mr. King has shown
these photographs before to the jury and to the witness.

     THE CORONER:   Just one minute, 282 please.   Put it
up on the screen.   I am sorry, I had forgotten we did
not have the acetate.

      MR. KING:     Mrs. McBrien has asked if I would help
her.    In fact the photograph which I know sha was
looking at, and I show it to you, sir, so you know what I
arn referring to, shows it is in fact much nearer the end
of Leppings Lane where this Officer was.      That shows a
time of fourteen    minutes past two.  It is aphotograph
that we have not    seen before, sir.

     THE CORONER:    I think we will let the witness have
a look at this.   We will get acetates and copies later
on.   This is C.282.    The reference on the photograph is
MWL.10/13A.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Officer, do you recognise   the location of that
photograph? - A. I don't,   I'm sorry.

I understand that is a photograph of Leppings Lane
itself? - A. Yes.   I take your word for it.

Do you know Leppings Lane? - A. I am not over familiar
with the location, no.   As I have said before, I am a
Doncaster officer.   This is the only one occasion when I
have worked actually on Leppings Lane itself.

So be it. - A. I don't know.

We will get other witnesses to deal with what that
photograph is, but just deal with it for the moment and
accept from me for the moment, subject to any other
evidence, that that is Leppings Lane. - A. Yes, sir.
                                                                89


                                              P. WILSON


    O. Accept from me for the moment that that is a scene of
       Leppings Lane at about eight minutes past two on the
       afternoon of the 15th of April, 1989. - A. Yes.

    0.    Does that in any way fit in with the state of Leppings
B        Lane from the your recollection at the time you say you
         were there? - A. Yes.    The only thing I don't recall
         seeing is the buses, but they are there,, obviously.

    Q.    There is plenty of space in the road for the bus to go
         on? - A. Yes, that's right.

    0. That doesn't quite fit in with your other evidence, does
       it? - A. Well, I did say about half past two.   You know,
       I said the road was clear.

    Q. No, that isn't half past two, that is eight minutes past
       two. - A. What I said was that the road was clear by
       about half past two.   I am not talking about the road
       between the two kerb edges.   I mean the street was
       almost devoid of supporters by half past two.

    Q. I am utterly confused and it may be my fault completely.
       I thought you were saying that traffic couldn't possibly
       get down Leppings Lane between... - A. At half past two,
       no.

    0. ...between I think you said one o'clock and half past
       two, something like that. - A. I think I did say that,
       yes.

    0.-That photograph suggests, if it is accurate, that traffic
       at the time of that photograph could get down Leppings
       Lane? - A. Yes, it does.

    Q. Can you help us on the difference between the two pieces
       of evidence? - A. Not really.  All I can say, it's a long
       time ago.   My recollection of it is that by 2.30 or
       thereabouts the street was almost clear.   I cannot break
       it down into minutes beforehand as to what the actual
       state of the road was.   Obviously from that photograph
F      at eight minutes past two the road was passable, but
       there was a time, a considerable time, when the road was
       impassable to traffic.

    Q. The jury will be able to look at that photograph .in a
       moment, but on your evidence you are saying that after
       that photograph was taken it got easier? - A. Yes, it
       did. That is what I am saying.

    0. On your evidence there would be no reason, for example,
       and I take a figure, at seventeen minutes past two, to
       demand that Leppings Lane be shut?   That just wouldn't




H
                                                        90

                                     P. WILSON


make sense on your evidence, would it? - A. I suppose
not, no.




         MR. KING:        I can't take it
                                                         91




                                            P . WILSON


   MR. KING:   I cannot take it any further with this
witness but perhaps the Jury could see.

     THE CORONER:    While this is happening, can I just say
something to the legal representatives? We are hoping to
have a machine installed on Monday morning which, when we
produce a photograph like this, we will be able to produce
an acetate of within minutes and have it on the screen. If
you want copies of it we will do that as well but we will
bill you for it. We should be able to get acetates of it
very quickly then and things will be easier.

          Cross-examined bv MRS. McBRIEN (Cont'd ):

Q. You mentioned that you asked the fans to slow down
   because there was a blockage at the entrance,
   Sergeant? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q, To prevent the fans from advancing towards the main
   gate. You said that they did not take any notice.
   You did not have any success in this way? - A. None
   whatsoever.

Q. Would you say that no Police Officers that day, in
   spite of the fact that there were 801 altogether,
   nobody could do anything, about this advancing crowd?
   - A. That is quite a sweeping statement to make. I
   do not think I am in a position to make that
   statement. What I think I can say is that so far as
   I am aware it was totally unexpected. To the best of
   my knowledge it was totally unexpected that this was
   going to happen shortly before the game and that we
   were not in a position to stop it at that time.

Q. I know we would like things to go perfectly well all
   the tim6 but is there not certain advice given in the
   event of certain problems arising? I know everything
   went as planned in 1988 but because it went very
   smoothly that year there could be eventualities,
   things causing problems, and are you not given
   instructions as to what to do when things do go
   wrong? - A. Not specific instructions, no. I am not
   sure of the point you are trying to get at but you
   cannot cater for every eventuality and it is very
   much down to each individual Officer to use his own
   initiative and common sense to deal with other
   eventualities as they arise.

Q. Who would normally be responsible for an emergency
   situation?
                                                             92




                                               P . WILSON


     THE CORONER:   I do not think this Officer should
answer. It is not really his question and it is not really
very relevant to this Inquest either.

Q.       MRS. McBRIEN:   You would say this crowd, running
     down as you said, it looked dangerous. You would not
     like to have coped with it on your own certainly? -
     A. No. I would not have used the word dangerous.
     Intense I think is probably correct. They appeared
     very intent on their purpose which was to reach the
     ground. They appeared intent on reaching the ground.

Q. As there were so many people already there the crowd
   was going to get exceptionally larger. That in
   itself is dangerous, is it not? I am not saying that
   the fans themselves were dangerous.

     THE CORONER:   This Officer has already said that he
did not see the crowd outside the gate because he was
standing behind a barrier. Besides you are asking him to
draw a conclusion.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, I am sorry.

        THE CORONER:    That is not really fair for him to
draw.

Q.       MRS. McBRIEN:   Did you attend the latest match at
     Hillsborough, the one on the 17th November? - A . I
     have not attended any match at Hillsborough since.

     MRS. McBRIEN:      Could I say this and I do not know if
it is appropriate?

     THE CORONER:       I will stop you if I do not think it is
appropriate.

Q.      MRS. McBRIEN: I watched fans arriving and
     departing on that day and the road was kept open the
     whole time while they were coming to the ground but
     it was closed when they were leaving the ground.   I
     was wondering if that is the usual procedure? - A. I
     cannot really comment. As I said, this is the only
     time I have, worked in close proximity to the football
     ground at Hillsborough and I can only comment on what
     happened on that day and not really on what is the
     norm or otherwise.

Q. You were standing by a barrier yourself to prevent
   fans going down the side roads? - A. Yes.
                                                             93




                                                P . WILSON


Q. Did you say you did not see any other barriers to
   stop people advancing towards the ground? - A. There
   were no barriers across Leppings Lane, no.

Q. No barriers at all? - A. Not across Leppings Lane
   itself.

Q. No cordons of Police Officers to filter out the
   ticketless fans? - A. Not that I was aware of.

       MRS. McBRIEN:   Excuse me a moment.

     THE CORONER:      It is quite all right.   You do not have
to tell me.

     MR. KING:   Sir, there is nothing to hide.

     THE CORONER:   You do not have to tell me either.        It
is perfectly in order to pass a message.

   MR. KING:  Sir, there is nothing to hide. I have had
my go and it is Mrs.McBrien's questions and I am not
trying to hide anything in doing what I am doing.

     THE CORONER:    I did not think you would. It never
crossed my mind I assure you. Even if you had wanted to
put a question through her I would not have minded
particularly either.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:    Sergeant Wilson, you had a radio
     on you that day, did you not? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you use your radio to send a message to the
     Control Room to tell them about this enormous crowd
     that you were seeing? - A. I didn't, no. No, I did
     not.

Q. Can you tell us why you did not? - A. I can tell you
   why very quickly. As I say, I was only about 150
   yards from the gate. By the time I saw them and they
   past me they would have been in clear view of the
   gate anyway and Officers at the gate would have been
   able to see them just as weil as I could.

Q. You left it to other Officers to take the necessary
   steps? - A. I did not realise at that time that there
   was any problem at the gate at Leppings Lane. Had I
   known of the problem there obviously I would have
   past a message to tell them there were more people
   coming but I was not aware there was any problem at
   the gate at that time.
                                                           9




                                              P. WILSON


               Cross-examined bv MISS AODELMANN

Q. Sergeant Wilson, as I understand your evidence you
   are quite confident about your recollection of
   events, the chronology? — A. Yes.

Q. You think your timing may be a little out? - A- My
   timing may be out, yes.

Q. I do not know if you can answer this but would you
   care to hazard a guess by how much your timing could
   be out? - A. Not a great deal, not by more than I
   would think ten minutes either side. It was very
   difficult at the time. I do not recall looking at my
   watch at the time and the times I have arrived at
   were considered afterwards trying to piece together
   what had actually happened.

Q.   Ticketless fans have just been mentioned? - A. Yes.

Q.    Fans without tickets. Do you have any personal
     knowledge whether the crowd on that day, a
     proportion, had not got tickets? - A. Yes, there were
     quite a fair number of fans without tickets. Several
     fans asked me if I knew where they could get tickets.
     They were up and down all day from very early on in
     the day and it appeared to be mainly the same ones
     that were up and down Leppings Lane all day asking
     for tickets.

Q.    Didthe numbers who were asking for tickets, did they
     increase at any point or did it stay the same really
     throughout the day? - A. It is difficult to say.
     There were so many people there that I could not
     really say whether they increased or not.

Q. It may be very difficult now but are you able to say
   how many approached you about tickets? - A. I would
   say I would have been aware of 30 or 40 people at
   least asking for tickets.

Q.   You have mentioned fans with drink? - A. Yes.

Q.    Are   we talking of the normal sort of consumptionthat
     one would expect to see at events like this or
     something out of the ordinary? - A. It was out of the
     ordinary. I have never seen anything like it before.
     There were people carrying six packs, four packs, two
     litre bottles of wine, carafes of wine, bottles of
     cider. Almost anything ^ou could name they were
     drinking it.
                                                                 95




                                                 P . C . LOMAS


     MR. HALE:   One small matter which I am sure you
appreciate arises out of the reference to Superintendent
Marshall.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

            Further Cross-examined b y MR. H A L E :

Q. You say you cannot cater for every eventuality. You
   make plans and things crop up, is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q . Would it be right that at the time when the last rush
    came and you stood with your arms trying to stop
    them, the road was completely clear of any
    vehicles? - A. I would say that is correct, yes.
    There were no vehicles at all.

Q. In fact it was easier then to rush down the road
   because there were no vehicles? - A. That is right,
   yes.

                PHILIP COLIN LOMAS     (Sworn)

                       Bv THE CORONE R:

Q. You are Philip Colin Lomas? - A. Yes.

Q. Police Sergeant 2305? - A. That is correct sir.

Q. You too in 1989 were stationed at Doncaster? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. You were another Officer who is not from Sheffield? -
   A. That is correct, sir.

Q. You had either been drafted in or volunteered, I do
   not know what and it does not matter, to assist with
   the policing of this match? - A. Yes.

Q. You started quite early that day at about half past
   eight or so in the morning? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. I cannot recollect which serial you were associated
   with? - A. 23, sir.

Q. You attended at the Hillsborough Stadium and I think
   there was a briefing where everybody was and senior
   Officers spoke to you? - A. Yes, sir.
              -              ,   - —> - ~                   . ., . '




                                                                 96




                                                   P. C. LOMAS


Q. And they gave you instructions and so on? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. Then you had a bit of a meal, sandwiches or
   something? - A. That is correct.

Q. You then at about ten past eleven set off to do your
   job? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. That was I think to look after Middlewood Road, Minto
   Road and Wadsley Lane? - A. That is right, sir. It
   was the protection of business premises, shop
   premises, along Middlewood Road from Wadsley Lane to
   Minto Lane.




                                  /Q.       If we look.
                                                                97

                                   P - C . LOMAS



Q. If we look there, can we find the area, where is Middlewood
   Road, I have lost it. Is it, yes I can just see it. Can
   you see where Parkside is then go up towards the left1
                                                        . That
   is Middlewood Road there, isn't it? - A. Yes sir.

Q. How far .. A. I was going from Wadsley Lane down past the
   number 2 and the same distance again to Minto Road. That
   was my area of responsibility sir.

Q. I see. So it was Middlewood Road towards the City Centre
   in fact. You may not know that if you are not a Sheffield
   person. - A. I will accept that sir.

Q.    It does not matter. And you had several      people in your
     Serial of course and you allocated them.       Were you in
     charge? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And you allocated them to various locations in this patch?
   - a . That is correct, sir. Prior to leaving Doncaster we
   get a pre-briefing order. There is the main Operational
   Order then each Serial, Sergeant, Inspector, they get a
   separate Order, a condensed Order, so prior to me leaving
   Doncaster I got my men together, briefed them, paired them
   off and told them exactly what they would be doing so that
   once we got to Sheffield we weren't going to be spending
   time discussing who was going to be doing what.

Q. You start patrolling up and down Middlewood Road, is that
   right? - A. That is correct sir. I allocate each pair
   of Officers certain points and then they are responsible
   for that point, then I am in overall supervision of the
   full operation or of my little operation.

Q. That is right and you wander around? - A. Yes sir.

Q. In doing that you came across a few fans, I don't mean
   literally but you came across a few fans? - A. I came
   across several thousand fans sir.

Q. Were they mainly Liverpool fans or was it .... A. They
   were all Liverpool fans sir. I did not see a Nottingham
   Forest supporter at all.

Q. Did you speak with any of them? - A. I spoke to quite a
   few sir. Two main questions:   "Where can I park?" and
   "Where can I get a drink?" If it was a pedestrian it
   was confined to one question of "Where can I get a drink?"

Q. What time    was   this? - A. From 10-past-ll- onwards sir.

Q. What time did     youfinish your duties at this location,
   about? - A. That was my duty sir right up to our Phase 2
   which takes place about 10-past-3 time.
                                                        98

                                 P.C.   LOMAS


Q. I see.   So what you are saying is from the time you started_
   ti-11 the time you finished people were approaching you
   and asking those questions? - A. Yes, they were approaching
   me and asking the questions but obviously as time got on the
   questions of where could they get a drink did not occur any
   more sir.

Q. I see, so that is what I am trying to find out: over what
   period were you being asked that question? - A. I would
   think up to about 12.30 time sir. For some reason like
   telepathy set in and then it became obvious from other fans
   where drink was able to be obtained.

Q. I see.  In other words up to 12.30 people asked you, after
   12.30 they ceased? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Whatever the reason you don't know? - A. I don't know sir.

Q. Did you have any pubs on your patch? - A. No sir, I didn't.
   There was one very close to my next sector called the Park
   Hotel, I believe, which was closed.

Q. You have mentioned they were asking you where the pubs
   were.  Did you see any alcohol consumed? - A. I saw a
   vast amount of alcohol consumed sir, in such a large
   amount I have never seen it before in my life and so far
   I have never seen it since.

Q. Do you mean in the streets or .... A. In the streets
   sir.  I saw every conceivable type of alcohol with the
   exception of hard spirits.  The Carlsberg Special Brew;
   Guinness, numerous makes of beers, lagers, wines,
   there were carafes of wine, bottles of wine, large bottles
   of lager and beer, everything that you can conceivably
   think of with the exception of hard spirits sir.

Q. I see. Was this being consumed obviously by individuals
   but what I am trying to find out was it a few individuals?
   - A. No, it was the vast majority of people sir. Like
   I say I have never seen such large amounts of people
   consuming intoxicants in the streets before.

Q. So these people were drinking, okay, but did it make any
   difference to their behaviour as far as you were concerned?
   - A. Yes sir, it certainly made them far more boisterous,
   far more loud.  I had to speak to several people about
   the foul language that they were using in the streets.
   There were residents about.  I did have complaints from
   the residents about it so when the occasion arose I spoke
   to the people concerned.

Q. You didn't attempt to arrest them? - A. I didn't attempt
   to.

Q. I don't know whether it is an arrestable offence anyway?
                              B.C.   LOMAS


- A. Swearing certainly whilst under the influence of
drink it could be construed as being part of an arrest.
After speaking to people they became very amenable and
they realised I take that they were in the wrong and they
realised if they- continued with bad behaviour they would
be arrested but it is not always tactically correct to
arrest a person just because he is swearing.   I looked at
my duties as a containment, to contain the situation because
for every arrest you make you then remove one or two people
from your-Serial to deal with that arrest. My instructions,
everybody's instructions were to be fair but firm so I
was being firm with them but being fair when they apologised
and they were just warned then and allowed to continue the
journey.

Can I just explore that for a minute or two with you.
Supposing for a minute that you had made an arrest, would
that have required one or two Officers to deal with? -
A. Normally sir two Officers go with an arrested person,
so for every one person that I arrest I have got to deplete
my strength by two persons.

And your strength was in fact eight men? - A. It was nine
sir.  It should have been ten but for one reason one person
was unable to attend.

So if one applied the general rule you could have arrested
four-and-a-half people so to speak? - A. That is correct
sir.

And if you had done it with one-to-one you could have
taken nine? - A. That is correct sir, then obviously that
then leaves my full sector completely void of manpower
and it then allows all the business premises etc. to
suffer whatever fate may or may not occur to them.

Because I think you said there were thousands of people?
- A. There were thousands of people sir, yes.

How the other thing you said and this is the second point
I want to explore, you mentioned that when you did speak
to the fans because of the swearing or whatever, they
in fact responded to you, they apologised and said they
would mend their ways.    Is that right? - A. That is
perfectly correct sir, yes.   Yes they were boisterous,
yes I would put it down to high spirits.    Most people
were in a good mood that day but unfortunately some
people's idea o.f fun when they have had .a little bit of
drink is a little bit different to a sober person's
particularly if it is an elderly lady or something like
that.

But it would be fair to say that yes they were drinking,
they may have been influenced and made more boisterous
and perhaps less inhibited, but they weren't aggressive
                                                             100

                                    P . C. LOMAS


     when you spoke to them and they were prepared to listen
     to, you? - A. That is correct sir. Obviously I would say
     that if any person had been aggressive towards me or
     continued swearing at me or whatever then I would have
     arrested them.

Q. Did you notice any who were actually a bit worse for
   wear than what you have described? - A. Oh yes sir.
   There was quite a lot, a number of people were staggering
   on the pavements, staggering in the road.  Inspector
   Humphries at one stage asked me if I could get a couple
   more men to the junction of Wadsley Lane.  There was a
   large group of quite aggressive people in the car park
   of the Park Hotel and we did fear that we were going to
   have some trouble.  The trouble did not ensue due to the
   fact that ....

           MR. KING:   Could the witness slow down slightly.

           THE CORONER:   Do you want to catch up?

           MR. KING:  Please.   I got as far as Sergeant
     Humphries I think sir.

Q.         THE CORONER:  Yes, can you go back to where you
     said, I think Inspector Humphries? - A. Inspector
     Humphries was my Commander that day.

Q. I think you said you and he thought there might be
   some trouble? - A. Well Inspector Humphries believed
   that there was going to be some trouble sir. Whilst
   doing my patrol I reached the corner of Wadsley Lane
   and he asked me if I could deploy two of my men to
   supplement another Serial because he believed there
   may be trouble from a group of Liverpool fans in the
   car park of the Park.

Q. That was actually further down the page, wasn't it,
   not near Wadsley Lane, it was at the other end of
   your patch? - A. No sir, it was at Wadsley Lane, the
   corner of Wadsley Lane and Middlewood Road sir, just
   where the circle is sir, that is roughly where the Park
   public house is.

Q. But in fact nothing happened? - A. No sir.  In fact I
   got two extra men; we came back and by that time the
   fans had left.

Q. And I think from your statement you were rather niggled
   with all this alcohol and you hoped that if there was
   going to be any damage it would be with the people who
   were selling it as opposed to the others? - A. That is
   correct sir.

Q. But in fact it didn't happen, not at the Park anyway <>
   - A. No.
                                                             101

                                   P . C . LOMAS


Q. At about quarter-past-2, I think, you heard a radio
   transmission.    Is that right? Can you remember that about
   sortie trouble in the public house? - A. That is correct
   sir, yes.

Q. And again did anything come of that? - A..All I remember
   hearing sir was that there was trouble at a public house.
   I don't know which public house it was and the public
   order vehicles were deployed.

Q. Nothing to do with you actually? - A. Nothing at all to
  • do with me.

Q. Forget it, it was just that you heard a message over the
   radio? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Did you notice any fans who appeared not to have tickets?
   - A. Yes sir, I noticed many many fans without tickets.
   I was approached by quite a number of fans asking if
   they knew where t h e y c o u l d get some from. Not only that
   whilst standing about I also saw numerous fans approaching
   other fans asking them if they had got what they said
   "spares".  Initially I did not appreciate what they were
   saying when they said;        "Have you got any spares?" but it
   soon became apparent to me that they were talking about
   tickets.

Q. Can you put a number on it just as a matter of interest?
   - A. I would say I was approached by between 30 to 40
    people.  I would estimate that I saw about 150-200
   people asking other fans for tickets.

Q. How many? - A. About 150-200 people sir. Those are the
   actual people that I heard when I say "estimated".

Q. Now in fact at around this time, I think about quarter-
   past- 2 or so you had sort of positioned yourself I think
   near Wadsley Lane and Middleton Road.   Is that right?
   - A. That is correct sir.   It was quite obvious that
   that was going to be the busy section with the fans.
   The majority of the fans were going up Wadsley Lane towards
   an off-licence up there and I believe to a public house.
   On Middlewood Road, Middleton Road to Catchbar Lane sir
   there is a lot of fast food takeaway shops on there and
   a lot of people were congregating around there getting
   something to eat.

Q. Yes, I see. ' Where you were could you see down Leppings
   Lane at all? - A. I could see down to the bridge sir
   on the ....

Q. So you could actually see the beginnings of Leppings Lane?
   - A. I could see the corner where the turnstiles are but
   I could not see the turnstiles.
                                                         102

                                 P.C.   LOMAS



Q. Were fans making their way down•Leppings Lane? “ A. Some
   fans were making their way down Leppings Lane, sir, but
   up until 2.30 the vast majority of the fans were making
   their way away from the ground at my position.




                            Q.           What happened
                                                              103


                                                 ?.   C.   LO.'iAS




Q. And what happened afc 2.30? - A. At 2.30, sir, it was
   just as if a switch had been flicked and the flow of
   pedestrian traffic turned, so iron walking away fran
   the ground they then started to walk towards the
   ground*

Q* They walked quite normally, apart from the odd ones who
   sight perhaps have staggered a bit, but by and large
   they were walking     they didn't run? - A. Ho, sir.
   There was no running at all. Certainly tnere was a lot
   the worse for drink and several of them were
   staggering.

Q. 3ut the walk was a normal walk? - A. A normal walk,
   sir, yes.

Q. Did they walk in the road or on the paveaents? - A.
   Initially they filled the pavement and then they
   spilled out onto the road, then half the road was
   blocked off up Wadslay Lane and then virtual!/ the
   whole of the road was blocked off then by pedestrian
   traffic.

Q. What time would that have been, about? - A. That was I
   would say about 20-to-3, sir.

Q. At about this time I think you also looked down
   Leppings Lane, did you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. IJhat was that like, was it siailar to ...? - A. Ho,
   Leppings Lane at the junction with Hiddlewood Road was
   blocked with traffic, sir - sorry, blocked witn
   pedestrian traffic, and I deployed.a Police Constable
   to stop all traffic going down Leppings Lane^at all.

Q. You heard - you may nave - I d o n ’t know whether you did
   hear, but one of your colleagues said he thougnt that
   the traffic had been stopped going down Leppings Lane
   from quarter-to-12 onwards. Would you agree with tnat
   or not? - A. Certainly not from cny side, sir.    I
   stopped traffic at 2.30.   I also heard taat somebody
   said that Superintendent Marshall had asked for the
   traffic to be stooped.   Radio transmissions were poor
   that day.  I didn^t hear the message*     I looked at the
   situation at 2.30, saw all those people, and I didn't
   want a car going down there.   Due to the condition of a
   lot of the fans, they could have stepped in froat of
   the car and we could have had somebody aurt fron it.

Q. So on your own initiative, you are saying, you decided
   .to block that road off? - A. Yes.

0. And you put one of your Officers to it? - A. Yes, sir.
                                               C.: LOiiAS




That worked, did it, as far as you are aware? - A. Yes,
sir. Ha remained on there up until, I believe, about
5-to~3 tiae.

What happened then, as far as you are concerned? You
remained in this area all the tiiae, didn't you? - A,
That is right, sir, yes. It becaae apparent, because I
heard certain radio transmissions, that there ware
probleas down at Leppings Lane end.   I tnought about
deploying sonie of ay manpower down there to assist them
but fans were still coning in quite large numbers,
albeit they, didn't spill out onto the road, so then
that again would have left ay sector void of all
manpower.   Being aware taat there were other serials
down tnere I didn't deploy them, sir.

So you kept them up where you were? - A. I kept then
where they were, sir.

And presumably the situation continued as you have
described until it started easing off at about what
time? - A. It eased off, sir, about 5-to-3 time, like I
said. The road cleared of pedestrians.   I could see
down Leppings Lane at that stage, towards the bridge,
and I then allowed traffic to flow back down there.

Yes, at about 5-to-3, as far as you were concerned, you
opened the road again? - A. Yes, sir.

Can you remember, you may not be able to remember, do
you recollect whether any vehicles did actually go down
after you opened it, at 5-to-3, apart frosi emergency
vehicles later on, of course? - A. I think soae die,
sir, but it wasn't that many.

Did you hear any messages at all about delaying kick-
off? - A. Yes, sir.

Tell sie a little bit about that? - A. I heard
Superintendent Marshall - like I say, radio
transmissions were very, very poor, but I heard
Superintendent Marshall to say that the turnstiles were
blocked and he did request that the kick-off be
delayed.

     MR. KING:   Sir, this could be quite important.
Could he slow down, please?

     THE CORQdER:    Yes, I agree.  I aa not writing so
it is easier for rae. 'where do you want hi;a to pick
this answer up?

     MR. KlilG:  "I heard Superintendent Marsaall say
the turnstiles were blocked” .
                                             P. C. LQHAS




     THE CQRQHER:    Could you repeat your answer as
best as you are able.   “Superintendent Marshall . . -
A. .. .* requested that the kick-off be delayed because
there was a queue, or a vast queue outside tae
turnstiles.

I think you actually said that the turnstiles were
blocked? - A. The turnstiles were blocked, sir, yes.

It is very difficult to repeat an answer, isn't it?
Try and speak a little bit slower particularly at this
point, because it is quite an important point obviously
for people to be able to record,  ilow, the first thing
I want to establish is, can you remember, or have you
any guide as to waen this particular radio message was
transmitted, as far as you can recollect? - A. I would
say, sir, it would be just after 5-to-3»   I can't be
any aore specific than that.  I do believe that I had
opened the road at that time.

And that was at 5-to-3 as far as you reraejaber? - A. As
far as I can remember, sir, about 5-to-3 but I can't be
definite.

Yes. Then the second question I want to ask you is
this: did you know Superintendent Marshall at that
tiiae? - A. At that tinie no, sir.

Did you recognise —    how did you know that it was
Superintendent ilarshall who was asking that request, as
opposed to somebody else? - A. I believe that he said
who he was, sir.

I see. That is what your recollection is, that "It is
Superintendent Marshall.  Can we have a delay?1* or
something like that? - A. Whether it be "Superintendent
tiarshall or his call sign, sir.

I see, yes, but you are quite sure that you heard a
message of this nature? - A. Yes, sir.

And as far as you were concerned it was Superintendent
Marshall? - A. Yes, sir.

And it was definitely a message requesting a delay? -
A. Yes, sir.

Of the kick-off, I mean? - A. That is corract, sir,
yes.

Did you hear any response to it? - A. [fo, sir.  whetner
it was a response, whether a response did coae, or
whetner I didn't hear it or not, I don't know.   Lika I
said, nay radio wasn't very proficient taat day.  I
                                                            106


                                                  P. C. LOMAS




don't know whether the batteries were gone or whether
there was problems with the control room itself.

Q. And you have already told me that you did think of
   sending soae of your manpower down to Leppings Lane but
   decided against it* is that right? - A. That' is
   correct, sir, yes.

Q. Because you felt that would denude your area? - A. That
   is corract, sir, yes.

Q. Did you hear any other transmissions regarding
   deployeaent of manpower? - A. Yes, sir. Superintendent
   Marshall again I believe was saying that there was
   problems down at Lappings Lane and then I did hear the
   control room say that there was soae reserve manpower
   available if he so required it.

0. And do you recollect whether there was any response to
   that offer? - A. I don't remember, sir.

Q. But in any case it was a comment about other people,
   other than you, presumably? - A. That is correct, sir,
   yes.

Q. That is the way you read the message anyway? - A. Yes.

Q. Now this message about the extra men that you heard,
   was this before the request to postpone the faatch or
   after, or can you not say? - A. I can't say, sir.   I
   just can't remember.

Q. Then did you hear any messages about opening or
   shutting of gates? - A. That is correct, sir.   I heard
   Superintendent Marshall again request three or four
   times for a gate to be opened.  He said that things
   were so bad down at Leppings Lana and if the gate
   wasn't opened then they would have a catastrophe on
   their hands.

Q.   Can you by chance remesiber - and if you can't I want
     you to say I cannot remember - was it a request to open
     a gate or gates, or were gate or gates specified in any
     way? - A. I just remember that gates, gate or gates
     being requested to be opened to ease the pressure
     because there was danger of people being injured.

0.   But you don't know whether it was in the singular or   in
     the plural? - A. I don't, sir, no.

Q*   Did you hear any response to that request? - A.
     Initially I believe that iir. Marshall was told to stand
     by. On his last request, this was whan he said taat if
     the gate wasn't opened then taere would be a
                                                          107


                                                P. C. LOMAS




   catastrophe, the order came back for the gate to be
   opened.

Q. So you actually heard that? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you - again, I want to try and place this message
   in relation to the other two which you have mentioned,
   the postponement and the reserve manpower - can you say
   when that would have been? - A. The reserve naanpower
   carae in between the two transmissions, I believe, sir.
   The final message about the catastrophe, that was the
   final message that I heard passed over the air at that
   time.

Q. So would I be right then in saying that as far    as you
   remember the request to postpone the niatch was   before
   the request to open the gates, because that is    what you
   have just told me? - A. That is quite correct,    sir.

Q. I just want to be sure about that.  I aa not trying to
   press you, but I am trying to ascertain as best as we
   can - timings are important in this matter, you see.
   You have told me about the three messages and you have
   tried to sort them, if you like, into an order.  Can
   you tell - in fact, there were more than three messages
   because you heard Superintendent Marshall ask about the
   gates more than once, didn't you? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. When I say three messages I mean three distinct .... -
   A. Three subjects.

0. That is right. Was there any lengthy time gap between
~ these three subjects - it is a good word. - A. I would
    think, and I am only estimating here, sir, and I may be
   completely wrong, I would say up to five minutes.

Q. Yes, staggered, about that? - A. About five ainutes,
   sir.

Q. But you don't want to coiamit yourself? - A. I don't
   wish to commit myself, sir.   It could have been 10
   minutes, it could have been 15 minutes.   It could nave
   even been 2 minutes, sir, I just can't remember.

Q. Can you remember, after you aeard the message from
   Superintendent Marshall, "You have got to open the
   gates or tnere will be a catastrophe" or something like
   that, did any more supporters go down tne ...? - A.
   Yes, sir, taere were supporters going down all tne
   time, but it was restricted to the pavements.  3y that
   time I would say that the supporters, they half filled
   the pavements.  The road, there ware very few people
   walking on the actual road.
                                                            108


                                                 P. C. LOMAS




Q. I just want to go back to the Superintendent's last
   message, the     one you have mentioned, because I want to
   just double check one word. Can you recollect whether
   the word "catastrophe" was actually used? — A.
   "Catastrophe" was actually used, sir, because one of ay
   men couuaented. on the word, so ....

Q.   It was a significant word? - A. It was certainly a
     significant word, sir, which will live with me for the
     rest of ay life.

Q. Pardon? - A.   I said it is a word that will live with me
   for the rest of my life.

Q. Yes, and then I think you did go down to the Leppings
   Lane end? - A. Yes, sir, we were waved down. Again,
   like I said, whether it be the radio transmissions or
   whatever, or whether the Officer didn't have a radio,
   we were waved down and I took my serial down to the
   turnstiles.

Q.   I think you formed a cordon across the turnstiles at
     that point? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. And kept a number of fans out? - A. That is right, sir,
   approximately 150 to 200.

Q. And most of these in fact had tickets, I believe, is
   that right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. It is ironic because these definitely had tickets, is
   that so? - A. Certainly quite a lot had tickets, sir,
   because they were coming up to us and sayin>, "Look,
   you know, I va got a ticket - why can't I go in?" At
   that stage we didn't know what had gone off.  I was
   saying,  Look, I'a sorry, at this stage you can't go
   in."

Q. I have been reminded about the time and it is actually
   more or less where I wanted to stop anyway.  'Je will
   obviously have to continue this cross-examination on
   Monday, I am afraid, because I don't think anybody will
   want to cose tomorrow, so may we finish at tuis stage?
   - A. Yes, sir.

0. I am sorry I have to ask you to cone back on iionday . I
   know we have postponed you once and we haven't finished
   today, but it is vary difficult to get the timings
   right and I apologise to you and hope it hasn't
   inconvenienced you too much.  I an sure it has
   inconvenienced you.

          THE COROii ER: Ladies and gentleman, you will be
     out by 4. Thank you very rauch indeed. A whole week
                                                    109




nas passed - it is amazing, isn't it? It is aaazing
that a whole week has passed.   You are a very
experienced Jury, you have done 2% v^eeks, but it is
quite hard work, isn't it, sitting and listening? Can
I just ask you one question before I let you go? Are
you satisfied, is that is the right word, with the
hours which we are doing? Are we doing too much for
you, or is it about right? You are coping with it?
You can see the rate at which we are going we are going
to take quite a long tirae because tnere are a lot of
witnesses, so we are not talking about a 5 niinute job.
If you find that you need a bit of extra sleep then
tell me, and I will do what I can. Obviously we nave
got to do a certain amount of work because we will be
here forever if we don't, but I don't want to wear you
out beyond what is actually essential.

     Hava a very good weekend.  You know the usual
things about not talking to anyone.   It is hard, but
that is how it is, and enjoy yourselves and we will see
you on Monday at the usual tiae. Thank you very auch
indeed.  Would you taka the Jury out?

            (In the absence of the Jury)
     ✓          ( I n the absence of th e j u ry )
     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, is there anything
you wish to raise with me before we rise this afternoon?

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I am just wondering what the position
is about a witness list?   It may be I haven't seen it, but
I wasn't sure whether there was a witness list for Monday.

     THE CORONER:   I suspect that we have not put one up
because we have got into such a terrible mess.  We had it
pre-planned for about two weeks and at the moment we are
busy unscrambling all the warnings, because I have got all
the estimates wrong with regard to time.

     MR. PAYNE:   If it is of any help, I am sure I can
speak for all Counsel here, that we are very sympathetic
about the problem of timetabling witnesses.

     THE CORONER:   That is very kind of you.    Have we got
a provisional list for Monday? Can you just bring it in and
I will have a look and maybe I can read out some of the
people who I think we will have.    I am hoping that as we go
along and as I become more experienced we will get it more
correct, but it is quite difficult.

     What we are going to try and do because we have got
them in order, within reason, so what we will try and do for
you is produce a list of potential week's witnesses but
without giving you the exact date and we will work our way
through it as far as we can but at least it will give you
some idea of the names of the people who we have in mind.
It is very difficult for you as well if you come, so to
speak, totally cold to it.

     The people whom we have warned for Monday, apart from
finishing with the Sergeant are Anthony Murray, Ross Wright,
Louise Hinton, Graham Richardson.

     I think all these appeared on that alphabetical list
which we sent you.   I think we are going to have to hear
these because this is the only day we can get them.

     MR. KING:   Sir, on the original list I was given for
today, some police officers, Chief Inspector Creaser,
Detective Superintendent McKay, Inspector Sykes and
Inspector Purdy, when are they likely to be?

     THE CORONER:   Well, there is another name you have got
to add and that is Chief Inspector Waring.   I was intending
to take them on Wednesday.   I still want to try and keep in
my sequence, but I am doubtful now whether we are going to
get to those on that day.   What I am going to try and dxr is
put them in order so that you can see which order we are
taking them in and to a certain extent you will be able to
guess as well as I how far down the list we are going to
get.   I can't say at the moment, but by Monday hopefully we
will be able to give you a clue as to where they come in.

     MR. KING:   Some Officers are obviously more principal
players than others.  Some of those names are obviously
important names,

     THE CORONER:    Indeed.    I quite understand that.
While I am on the witnesses, I might just as well mention
this. When I circulated that list of alphabetical names, I
tried to put as many caveats in as I could about adding,
subtracting and so on.     You have probably already heard
this, that we have had at least one that I can think of, and
I think there may be more than one name which isn't on that
alphabetical list. There is no way in which I can keep it
up, so to speak, and keep on up-dating it.     The reason for
this is at least three-fold.     One, because I an finding
people who on reflection I want to insert.     Two, some of
you took up the options and have notified me of names that
you wish me to consider and some of those names I have
acceded to and said that yes, I think I agree, and I will be
putting them in.   Some, of course, I decided I didn't wish
to call for whatever    reason. Usually the reason is I
already think I have   covered - it is either because Ithink
I have already covered the point that that witness is making
with somebody else, or because the witness is unavailable,
either because we can't find him or her or because they are
abroad or some other good reason.

      We have, as you know, a vast number of witnesses
already so I am not inviting you to add to this list, but on
the other hand if we are going to do this job, and it looks
as if we are going to be sitting here and working for
certainly days and probably weeks, I want at the end of the
day to feel that we have done as good a job as we can.   It
seems a pity to spoil it for the sake of another couple of
days.

      If you feel there is somebody I really have to consider
then tell me, but please be gentle with me.    Don't send rae
hundreds of names because remember I have got to look at
them.    Be selective, but if there is somebody who you think
really needs to be heard, then I -will consider it.   It may
be the sensible thing to do is to go through what we have
got, at least to go through it for several weeks and then
for you to sit back and say, "Have we covered what I want?"
We can then, if necessary, slot people in, to round off a
supplemental.    Just as, if you like, I am doing with Mr.
Ollerenshaw's evidence.    As I say, I am not criticising it.
It may be right.   It may be wrong.  We will hear just a
little bit more just to make quite sure, but I haven't y.et
                                                          112




assessed the other evidence so I can’t actually say, but as
I say'it didn't escape ray notice that there was something
that certainly surprised people, let's put it that way.

     Mr* Jones has got the next twelve names,, so if you want
to get-your pens out he will read them to you.   Again you
must bear with us if we have to change them around.
Occasionally we have to move them or something happens, but
that is the plan.




                  MR . JONES:   Mr.   'd u rst..   ..
                                                       113




     MR. JONES:  M. Hurst, A. Bennett, D. Lowe, K. Carrol,
R„ Knowles, S. Jones, G. Richardson, A. Murray, L. Hinton,
R. Wright, B. Lackey and R. Thompson.

     THE CORONER;   Those are the names but not the order.
Is there anything else? Ladies and gentlemen, thank you
very much for being here.  Have a good weekend as well and
I will see you all, God willing, on Monday.

  (The Inquests were adjourned until the following Monday
                        at 10 a.m.)
