+




nh
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER
                                       m                                  CITY COURTS
                                                                          THE TYRLS
For the County of West Yorkshire                                          BRADFORD BD1 1LA
        (Western District)                                                Tel: 0274-391362




Mr. C. P. Dorries,                                                        My ref: JAT/AP
H. M. Coroner,
H. M. Coroner’s Office,
M edico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD.                                                              31 Decem ber 1992
S3 7ET




Re: Hillsborough Inquest

Thank you very much for your letter o f 29th Decem ber, which I have received today, and
for all the very full and useful information which it contains. I will get in touch with the
personnel you have referred to and I look forward to having a transcript and a copy o f the
Taylor report in due course.

I note what you say about Dr. Start’s questionnaire. I will come back to you with any
comments on your list if I may. I have invited the observations o f my Coroner’s Officers.
I do not expect that any material alteration will be suggested either by them or by myself.




                                                                RECEIVED
                                                               U JAN 1993
                                                         H. M. CORONER’S OFFICE
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER                                                       CITY COURTS
                                                                              THE TYRLS
For the County of West Yorkshire                                              BRADFORD BD1 1LA
        (Western District)                                                    Tel: 0274-391362




 Mr. C. P. D o m es,                                                          My ref: JAT/AP
 H. M. Coroner,
 Office o f H . M. Coroner,
 M edico-Legal Centre,
 Watery Street,
 SHEFFIELD.                                                                 21 Decem ber 1992
 S3 7ET




 Dear                       1


 Thank you for your letter o f 17th Decem ber, received today, with its enclosures, which I am
 sure I shall find very interesting and informative. I am contemplating proceeding with a
 similar exercise here and will let you know whether we have similar responses.

 Further to our recent conversation concerning the Hillsborough case, I shall be glad if you
 will let me have a transcript in due course together with, if you have it, a copy o f the Taylor
 R eport and details o f the senior police officer who conducted the investigation.

 Yours sincerely,




J. A. Tufnbull
H. M. CORONER
                                             22nd December 1992

Mr. B. Devonside.




Dear Mr. Devonsode,

Rei HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS


Following our conversation yesterday I am now able to enclose the
copy documents referred to.

We cannot find any trace of reply from the Fire Service, it is quite
possibly the letter was acknowledged but that this was put in
another part of the file. It also seems that there might have been
a letter to the Local Authority, but again this is not on the relevant
file. We have looked quite hard for this without success.

The item of most interest however is likely to be the letter to the
Home Office. I spoke to the Home Office this morning and they are
happy for you to see their reply.




C.P. Dorries
H.M. Coroner
      Telephone:      (0742) 7 2 6444


       Facsimile:     (0 7 4 2 )7 3 5 0 0 3


Telecom Gold 79:      LLA 3020


            Telex:    265871 MONREF G (quote ref LLA 3020)
                                                                                                                                                       C O U N C I L

  Your reference:


   Our reference:            A H /E B /G J
                                                                                                                                                       Administration & Legal
             Date:           5 October 1992                                                                                                            Department
                                                                        .8 0 C U 9 W                                                                   Head of Department
                                                                                                                                                       Mark Webster,   c ity solicitor

                             Mr C P Dorries                 u u CORONgg .                                                                              Town Hall
                             HM Coroner                                                                                                                Sheffield
                             Medico Legal Centre                                                                                                       S1 2HH

                             Watery Street
                             SHEFFIELD
                             S3 7ET


                             Dear Chris

                             HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

                             Further to my letter dated 8 September 1992 I enclose herewith a response
                             from the Solicitors acting for the families. The contents of the letter
                             are self-explanatory.

                             Obviously, when I am notified of the date for a renewed hearing I will
                             contact you again.

                             Yours sincerely




                             City solicitor and Head of Administration




      Keith Trelfa                                                                                   ...     . ^
     Senior Assistant Head                                                                                                                                                           Elizabeth Bashforth
     (Administration)                                                        Assistant Head (Legal)




                                                                                    734019 - Mrs Bashforth
                                                     For telephone enquiries on
     R2220/XU                                            this matter please ring:   .................................................(STD Code 0742)
                       M alcolm J. G regg & Co.
                                            S o licito rs
                                                                           Telephone:   051-236   9085
M. J. GREGG, LL.B.
                                        S E C O N D FLO O R                   Fa x No   051-236   4182
J. M. HAWTHORN, M.A.                                                               DX   14175
                                    C E N T U R Y B UILDING S
                                  31 N O R T H J O H N S T R E E T
                                     L IV E R P O O L L 2 6 RG

                                                                         AD


    Our Ref: JH/LF/H359                                                                                  IS
    Your Ref: AH/EB/GJ                                                            16 SEP 1992




    City Solicitor
    Sheffield City Council
    Town Hall
    SHEFFIELD
    SI 2HH                                                       14th September 1992



    Dear Sirs

    Re:    Hillsborough Inquest

    We thank you for your letter of 7th September 1992.

   As you may know, the Attorney General has declined to apply to the
   High Court to reopen the Inquest. There remains an application for
   Leave to Apply for Judicial Review of the Coroners Inquest which has
   stood adjourned pending the Attorney General's decision. Now that
   that decision is known, we await a date for a renewed hearing before
   the Divisional Court and will notify you when we receive it.

   Yours faithfully
      Telephone:      (0 7 4 2 ) 7 2 6 4 4 4


       Facsimile:     (0 7 4 2 )7 3 5 0 0 3


Telecom Gold 79:      LLA 30 20


           Telex:     265871 MONREF G (quote ref LLA 3020)
                                                                                                                                                        C O U N C I L

  Your reference:


   Our reference:         AH/EB/GJ
                                                                                                                                                        Administration & Legal
             Date            8 September 1992                                                                                                           Department
                                                                                                                                                        Head of Department
                                                                                                                                                        Mark Webster,   c ity solicitor

                          Mr C P Dorries                                                                                                                Town Hall
                          HM Coroner                                                                                                                    Sheffield
                                                                                                                                                        S1 2HH
                          Medico Legal Centre
                          Watery Street
                          SHEFFIELD
                          S3 7ET


                             Dear Chris

                             HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

                             Further to our recent discussions regarding the potential legal action in
                             relation to the Hillsborough Inquest I enclose herewith copies of two
                             letters, for your information.

                             The first is a response from Municipal Mutual regarding the insurance
                             position and you will note that, in the Insurer's view, any costs
                             incurred as a result of the applications in relation to the Hillsborough
                             Inquest cannot be met by insurance.

                             The second is a copy of my letter to the Solicitors acting for the
                             various families requesting an update on the current position.

                             I will contact you again as and when I receive a response.

                             Yours sincerely




                             MARK WEBSTER
                             City Solicitor and Head of Administration




     Senior1Assistant Head                                                                                                                                                            Elizabeth Bashforth
     (Administration)                                                       Assistant Head (Legal)




                                                                                   734019 - Mrs Bashforth
                                                     For telephone enquiries on
                                                        this matter please ring:   .................................................. (STD Code 0742)
JH/LF/H359

A H /E B /G J


7 September 1992


Malcolm J Gregg & Co
Solicitors
2nd Floor
Century Building
31 North John Street
LIVERPOOL
L2 6RG


Dear Sir

re: HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

I refer to previous telephone conversations and correspondence regarding
the various applications relating to the Hillsborough Inquest.

I should be grateful if you could inform me of the current position of
the various applications and what steps you now intend to take.

I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours faithfully




City Solicitor and Head of Administration




                              734019 - Mrs Bashforth
                       MUNICIPAL MUTUAL                                                                   8 SEP



Mrs Bashforth                                                                                  ::±
Assistant Head (Legal)
Administration & Legal Dept                                         Our Ref : BF/MS
Sheffield City Council                                              Your Ref:
Town Hall                                                           Ext     : 127
SHEFFIELD                                                           Date      7th September, 1992
SI 2HH




Dear Mrs Bashforth,

Hillsborough Inquest

I refer to your letter of the 24th August, 1992 and the enclosed copy
documentation relating to the applications for Judicial Review etc,
following the Hillsborough Inquest.

I can confirm that any additional costs incurred iri carrying out a
Judicial Review would not be covered by any of the Council1s Liability
Policies with us in force at the time of the Hillsborough Disaster.
The reasons for this are as follows

1.    The relationship of the Council to its appointed Coroners is not
       the normal relationship of Employer and Employee. It is most
       easily considered as a "statutory office*' to which the Council
       appoints and meets the salary and other ejqoenses. Except in this
       narrow sense, the Council is not responsible for the conduct of
       the Coroner, who occupies an independent Judicial .cff\.GL

       Our Liability Policies operate in respect of claims against the
       Council and its Employees only.

2.    The Coroner enjoys the same qualified privilege as Judges and
      Magistrates and, therefore, cannot be sued in negligence.

       Our Liability Policies operate only in respect of claims brought
       in negligence.




                                                                                     Continued


 Municipal Mutual Insurance Limited, Park H ouse, 57-59 Well Street, Bradford BD1 5SN
                 Telephone: (0274) 729446 • Fax No: (0274) 306478
                                           R egional M anager: R. E. L aughton, FCII
 R egistered office: 22 O ld Q ueen S treet, W estm inster, L ondon SW1H 9HW R egistered n u m b e r 76678 E ngland
            An a p p o in te d rep rese n tativ e o f T he P ro sp e rity G ro u p (M em ber o f IMRO an d LAUTRO)


                                                         ABI
3.    Judicial Reviews are not actions for compensation.

      Our Liability Policies provide Defence Costs cover provided there
      is at the same time a claim under the Policy for compensation
      following negligence.


For the above reasons, therefore, I am afraid we cannot be      of any
help to the Council in this matter.




Yours faithfully




BARBARA FAAL
Deputy Regional Manager




c.c   John Tomlin - Insurance Officer
      Telephone:      (0 742)726444


       Facsimile:     (0 7 4 2 )7 3 5 0 0 3


Telecom Gold 79:      LLA 3020


            Telex:    265871 MONREF G (quote ref LLA 3020)
                                                                                                                                                        C O U N C I L

  Your reference:            CPD/PMS

   Our reference:            AH/EB/GJ
                                                                                                                                                        Administration & Legal
             Date:           17 August 1992                                                                                                             Department
                                                                                                                                                        Head of Department
                                                                                                                                                        Mark Webster,   c ity solicitor


                             Mr C P Dorries                                                                                                             Town Hall
                             Office of HM Coroner                                                                                                       Sheffield
                                                                                                                                                        SI 2HH
                             Medico-Legal Centre
                             Watery Street
                             SHEFFIELD
                             S3 7ET


                             Dear Chris

                             HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

                             I refer to your letter dated 16 June 1992 regarding the application made
                             to the Attorney General relating to the Hillsborough Inquest.

                             Although we have not had an opportunity to discuss the matter due to our
                             various commitments, I have kept a watching brief over the issue,
                             although there seems to be very little information available at present.

                             The only step I would suggest taking at present is to inform the insurers
                             of the applications and provide them with a copy of the documentation in
                             order that they can consider their position.

                             I will assume that you have no objection to this course of action and
                             make the appropriate arrangements unless I hear from you to the contrary
                             in the next few days.

                             If you have any further information or wish to discuss the matter,please
                             give me a ring.

                             Yours sincerely




                             City Solicitor and Head of Administration




      Keith Trelfa
     Senior Assistant Head
                                                                                                                                                                                          Elizabeth Bashforth
     (Administration)                                                                                                                                                                     Assistant Head (Legal)




                                                                                    734019 - Mrs Bashforth
                                                     For telephone enquiries on
                                                         this matter please ring:   ..................................................(STD Code 0742)
             CPD/PMS                                                  8 July 1992
             AJC/GA




             Mr A J Callaghan
             Dibb Lupton & Co
             Solicitors
             Fountain Precinct
             Balm Green
             SHEFFIELD
             SI 1RZ




             Dear Mr Callaghan

             HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

             I refer to your letter of the 22 June 1992 and our subsequent telephone
             conversation.

             I confirm that I will not release copies of the statements in question
             without giving you reasonable notice of my intention so to do.

             I have taken the opportunity of seeking clarification on the law from the
             Home Office.  I do not know how long it will be before I receive a reply.

             No doubt we will speak when the situation develop^/s further.

*
             Yours sincerely




             C P Dorries
             H M Coroner




    DESAAV
         CPD/PMS                                                  2 July 1992




         Miss Gillian Harrison
         Room 983
         D Division
         Home Office
         50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate
         LONDON
         SW1H 9AT




         Dear Gillian

         HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

         I refer to our recent telephone conversation and am enclosing a separate note
         of the problem that now faces me in relation to release of documents.

         I would be grateful if you could give some thought to this matter and perhaps
         take an opinion from the Home Office, Legal Department.  Your urgent
         attention to my query would be greatly appreciated.

         I look forward to hearing from you.




         Yours sincerely




         C P Dorries
         H M Coroner



         Enc




DESAAQ
         CPD/PMS                                                 16 June 1992




         Mr M Webster
         City Solicitor
         Sheffield City Council
         Legal & Admin Department
         Town Hall
         SHEFFIELD




         Dear Mike

         HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

         I have received a bundle of papers from Messrs Malcolm Gregg & Co, Solicitors
         of Liverpool and enclose the same herewith for your attention.  I have
         retained a copy of the application to the Attorney General and of the High
         Court papers but not of the bundle of statements.

         I am on leave for a week from this Friday (Majorca!) but suggest   that we   have
         a discussion about the situation shortly thereafter.

         I did not manage to speak to Stefan Popper about thisbefore    itbecame public
         and he has not been in touch with me since.

         I look forward to hearing from you.




         Yours sincerely




         Encs




RVSAAR
         CPD/PMS                                                     8 June 1992
         JH/LF/H359




         Malcolm J Gregg & Co
         Solicitors
         2nd Floor
         Century Buildings
         31 North John Street
         LIVERPOOL
         L2 6RG




         Dear Sirs

         HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

         Thank you for your letter of the 2 June 1992 together with its enclosures.

         I am enclosing a complete copy of Mr John G l o v e r ’s letter of the 15 October
         1990 as it was received at this office.




         Yours faithfully




         C P Dorries
         H M Coroner

         Enc




PMSACK
         CPD/PMS                                                   22 May 1992
         MJG/JH/LF/H359




         Malcolm J Gregg & Co
         Solicitors
         2nd Floor
         Century Buildings
         31 North John Street
         LIVERPOOL



•
         L2 6RG




         Dear Sirs

         HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

         Thank you for your letter of the 20 May 1992 together with its enclosure.

         When we spoke on the 14 May you indicated that you would have no objection to
         sending us a copy of the Applications both to the High Court and to the
         Attorney General.  It would be most useful to have early sight of these
         documents.

         I look forward to hearing from you.



         Yours faithfully




         C P Dorries
         H M Coroner




PMSABV
                                                                                                    Crown Office
                                                                                                          jnice Ref
                                                                                                                 nei

                     In the High Court of Justice                                                   CO       10 0 ^ / 9   Z .

                     Queens Bench Division
                     Crown Office List
                      In the matter of an application for Judicial Review

                                       T he Q u e e n - v -

                                       Ex parte                                        ^              o tt^ f?

                                       Application for leave to apply for Judicial Review
                                       NOTIFICATION of the first Judge’s decision (Order 53 r.3)
                      Follow ing :
                     &    ■eonoideration of the documents only*

                      r e c o n s id e r a tio n o f the documents and oral subm issions by the applicant
                      — or counsel \ff\R .                        in     court-

                        O rder by the Honourable Mr Justice

                        Observations for the applicant- '■
                                                          v)             yT

                                                                          ^   I    V       W    ^        ^        4 x -




                           o il                                                                                                 ^



                         Dated                                                    Signed
                                     \*5 *~         t V M
                         Where leave to apply has been granted, applicants and their legal advisers are reminded of
                         their obligation to reconsider the merits of their application in the light of the respondent's
                         affidavit.

Notes for the app licant                                                               Sent/Handed to the applicant/

(1) Where the Judge has refused leave an applicant                                     the applicant's solicitors
     or his solicitor may renew his application by
     completing and returning form 86B within 10 days                                  on (d ate):
     o f the service upon him o f this notice. The application
     may not be renewed in a non-criminal cause or matter
     if the Judge has heard oral argument.                                          M tocom J . £ le(k £ r Cc
(2) If leave has been granted the applicant or his solicitor
     must within 14 days from the grant o f le a v e :
      a) serve on all persons directly affected
         - copy N otice o f Motion in form 86 together with                            Applicant's R ef No.
         Form 86A, supporting affidavits and exhibits;
      b) enter in the Crown Office the original Notice o f
         M otion in form 86, together with :                                                   ■ C f H |us(            f-KSS^.
        _ 0 /V>TMAC* •I5&1 fp#>- a f f i d a v i t r t f s e r v i c e
                                      M alcolm J. G regg & C o.
                                                          Solicitors
                                                                                Telephone:   0 5 1 -2 3 6 9085
     M. J. QREQQ, LL.B.
           -----------------------------------                    SECONDFLOOR      Fax No.   0 5 1 -2 3 6 4162
j.   j.   M. HAWTHORN,       m .a .                  CENTURY BUILDINGS                 DX    14175
                                                   31 NORTH JOHN STREET
                                                      LIVERPOOL L2 6RQ




                       Our Ref:          MJG/JH/LF/H359



                       The Coroner's Office
                       The Medical Legal Centre
                       Watery Street
                       SHEFFIELD
                       S3 7ES                                             20th May 1992



                       Dear Sirs

                       Re:       Hillsborough

                       We refer to our telephone conversation of the 14th instant and
                       enclose for your information a copy of the Single Judge's Decision.

                       Yours faithfully




                       Enc.
                      ss^ s           ^     <**■*

    o<^             ^"►^,

^         r^N<- ^   <«&*»** t*~             ^    *^Sk>A




               c— viJ^Vi          ^»>K«X


             TRAXAM                        GEL
                                                  C       I       T        Y
                                                  C   O       U   N   C        I   L
with compliments
MR DORRIES                                        Health and Consumer Services
                                                  Director
Please phone D Purchon on your return regarding   D W Purchon     m ie h   AMinstwM
the attached letters.
                                                  Town Hall Chambers
                                                  1 Barkers Pool, Sheffield S1 1EN
                                                  Telephone: (0742) 734611
                                                  Telecom Gold 76: LMX877 (Em. Health)
                                                                 76: LMX878 (Consumer Serv.)
                                                  Fax: (0742) 736464 (Town Hall Chambers)
                                                       (0742)402531 (Trading Standards)
                                                       (0742) 734692 (Env. Services)
  p rin te d o n recycled p a pe r                Telex: 9312132270 (IF G)
                                                                                                                                                   hlxLL.'b'         S'a i   Z><~ ■
     'jjw p h o n e :   (0742) 726444        .
                                                                                                                                           w m
            <• * •

■ v* ' Facsimile:       (0742) 733003   /■

Telecom Gold 79:        LLA 3020


             Telex:     265871 MONREF G (quote ref LLA 3020)
                                                                                                                      C O U N C I L

 Your reference:            HC/AA

  Our reference:            MW/PSW
                                                                                                                      Administration & Legal
             Date:          18th March 1992                                                                           Department
                                                                                                                      Head of Department
                                                                                                                      M ark Webster, c ity Solicitor
                            A M Adlington
                                                                                                                      Town Hall
                            Liaison Officer                                                                           Sheffield
                            Hillsborough Working Party                                                                SI 2HH
                            Municipal Buildings
                            Dale Street
                            LIVERPOOL
                            L69 2DH




                            Dear Sir or Madam

                            Mi      DR POPPER, EX CORONER,                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE DISTRICT

                            Thank you for letter of 13th March 1992 concerning your request for a
                            copy of witness statements relating to the Hillsborough Disaster.

                            I have passed your communication to the Director of Health and Consumer
                            Services as he has responsibility for the operation of the Medico-Legal
                            Centre and have asked him to let me have his comments in connection with
                            this matter.

                            Yours faithfully




                         City Solicitor and Head of Administration




    Keith Trelfa
    Senior Assistant Head                                                                                                                          Elizabeth Bashforth
                                                                                                                                                  Assistant Head (Legal)




                                                                                      734018
                                                     fo : telephone enquiries cn
    R222CVX14                                             this m atter please ring:                .(STD Code 0742}
                                                          Municipal Buildings
         HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY                               Dale Street
                                                          LIVERPOOL.  L69 2DH

                                                   Telephone: 051-225-1324/2325



                                                   Your ref

                                                    Our ref:      HC/AA

                                                         Date:    13th March 1992

    Head of Administration & Legal D e p t . ,




•
    Sheffield City Council,
    Town Hall,
    SHEFFIELD
    SI 2HH.


    Dear Sir,

    Dr. Popper — Ex—Coroner, South Yorkshire District.

    A number of Hillsborough families have been attempting for some time to
    obtain copy witness statements relating to the death of their loved
    ones at Hillsborough.     Iam informed that all enquiries made through
    the Coroner's Office are directed to Dr. Popper.    Indeed, it has been
    stated that Dr. Popper has specifically requested such matters to be
    referred to him and that the present coroner "won't have anything to
    do with Hillsborough".     I find such a procedure astonishing given that
    Rule 59 Coroners Rules 1984 provides   that where a coroner vacates his
    office by death or otherwise, all documents, exhibits, registers and




•
    other things in the custody of the coroner in connection with inquests
    or post-mortem examinations shall be transferred to the coroner next
    appointed to that office.

    I should be grateful if you would provide me with an explanation for
    the adoption of such a procedure given that Dr. Popper retired some
    time ago.

    Yours faithfully,




    A.M. Adlington,
    (Liaison Officer)


                                                  I -■Ift.i      y.




    TSTCYI
I am afraid that you have been misinformed about Dr. P o p p e r ’s role.      It
is not correct to say that all e n q u i r i e ^ a r e referred to him and I must
make it plain that he would not take ,£(riy part in deciding how requests
are dealt with.        Where Dr. Popper cstn assist is in indicating very
speedily which doccuments were tendered in evidence at the inquest and
which were not.        So far as I can/see the only alternative to obtaining
Dr. P o p p e r ’s response on this raoint is for me to sit and read through
the whole of the transcript of a 90 day hearing.




BMBAAW
                                              OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR        MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                WATERY STREET
                                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                SHEFFIELD
                                                           (West District)
                                                                                S3 7ET
                STEFAN L. POPPER, L L B ., B.M ED.Sd.. B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                                CORONER


                                          Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                                    " 2 7 tT i'"S e p te m B 'e f   1 9 —9 1 ;


           SLP/JT.




                                                                                -     "




           Dear Colleague,



           I have recently been approached by the father of one of the deceased at'
           Hillsborough to inquire what steps if any I was taking with regard to making
           available material, documentation and papers including photographs etc.,
           relating to or arising out of the Hillsborough Disaster.

           He told me that he had been- making some personal inquiries and has
           discovered that a considerable amount of material is available in relation to
           the Ibrox and Bolton Disasters and as I understood h i m he appeared to be able
           to obtain copies of some of this material, if he so wished.

           I am of course aware that generally speaking, coronal papers are not
           disclosed to the general public for a period as specified in the appropriate
           Act subject to the exceptions with which we are all familiar.  It is also of
           course possible for a coroner to give specific consent to allow access to
           coronal papers.

           The matter is fairly complex because in addition to the coronal inquiries
           there may have been public inquiries as well as inquiries by or on behalf of
           the D.P.P. the Police Complaints Authority, the Health & Safety Executive and
           Air Accident Investigators, quite apart of course from any private inquiries
           and investigations undertaken by the parties themselves. -     ______________ _

           The material which becomes available following a major disaster seems to me
           to fall into the following classes

               1.     Coronal papers proper i.e., transcripts, documents admitted
                      under Rule 37 and exhibits at the inquests.

               2 . Statements, photographs, documents, videos etc., on which the
                      evidence contained in the documentation referred to in N o . 1
                      above was based.

                     Other statements, documents, photographs, videos, tape recordings
                     or other material which was available but was not used in the
                     coronal proceedings.

                     Documents etc., which were collected on behalf of or prepared for the
                     D.P.P. or the public inquiry, whether or not these were also made
                     available to the coroner.




   R86O6
LESABA
„   ’ r       r5•      Intra-office papers e.g., correspondence, minutes of meetings etc.

       In addition to the coroner, the Chairman of the Public Inquiry, the D.P.P.,
     ■ the Police Complaints Authority and the police themselves who have taken the
       statements, there may be other parties who may have interests in some of the
       material e.g., B.B.C. or I.T.V. in respect of T.V. footage.

        On the other hand, I think it is probably right to say that with events which
        we class as major disasters, there is a considerable argument for saying that
        the material relating to this event should not only be preserved but should
    . a l s o be made available for historical purposes, research, and preventative



          I would be most interested to know whether you have had any similar - s :
          approaches from anybody in relation to the disasters in which you were
          c o n n e cte d .                                      v                . . ~

          Whether or not you have had such an approach, I would be most interested to
          learn whether you have any views with regard to the inquiry, the disclosure
          of the material in whole or in part., or any other comments relating to this
          matter

          One thought that has,grossed my mind (bearing in mind the somewhat complex
          nature of the situation) is whether_there might not be some advantage in
          discussing the issue with the public records office or one of the major
          museums with a view to them taking over the material, sorting out with
          various interested parties the rights and wrongs of disclosure and perhaps
          even setting up what one might describe as a Major Disaster Section where
          material from several of the major disasters could be collated and collected
          with a view to having in one place this sort of information available for
          inspection, subject to such restrictions as might be appropriate or agreed.

          It may well be that there will be some material, e.g., personal
          correspondence or other matters which may be deemed to be of such a
          confidential nature that it should not be included in such a venture or that
          its disclosure be restricted for the appropriate period of time allowed for
          in the Public Records Act.

          I look forward to hearing from you in due course.                  ;




          H.M.Coroner.


          c.c. Dr.            P.   Chambers.
               Dr.            P.   Knapman.
               Mr.            R.   Sturt.
               Mr.            J.   Turnbull.
               Mr.            P.   Tomlinson.

                   U e < u .( S o e o o ^ i * ^
FILE NOTE    1.11.91    TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR. DEVONSIDE
                        ON 31.10.91




I told Mr. Devonside that I was writing to him, that he wouldn't be
entirely satisfied but I didn't think I had the authority to disclose
the photographs.   I also said that a lot of the photograps of course
were taken by other individuals other than South Yorkshire who
might have the copyright.   He asked whether it would be possible for
me or my successor to let him know who the photographs were taken
by.  I said unfortunately I didn't have that information to hand
and I had no recollection of having it but I was pretty sure that it
was available and I suspected South Yorkshire   would be in a position
to supply this.  I said failing that he could consider   approaching
the Press Association to see if they would know who might have taken
photographs and alternatively perhaps the Club because they might have
organised people to take photographs.   Mr. Devonside enquired whether
I was intending to write a book, I said I hadn't really taken any
decision it was very difficult to know what would be right and proper.
I turned the question round and asked him what he would say if T did
decide to write a book.   He said he found that difficult to answer as
as well because speaking for himself he would find it very interesting
because he would like to see what I thought about the system and how
I thought it should be changed etc.   In otherwords quite positive about
the possibilities.

He also said and I thought this was very interesting and helpful that
he for himself now felt that one had to put the pointing of fingers
and recminination and so on aside and one had to look at the situation
and at the future with a view to trying to improve things so that
things would be better and hopefully avoidable.  I was very pleased
indeed to hear sentiments like that.  We ended and said goodbye to
each other.
                                            OC--rt><5<£,vt_
                                       31st November          91



SLP/PAD

Brian L. Mole,
Chief Superintendent,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
Sheffield,
S3 8LY,


Dear Chief Superintendent Mole,

RE* HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


Thank you for your letter '" - ’th October. I note what you say
and no doubt you will deal with this as soon as you are able.




Yours sincerely.




S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                           POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                           SNIG HILL
                                                           SHEFFIELD    S3 8LY
                                                           TELEPHONE (0742) 768522
                                                           TELEX 547996


ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO “THE CHIEF CONSTABLE”
r                                                   n
        S L Popper Esq
                                                           Your Ref:   SLP/JT
        H M Coroner
        Medico-Legal Centre
                                                           Our Ref:    CCO/BLM/LM
        Watery Street
        Sheffield
                                                            Date:      17 October 1991
        S3 7ET

L                                                   J


        Dear Mr Popper

        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

        I refer to your letter dated 14 October 1991 concerning approaches made by
        Mr Devonside with a view to the obtaining of photographs connected with the
        disaster.

        For your information I have been in communication with Mr Devonside concerning
        this matter and have advised him of the present policy of the South Yorkshire
        Police, that is that for the time being we are not in a position to release
        any material taken in connection with the disaster until such time as all
        matters have been finalised.

        We have taken legal advice concerning this matter and this is the policy
        that has been determined consequent upon that advice. You will be aware
        that discipline proceedings are still pending in connection with two of the
        officers involved in the enquiry and it may well be some time before those
        matters will be finalised. In addition, the question of 'property' does
        arise and as you quite properly say some of the material is not the property
        of South Yorkshire Police and approaches will have to be made to other
        organisations to whom that property belongs.

        I have assured Mr        Devonside and many other individuals who have made similar
        approaches that I        will do everything in my power to expedite the requests
        made when matters        have been finalised. However, for the time being I am
        not in a position        to release any material.

        I trust this information will be of assistance to you.

        Yours sincerely




        Brian L Mole
        Chief Superintendent
        (Discipline & Complaints)




The officer dealing with this correspondence is                               Extension   .

ADM/1
                                      30th October    91



SLP/PAD


Mr. B. W. Devonside,




Ctear Mr. Devonside,
I refer to our conversations regarding the release of copies
of photographs which were not used during the Inquests.

Unfortunately 1 do not think that 1 have any authority to
authorise the making of copies of these photographs particularly
as the copyright vests in other parties.

The present toiew of the South Yorkshire Police is that they are
not in a position to release any material taken in connection
with the disaster until such time as all Proceedings have been
finalised.

I am informed that they have indicated to you that when this
happens they will review the situation with a view to reconsidering
their position, and I believe that they have been in touch with you
regarding this.

There are of course a number of photographs and other material
which was owned,,or where the copyright is owned by third parties
e.g. Press photographers of television compamies. Whether they
would be prepared to let you have copies of their photographs
or whether they would be prepared to authorise the release of
these I am not in a position to say.
A appreciate that you will be a little dissapointed by this letter
but it may well be that the passage of time will enable some
resolution to be brought to the problem so that your wishes at
least in part can be met.

May I also take this opportunity of wishing you well for the
future. Nothing can give you back your son and that loss must
remain with you, but I hope that the pain may ease and that you
will get a measure of peace.
I also want to say that I have appreciated the way in which
it has been possible to conduct the contact which we have
had over the years.




Yours sincerely.



S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
F IL E   NOTE DATED 1 4 . 1 0 . 9 1 .



Mr.      Devonside rang.       (I told him I would ring him back

horavnr° I had obviously overlooked               -       h(4 wanted to
                                                      C J U ^
know what was happening about documents wka-t“he was a f t e r .

It turned out that I had misunderstood him.                     He was not

after copies of everything,             he just wanted a few

photographs preferably of general crowd scnene relating to

the disaster.           He would like to come and look through the

bundles and select a few for his records.                 He did not think

that there would be more than 20 to 40 or thereabouts.                       I

said I would try and find out what could be done.                     I

explained to him that to try and set up a Hamjafrre m u seum of

all the material would just be too difficult as there were

thousands of documents and statements.

 I also mentioned to him just for his information that I had

taken on board the comment he had made during the inquest

regarding identification and so on and that I had written

 to the Coroners'          Society and asked them if they would

consider setting up a sub-committee with a vie w to seeing

w hat could be done.

 I said whether in fact anything would come of it was of

 course another matter on which I could not comment.




 TAYABA
                                                    y )        t

TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH JUDGE SIMPSON                 ✓
TUESDAY, 26 MARCH 1991


Telephoned Judge Simpson and told him that the Jury had gone out
but had not yet reached a verdict and that I had been invited
to a Dinner by the members of the Bar who had appeared before
me with some of my officers, and that I had been told that it
was perfectly proper for me to go and this was a standard
convention. He confirmed that that was correct and it was entirely
conventional in long trials for the Judge to be entertained towards
the end or sometimes after the Jury had gone out. It had not
happened to him for a dinner but he could see no reason why I should
not go. He suggested one should avoid discussing the case.

Attended the Dinner at Claremont Hotel, Sharrow Vale.
Mr Maxwell was not present neither was a representative of Dr
Eastwood, but the other parties were there including Mr Tim King.
It was an exceedingly pleasant evening and an excellent meal.
There was some reference made to the proceedings which in a way
was inevitable.



SLP
                                  J        C\M.        LojJi^                    cu                                    b(L

alio -2_ci
         IA J              Jo         ajzcejv'e,           Itui            S^cO / t f c        t ic ?   tk .       .




_LV S             u y iV          _\(p      S cau              o V j^ ^ fc - r            -tVu                 V 'e x c W c t

U>(L              J M -6 _ U ss              i^ O X jo i              cv         (V ca tuftxo"H u                       a«wdl

qU   . ^ c o U'        ~tnsk                 ou       k-QV
                                                      K-QV/C               LqA               ~-fL c & t .

ia.sl'                 <        . AAO/i^L-S ,         i\   I   ol O        'tk jlb        iK               CVfc/

voil cl            J.tRe           ib                                 CjCiu-         ujqJJ                     W             H   vl
                                                        V J.   ft       c \J h




                                                                f   r     o_.
WEDNESDAY, 27 MARCH 1991                                            ‘ '

I received a note from Mr Webber dated 27 March enclosing a letter
addressed to the Jury. He suggested that I agreed that this could
be circulated on 28 March.
I read the letter and considered it to be totally unsuitable.
I telephoned him and said I had not agreed although I did meet
one of his colleagues by chance in the street and she had asked me
whether I had seen the draft. My response was that I had not and
she said she would find out what was happening and let me see it.
I had not been opposed in principle to a letter being given to
the Jury. However, having read it I felt that it was unsuitable,
in particular because it could be construed as inviting the Jury
to discuss their deliberations. Mr Webber assured me that that
had not been his intention and he had not intended it to be read
that way. In the end I said I prefer to deal with it viva voce.
All communications
    to be addressed
  'Director o f Social
            Services'


    Your reference:


     Our reference:      DW/JMG/D1                                         C O U N C I L
                         Mr David Webber
                Date:
                         27 March 1991

                                                                           Family & Community Services
                         Juror                                             Department
                         Hillsborough Stadium Inquest                      Director of Social Services
                         Town Hall                                         M r M Manby
                         Sheffield
                                                                           Redvers House
                                                                           Union Street
                                                                           Sheffield
                                                                           S1 2JQ




                         Dear Juror

                         I have asked Dr Popper, the Coroner to give you this letter at
                         the end of the Hillsborough Stadium Inquest.

                         During the period of the Inquest you as one of the Jurors have
                         had to undertake a very responsible and onorous task. Day after
                         day you have been confronted with the full horror and tragedy of
                         the disaster and at the end of the Inquest had to make an almost
                         impossible decision.

                         Although you were not present at Hillsborough on the day of the
                         disaster I am sure that the experiences of the last month will
                         have had a profound effect on you.  Now that the Inquest is over
                         and your decisions made you may find that some of the information
                         and material presented at the Inquest keeps coming back toumind
                         or you wonder whether you made the right decisions.  It would be
                         quite natural, because of the circumstances of the disaster that
                         you may have feelings such as distress and anger which are not
                         easy to deal with.

                         Over the last few months you may have noticed that Social Workers
                         from Liverpool and Sheffield have been at the Inquest talking with
                         and supporting relatives of the victims and witnesses.  Because of
                         your position as Jurors you have been isolated from this support.
                         Now that your task is complete it is possible to offer you the
                         opportunity to talk with a Social Worker about any experiences and
                         feelings you may have.

                         I can assure you that any contact you make with a Social Worker
                         will be completely confidential.



                                                                          Continued/        . . .




      For telephone
       enquiries on      734855/734856
                                                                          FOCS
                                                                          iK V tM W t
   this m atter dial:


                R8586
Juror                         - 2 -               27 March 1991

If you would like to talk to a Social Worker now or in the future
please write or telephone Dave Webber, Senior Principal Social
Worker on 734856 or 734855. If you write please mark the envelope
Private and Confidential. Depending on your wishes, Mr Webber will
put you in touch with a Social Worker from the Department or another
agency.

Yours faithfully




Martin Manby
Director of Social Services
All communications
    to be addressed
  'Director o f Social
            Services'


    Your reference:


     Our reference:
                                              C O U N C I L


                Date:    XT/3/1
                                                  Family & Community Services
                                                  Department
                                                  Director of Social Services
                                                  M r M Manby

                         Co/Wt'A                  Redvers House
                                                  Union Street
                                                  Sheffield
                                                  S1 2JQ




                                              l

                                   aJ L zjL                           JZ




       For telephone
        enquiries on
                                                  FOCS
    this m atter dial:


                 R8586
 HILLSBOROUGH
          A 24 hour telephone helpline




HELPLINE was set up to offer help, advice and support to
anyone affected by the Hillsborough tragedy. Many people
suffered from the events at Hillsborough. Som e lo st close
friends and relatives, or were injured themselves, others suffered
stress and shock, w hich m ay n ot becom e apparent until long
after the tragedy itself.

HELPLINE is staffed by trained and experienced volunteers,
w h o w ill assist w ith material problems, or will listen if y o u are
upset and just w ant to talk.

A n yth ing y o u say, or any help y o u are given, will be com pletely
private and confidential.

D o n ’t b o ttle up your feelings — talk about them . I f y o u feel
especially upset, or find y o u cannot talk to fam ily and friends,
y o u CAN still talk to som eone.

          PHONE THE HILLSBOROUGH HELPLINE

N o problem is to o small, or to o big, for us to listen to and help
with.

Out o f office hours your call w ill be diverted to the duty
volunteer. A fter 2 —3 ring ton es y o u w ill ‘hear’ 8 —9 seconds
‘silence’ w hen y o u m ay think y o u have been disconnected.
Please be patient, your call is sim ply being transferred and will
be answered.

HELPLINE WILL BE O PERATIONAL UNTIL A T LEAST 1991
                               EMBARGOED UNTIL AFTER THE VERDICTS                          If




             TiMT

Wgst Midlands Police                                       T elep h one numbers:
N ew s Bureau                                              0 2 1 -6 2 6 5 1 9 1 / 2 / 3 / 4 / 5 & 5 1 8 6
Police Headquarters
PO B ox 5 2, Lloyd H ouse                                  Fax number:
Birmingham B4 6N Q                                         0 2 1 -2 0 0 1 2 4 9




                                      PRESS RELEASE



    By Mr J. Mervyn JONES,        the Deputy Chief Constable of Cheshire and Officer in
    day-to-day command of the initial investigation and more recently has acted

     as the Coroner's Officer.



     He said:-


             "I have no comment to make about the verdicts, nor has the Coroner,

             Dr Stefan POPPER.


             The investigation into the circumstances surrounding the tragedy at Hillsborou

             has been exhaustive and comprehensive.       At the height of the investigation

             nearly 500 West Midlands Police Officers were involved.                  Upon completion

             of the bulk of the work by the Summer of 1989, the team was reduced to
             62, and from November 1990 onwards, a team of 12 Officers has been

             dedicated to supporting the Coroner for his Inquests.


             During the course of the inquiry as a whole, contact has been made with

             over 13,000 people, over 5,000 statements have been taken, 9,000
             questionnaires completed, over 2,400 photographs examined and 71 hours

             of video       viewed.


             The product of these extensive investigations was made available to
             Lord Justice TAYLOR,      the Director of Public Prosecutions,              the Police

             Complaints Authority, and latterly to the Coroner.


             At the opening of the investigation I stated that this tragedy would

             be investigated thoroughly;      this we have done.

                                                                                                            t

                                                                                                ’* 1 * .
                                                                            Continued            .......


                                EMBARGOED UNTIL AFTER THE VERDICTS
                                 EMBARGOED UNTIL AFTER THE VERDICTS




West Midlands Police                                  T elephone numbers:
N ew s Bureau                                         0 2 1 -6 2 6 5 1 9 1 / 2 / 3 / 4 / 5 & 5 1 8 6
Police Headquarters
PO B ox 52, Lloyd H ouse                              Fax number:
Birmingham B4 6N Q                                    0 2 1 -2 0 0 12 49




                                Continued




          "As a matter of interest the Coroner's Inquests, sitting with a Jury, have

          been the longest running in recent history, if not for all time.                   Including

          the interim inquests in April/May of last year the Coroner's Court sat
          for a total of ninety three days over a total of nineteen weeks.                  There
          were over 520 appearances by witnesses and 540 exhibits examined.                   The
          transcripts of the proceedings amounted to over 8,650 pages recording

          over 3.6 million words spoken.




          THERE WILL BE NO SEPARATE INTERVIEWS WITH MR JONES OR THE CORONER."




                                ***** ENDS *****

                                                                                   M 3



                              EMBARGOED UNTIL AFTER THE VERDICTS
JANET: BPS_X@UK.AC.LE.VAX                           ^ 0 5 *1 2 3 ^ .                    St. Andrews House
Microlink: MAG100597                                                         48, Princess Road East
Telephone: 0533 549568                            n B ^ y h ^ e j}                             LEICESTER
Fax: 0533 470787                                                         LE1 7DR




         The British Psychological Society
                                         Incorporated by Royal Charter

3 October 1990



Dr S L Popper
Medical Legal Centre
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD
S3 7ET




Dear Dr Popper

                           Hillsborough Inquest - Psychologist Experts

Further to our telephone conversation last week I have now been able to consult
several colleagues about who would be the best people for you to consult about the
three issues you raised.

1.       Psychology and crowds and Psychology, crowds and alcohol - I’ve put these two
         headings together as I feel the people below should have knowledge in both
         areas:-

         Dr George Gaskell
         Department of Social Psychology
         London School of Economics
         H oughton Street
         L ondon WC2A 2A E

         Tel:

         Dr Peter Marsh
         O xford Polytechnic
         Headington
         Oxford
         0 X 3 OBP

        Tel-        ..................


2.      Psychology, stress and decision making:-

        Professor James Reason C Psychol FBPsS
        Department o f Psychology
        U niversity of Manchester
        Manchester M13 9PL

        Tel:        QlSI lO Z -W Z tr       ___

                V
        Professor Tom Cox C Psychol FBPsS
        Department of Psychology
        U niversity of Nottingham
        Nottingham N G 7 2R D

         T el:.   ............................

         Professor David Canter C Psychol FBPsS
         Department of Psychology
         U niversity of Surrey
         G uildford G U 2 5H X

         Tel:

         Professor Cary Cooper C Psychol FBPsS
         UMIST
         PO Box 88
         Manchester M60 1QD

         Tel:       I________________ I


If I can be of any further assistance please do not hesitate to contact


Yours sincerely
           _____




'Stephen^White
 Director of Information
                                                                           PEN     (ENTRY    EHTRY      2 .4 8 ) GATE C POSSIBLE > U/K            HOSP HTHKK VJ&U
80          SAME              AGE     CERT][FXED        DATE OF ALCOHOL
                                                                                   (BEFORE   2 .3 0 -     + )           GATE Cl I
                                    TIME      DR        bearing
                                                                                   (2.30     2.47               )       TURNSTILE
    *
                                                                                                                        PROBABLY
                                                                                                                        AFTER
                                                                                                                        2.30
        *

                                                                                                                                               -----------
                          i                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                           3       -         -                -        F. TICKET   -                                       CH
13          COLIN WAFER   j 19      15.40    BYRNE      18/4      -VE                                                                                            i
                          i                                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                                                                 !


                                             DOORE      19/4      -VE      74      -         -                -        F. TICKET   -            NGH                        c
87          STEPHEN F         17    -                                                                                                                            j
            O ’NEILL
                                                                                                                                                                 I


                              17    16.10    BULL       19/4      10 mg    3                 +                                                    —              i   ~
                                                                                                                                                                           c
52          SIMON BELL
                                                                                             pg 116                                                          j
                                                                                             (a photo
                                                                                             shows him                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                             in pen at                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                             this time)
                                                                                                                                               ------ f1------

                                                        19/4      118 mg   3                 -                -        V.EVID      -                                 130   CH
12          ROY HARRY         33    16.08    BYRNE                                 -

            HAMILTON                                                                                                   14.37-
                                                                                                                       14.50



38          CHRISTOPHER       29    15.50    REDGRAVE    1 9 A     -VE         3       -     +                -        -           -               -                 -     C
            EDWARDS




9           JAMES GARY        18    15.54    BULL       19/4      -VE      3       ON        -                    -    -               -           -                 -     CH
            ASPINALL                                                               TERRACE
                                                                                   1330
                                                                                   P. 148



75          DERRICK           24    16.27    ASHTON     L9/4      -VE      3                                                           +                                   C &
            GEORGE                                                                                                                                                         TRAIN
            GODWIN




                                                   •                                         •                                     f
                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                            GATE C   POSSIBLE       U/K    HOSP OTHER
                         CERTIFIED      DATE OF ALCOHOL    PEH ( ENTRY ENTRY       2.48 )
NAME             AGE                                                                                 GATE C l
                                        hearing                ( BEFORE 2 .3 0 -   +    )
                       TIME . ML                                                                     TURNSTILE
                                                               { 2.30   2.47            )
                                                                                                     PROBABLY
                                                                                                     AFTER 2.3C



                                                                                                                  F TICKET!1     CHECK
COLIN            23    15.50   BULL      19/4      -VE                                                                           CERTIFY
                                                                                                                  p. 208
ANDREW                                                                                                                           FROM
HUGH                                                                                                                             174
W IL LIA M
SEFTON


                                                                                                     F. TICKET
DAVID HAWLEY     39    1550-    BULL     19/4      -VE
                       1615              2/5


                                                                                            1450
MART IN          29    16.35    MONAGHAN 19/4      -VE
KENNETH WILEj|




GERARD           67    16.01    BYRNE    20/4      -VE       3      +
BERNARD
PATRICK
BARON


                                                                                                                           NGH
ADAM             14    16.45    CLARK    20/4     | -VE
EDWARD
SPEARRITT




DAVID             22   16.05    BYRNE     20/4     42 mg
WILLIAM
BIRTLE
                                                                                  iUnNOiXLJVi
                                                                                                         GATE   POSSIBLE   U/K HOSP OTHER     VEH
HO   SAME               AGE     CERTIFIED        DATE OF ALCOHOL     PEH ( ENTRY   ENTRY        2.48 )
                                                 HEARING                  ( BEFORE 2 .3 0 -        +)    C      GATE C l
                              TIME     DR
                                                                         j( 2.30    2.47             )          TURNSTILE
                                                                                                                PROBABLY
                                                                                                                AFTER 2.30




                                                  20/4   ; 30 mg                                                               NGH
91   STEPHEN            31             KURPIEI
     FRANCIS
     HARRISON


     GARY               27    16.30+   BIRKBY     20/4   | -VE
     HARRISON



48   GARY               22    16.04    WELSH      20/4   j   29 mg    3                 14.45
     COLLINS


                                                                                                  1500                               A/HOL
40   PETER              21    15.50    BULL       20/4   i 172 mg
                                                                                                                                     LEVEL
     M c Do n n e l l
                                                                                                                                     4 PTS



                                                                                                         Yes                          No
24   HENRY              17    16.20    RIDDELL 20/4          -VE
                                                                                                         1450                        Ticket
     CHARLES
     ROGERS



86   GARY               18    16.20    MARSH      23/4       -VE                                                           +   NGH
     PHILIP JONES
                                                                         T U H N S T lL b v i


                                                               fENTRY        ENTRY 2.48)                 POSSIBLE
                                             DATE OF ALCOHOL
                                                               ^BEFORE       2 .3 0 - + )                GATE Cl
                                             HEARING
                                                               C 2.30        2.47       )                TURNSTILE
                                                                                                         PROBABLY
                                                                                                         AFTER
                                                                                                         2.30


                                                                                                14.40+
68    JOHN McBRIEN        16.29   ASHTON



      STEPHEN PAUL        16.05   REDGRAVE           49 mg
      COPOC
                                                                                                14.56+                      N/K
      FRANCIS JOSEPH 27   15.30   REDGRAVE                                                                           Certified
      M cAl l i s t e r
      fcp Nicholas
      Joynes


53   I STUART PAUL        16.04   CURPEN             78 mg
       WI LLIAM
       THOMPSON




      WILLIA M            16.00   CURPEN
      ROY
      PEMBERTON

      TRACEY              15.54   TIMNEY
      ELIZABETH
      COX
                                                                                                                           C
      DAVID               16.00   DOORE               48 mg
                                                                                                         p.416             HIRED
      LEONARD
      THOMAS
                                                                            TURNSTILES
                                                                                              GATE POSSIBLE  U/K           HOSP OTHER VEH
                                                                    ( ENTRY     ENTRY 2.48]
                      AGE     CERTIFIED       DATE OF ALCOHOL PEH                        +    C    GATE C l
NO    NAME                                                          (BEFORE     2 .3 0 -
                            TIME     DR        hearing                                             TURNSTILE
                                                                    ( 2.30      2.47
                                                                                                   PROBABLY
                                                                                                   AFTER
                                                                                                   2.30



                                                         21 mg                 14.30
                      15    1550     BULL      24/4
11    PETER                                                                    p 423
      ANDR EW               1615
      HARRISON


                                                         67 mg                 14.30
                      18    16.07    CURPEN    24/4
58    PAUL CLARK                                                               p 440



                                                         >10 mg                14.35
                       38   16.05    REDGRAVE 24/4
      DAVID                                                                    p 451
      GEORGE
      RIMMER

                                                                                                                                      CH
                             15.45   CURPEN     24/4     -VE
 36   KEVIN            15
      TYRRELL


                                                         83 mg                 14.45 +
                       18    16.03    BYRNE     24/4
 46    CARL BROWN                                                              p. 473


                                                                                                                            NGH       MINI
                                                          92 mg                   +
                       41             DOORE     24/4                                                                                  BUS
 92    ARTHUR                                                                   P. 436
       HORROCKS                       NAIDOO


                                                24/4      -VE          13.55
 64    SARAH           19    16.20    BULL
       LOUISE HICKS




                                                                                                                       r

                                                                                                                       r

                                                                                                                   r
                                                                         TURNSTILES
                                                                                                              HOSP   OTHER VEH
                                                                  ( ENTRY     ENTRY 2.48) GATE POSSIBLE U/K
                                CERTIFIED       DATE OF ALCOHOL                                GATE C l
     NAME           AGE                                           ( BEFORE    2 .3 0 - + ) C
                              TIME     DR        HEARING                                       TORNSTILE
                                                                  ( 2.30      2.47       )
                                                                                               PROBABLY
                                                                                               AFTER
                                                                                               2.30



                                                                                                              NGH
                                                                    13.55
                     15       16.00    CALDER    24/4
89   VICTORIA
     JANE HICKS                        DOORE

                                                                                                                         C
                                                                                           1500
                              15.55    BULL      25/4                                                                    (VAN)
42   PAUL ANTHONY    26
     HEWITSON

                                                                                   +
     ANDREW MARK    I 26      15.50    BULL      25/4
50                                                                                 p.551
     BROOKES                  16.15                                                p.552



                                                 25/4                 +
      INGER SHAH    i 38      15.55    BULL
                                                                     13.30
      <F)

                                                                                           14.50+                         MB
      GORDON        : 20       16.02   BYRNE      25/4
59
      RODNEY HORN


                                                                     13.50
      CHRISTINE      j   27    16.15   REDGRAVE 25/4
      ANNE JONES    |
      (F)           i
                                                                                TURNSTILES
                                                                                  ENTRY 2 .4 8 ) GATE POSSIBLE U/K       HOSP   OTHEI VEH
HO   HAME           AGE     CE&T][FIED       DATE OF ALCOHOL PEH ( ENTRY
                          TIME      DR       hearing            ( BEFORE          2 .3 0 - + ) C      GATE Cl
                                                                ( 2.30            2.47          )     TURNSTILE
                                                                                                      PROBABLY
                                                                                                      AFTER



10   DAVID STEVEN   25    15.58    REDGRAV E     26/4   15 mg   3   1415           -               -         -   -       -      -     C
     BROWN


                                               26/4     -VE     3       -          -               +         -   -       -      -         CH
21   VINCENT        34    16.03    WELSH
     MICHAEL                                                                                       p . 675
     FITZSIMMONS


54   ANTHONY        29    16.01    CURPEN      26/4     -VE     3           -      72.45      -    -         -   -       -      -         CH
     PETER KELLY


83   JON PAUL       10    -        DOORE       26/4     -VE     3       -          -               +         -   -       NGH    -         MB
     GILHOOLEY                                                                                    p . 6 97




31   HENRY THOMAS   47    ?4 pm    BULL        26/4     16 mg   3   -              -               -         +   -       -      -         C
     BURKE


17   CHRISTOPHER    18    1700     BIRKBY      26/4     32 mg   3   -              +               -         -   -       -      -         C
     BARRY                                                                         p . 720-
     DEVONSIDE                                                                     721




                                         •                                        •                                  r
                                                                           TURNSTILES

NO   NAME           AGE     CERTIFIED       DATE OF ALCOHOL PEN ( ENTRY      ENTRY 2.48 ) GATE POSSIBLE U/K          HOSP   OTHER TEH
                          TIME      DR       HEARING            ( BEFORE     2 .3 0 - + )C     GATE C l
                                                                ( 2.30       2.47              TURNSTILE
                                                                                               PROBABLY
                                                                                               AFTER



34   JONATHON       18    1600     BYRNE     27/4     -VE     3    -         -          +                    -       -      -      C
     OWEN                                                                               2.59?
                                                                                        p. 73 3



7    JAMES ROBERT   29    1609     BYRNE     27/4     35 mg   3    -         -          -      +             -       -      -      CH
     HENNESSY                                                                                  T/S.
                                                                                               p.742



56   DAVID WILLIAM 19     1600     CURPEN    27/4     -VE     3    12.30     -          -      -             -       -      -     C
     MATHER


33   JAMES PHILIP   19    1602     BULL      27/4     38 mg   3    -            -        -     + T/S         -       -      -     CH
     DELANEY                                                                                   p. 759



76   JOHN ALFRED    62    1630     MONAGH4iN   27/4   76 mg   4    -            -        +                   -       -      -     C
     ANDERSON                                                                            p. 76 9



60   CHRISTOPHER   26     1603     BYRNE     27/4     54 mg   3    -            -        -         2.40 +    -       -      -     C
     JAMES TRAYNOR                                                                                 p. 782
                                                                                                   cp. 785




                                                                                                                 r
                                     A                                      m
                                                    I                                        TURNSTILES
HO   NAME           AGE             CERTIFIED       !l3ATE OF ALCOHOL   PER ( ENTRY            ENTRY 2.48 ) GATE POSSIBLE U /K                   HOSP              OTHER VEH
                                  TIME     DR          HEARING              ( BEFORE           2 .3 0 - + ) C    GATE Cl
                          i                                                 ( 2.30             2.47       )      TURNSTILE
                                                                                                                 PROBABLY
                          i
                                                                                                                 AFTER

                                                                                                                                          ----------------------

80   DAVID JOHN     22            16. 3A   ASHTON       25/A   >10 mg    3                     +                                                                         C
     BENSON                                                              p.5S>3                1A.30
                                                                                               p. 591

25   JOSEPH CLARK   29    i 15.55          REDGRAV E 25/A      177 mg    3           1A15           -      -           -          -                    -           -    c


78   PETER REUBEN   30        ;   16.36    MONAGHA N 25/A      -VE       3                                         +                                                    c
     THOMPSON                                                                                                      BET
                                                                                                                   2.37
                                                                                                                   2.50
                                                                                                                   p. 617



66   THOMAS         21            16.27    ASHTON       25/A   82 mg     3           -          -          -       +                  -            -               -    c
     STEVEN FOX                                                                                                    p. 626/
                                                                                                                   627



5    COLIN MARK     19            16.05    REDGRAV S 26/A      -VE       3?                     -          -       1A .56             +                    -       -        CH
     ASHCROFT                                                            p. 6 ‘^5                                  POSS
                                                                                                                   PHOTO
                                                                                                                   p. 6AA/5


6    IAN DAVID      19            16.11    BYRNE        26/A   -VE       3               -      -              -   —          +                    -               -    CH
     WHELAN




                                                                                    ■v




                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                          TUR HSTILES
                                                               PEN ( ENTRY      ENTRY 2.48 ) GATE POSSIBLE    U /K           HOSP   OTHER VEH
MO   NAME           AGE     CERT]LFIED       DATE OF ALCOHOL
                                    DR        HEARING              ( BEFORE     2 .3 0 - + ) C    GATE Cl
                          TIME
                                                                   ( 2.30       2.47       )      TURNSTILE
                                                                                                  PROBABLY
                                                                                                  AFTER


                                                      60 mg     3                                 2.AO +                                  C
57   MARTIN KEVIN   16    1608     CURPEN     27/A
     TRAYNOR                                                                                      p. 782,
                                                                                                  785, 795




                                   DOORE   27/A       -VE       3     1A00 +    -           -     -           -              NGH    -     c
82   PHILIP JOHN    15    1600
     STEELE                        p. 806                             p. 803
                                   re time



20   MARIAN HAZEL   21    1609     BULL       30/A    -VE       3     +                                                                       T
     McCABE                                                           13.30
                                                                      see
                                                                      Inger
                                                                      SHAH



28   STEVEN JOSEPH 17     1602      BULL      30/A    1A1 mg    3/A   -         -           -     2.AO +             -       -      -         CH
     ROBINSON                                                                                     p. 827



81   THOMAS         39    1610      ASHTON    30/A    3A mg     3     -          -         1A.52+                    -       -      -         CH
     HOWARD                                                                                 p. 8A 3



1    THOMAS         1A    1555      BULL      30/A    20 mg     3     -          1A.52 -    -         -              -       -                CH
     ANTHONY                                                                     p. 8A3
     HOWARD




                                                                                                                         r
                                         A
                                                                             Tui NSTILES
                                                DATE OF ALCOHOL PEN jENTRY        ENTRY 2.48) GATE POSSIBLE U/K        HOSP   OTHER VEH
HO   NAME           AGE     CERT]LFIED
                          TIME . DR              HEARING            ( BEFORE      2 .30-  + ) C    GATE C l
                                                                    I 2.30        2.47             TURNSTILE
                                                                                             )
                                                                                                   PROBABLY
                                                                                                   AFTER




     GRAHAM JOHN    24    1625     ASHTON        30/4        79 mg   3   -         -       -       14.50 ? -   -       -      second C
79
                                                                                                   p. 86 2                    evidence
     ROBERTS
                                                                                                                              is best



74   KESTER ROGER   16    1635     MONAGHAJJ 30/4            -VE     3   -         -       -       14.54 + -   -       -      -       C
     MARCUS BALL                                                                                   P. 87 9




41   ERIC GEORGE    42    1550-1 515     BULL    30/4        32 mg   3   -         +           -   -      -    -       -      -       c
     HUGHES                                                                        887-
                                                                                   888



67   RAYMOND        50    1607         BULL      30/4        91 mg   3   -         -       -       -      +    -       -      -          c
     THOMAS
     CHAPMAN



95   LEE NICOL      14    1800-        APPLEYi R D     1/5   -VE     3   +         -       -       -      -    -       NGH    -          T
                          2000


16   PAUL BRIAN     14    1640         BIRKBY    1/5         -VE     3   -         -       -       14.53.+     -       -      -     CH
     MURRAY                                                                                        925




                                                                                                                   r
                          1                                                       m
                                                                               TURNSTILES
                                                                     ENTRY       ENTRY      2.48 ) GATE POSSIBLE U/K       HOSP   OTHER VEH
HO    NAME           AGE     CERTIFIED       DATE OF ALCOHOL   PEN
                                              HEARING                BEFORE      2 .3 0 -      +) C     GATE C l
                           TIME     DR
                                                                      2.30       2.47            ]      TURNSTILE
                                                                                                        PROBABLY
                                                                                                        AFTER




                                              1/5     -VE                                        14.50
22   I BRIAN         38    1555   l TIMNEY
       CHRISTOPHER
       MATTHEWS


                                              1/5     >10             +1330                                                             CH
43   | GRAHAM JOHN   17    1610     CURPEN
       WRIGHT                                                         unsubs


                                              1/5    ; -VE                        +                                                     CH
72   | MICHAEL DAVID 38    1559     BYRNE
       KELLY                                                                      p. 961




                           1605   ' BYRNE    | 1/5    >10                                                                              CH
44   I CARL DARREN   17
       HEWITT



      NICHOLAS       16    1600   ; BYRNE    ! 1/5     -VE      3                                                                      CH
55
      MICHAEL
      HEWITT



39     PETER         21    1554     BULL     | 2/5   j -VE                                        + 2.52-
       FRANCIS
       TOOTLE




                                                                                                                       r
                                                                   TURNSTILES
                                                                       ENTRY 2.48 > GATE   POSSIBLE n/K   HOSP   OTHER VEH
                       CERTIFIED        DATE OF ALCOHOL    ( ENTRY
NAME           AGE                                                      2 .3 0 - + jC      GATE CI
                                         HEARING           ( BEFORE
                     TIME     DR                                                           TURNSTILE
                                                           ( 2.30       2.47
                                                                                           PROBABLY
                                                                                           AFTER



                                                                                   +14.56                              MB
               27    1605     BYRNE      2/5     72 mg
NICHOLAS                                                                           +
PETER JOYNES




                              CURPENl    2/5     56 mg       1330
KEVIN DANIEL  15     1606
WILLIAMS Note
supp evidence
on 4.5.90


                                                                                                          NGH          CH
                              DOORE      2/5     >10 mg       1330
PHILIP         14
HAMMOND

                                                                                                                       MB
GARY           19    1553     BULL       2/5      -VE
CHRISTOPHER
CHURCH


ERIC HANKIN    33    1641     BIRKBY     2/5      132 mg



PATRICK JOHN    35   1600     BULL       2/5      93 mg
THOMPSON
                                                    TURNSTILES
                                                   ( ENTRY    EHTRY)2.48   POSSIBLE    HOSP
                                DATE OF ALCOHOL
                                 HEARING             BEFORE   2.30-) +     GATE Cl
                                                   ( 2.30     2.47 )       TURNSTILE
                                                                           PROBABLY
                                                                           AFTER




JOSEPH DANIEL           REDGRAVE 2/5      18 mg
M c Ca r t h y


PAULA ANN               ROBERTS
SMITH


PAUL WILLIAM            MONAGHAN   3/5    61 mg
CARLILE


CARL DAVID       1705   STODDARD   3/5
LEWIS


PETER ANDREW     1600   BYRNE             99 mg
BURKETT


RICHARD JONES    1600   SEIVEWRIGHT 3/5   >10 mg
                                                                                               t


                                                                                         TURNS! ILES
                                                        DATE OF ALCOHOL PEN ( ENTRY                ENTRY 2.48) GATE POSSIBLE U/K            HOSP    OTHER VEH
HO       SAME               AGE         CERTUPIED
                                  .
                                      TIME     DR        HEARING            ( BEFORE               2 .3 0 - + ) C   GATE Cl
                        '                                                   ( 2.30                 2.47       )     TURNSTILE
                                                                                                                    PROBABLY
     t
                                                                                                                    AFTER 2.31 )




                                                           3/5        138 mg   3                   -          +                 -           -       -       C
62       BARRY GLOVER 27              1600    COLIN                                  -

                                              WELSH                                                           p.116]
                                                                  ■




                                              REDGRAV E 3/5           34 mg    3 7   -                        -        +        -           -       -       MB
30       ALAN               29        1604                                                         -


         JOHNSTON



                                      1552     TIMNEY      3/5        144 mg   3     -             -          -        +        -           -       -       C
15       CARL WILLIAM       21
         RIMMER                                                                                                        p.1185



         ALAN McGLONE                 1558     BYRNE       4/5        75 mg    3     1415          -          -        -        -           -       -       C
70                          28




32       KEITH McGRATI1 17            1606     REDGRAVrE    4/5       -VE      3     -             -          -        -        +               -       -   CH




37       IAN THOMAS         20        1540+    REDGRAVrE    4/5       -VE      3     -             +          -        -            -           -       -       C
         GLOVER                                                                                    p.1214




                -


                                                    •                                                  •                                r
                                                                                                                                        r

                                                                                                                                        f
                                                     1;
                                                     j;
                                                                                           t u r n ;STILES
                                                                                PER ( ENTRY         ENTRY 2.48) GATE POSSIBLE n/K                                       HOSP   OTHER VEH
MO 1           NAME           AGE     CERT!CFIED     'lDATE OF ALCOHOL
                                                        HEARING                     ( BEFORE        2 .3 0 - + ) C   GATE C l
                                    TIME      DR                                                                     TURNSTILE
                                                                                    ( 2.30          2.47       )
       1
                                                                                                                     PROBABLY
                                                                                                                     AFTER
                                                     \i
                                                                                                                     2.30
                                                     I



                                                                    j


                                                                        13 mg    3     -            -          -     +                      -                           NGH    -     C
84             PAUL DAVID     21    1605     JACOB            4/5
               BRADY                                   i


                                                                                 3                                   +                                                  NGH    -     c
88             BARRY SIDNEY   26    1600?    DOORE     | 4/5            78 mg          -            -



               BENNETT
                                                                                                                   ---------------   —   ----------------------------




                                                          I

                                                          i




           i
           I




           !
           i

           3




                                                                                                                              ■


                                                                                                                                                                   f


                                                   A                                                    •                                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                  f
Wmm^mm   iStSSllll
                                                             mmm                   mm
                                                                                        •fe&rgxi                         ’
                                                                                                                         $&£&:■i'V ft.
                                       §§ggjj|^tf
                                                    ---...,.,-.     5®SS?-                           SI
                                                                   :M?

                                                                                                            >M
                                                                                                             %&&M
                                                                                                                &&
                                                                                                                                         '#*:v>:£¥S»
WSMsS                                                    V-V«                                                                     «#:y&¥£<*'
                                                                                                          i&&iS8i&iS
                                                                                            M m &S


                                                                             |«1                                                  'MMim                 W$p2$w
                                                                                                                                                        mmm
                                                                                                                       •>&<<-’k-&SS>F,


                                                                   ■»mm      ^m m m
                                                                                                                                                  WPF
                                                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                                                   %mM
                                                                                                                                                       tmm
                                                                                                                                              fm
                                                                                                                                               fiv:#m»':;m
                                                        £$<
                                                          ?K
                                                           Si                                                                                «11m i
                                                            «i«
                                                        illta ls



                                                                                                                                                       , M ^ V.
                                                                                                                                                       MMWMa

        ■is&m   Wmm   Ii« l




                              m jm ^



                                                                                                                                                                  year




        A»«
FOR THE ATTENTION OF SUPERINTENDENT STARKEY



The Coroner's attention has been drawn to the Sheffield
Star dated 5th April 1990.   In order to avoid any
misunderstanding the Coroner wishes it to be known that
no South Yorkshire Police Officers will be asked to give
oral evidence during the interim Inquests which are
scheduled for April and May 1990.




c.c   Mr. M. Jones.
0 6 /0 4   90             11:37   ©0742    726247                  MEDICO LGL CNTER           ®001
           —                                                                          — ■ —   —
           ♦



                                                           ACTIVITY REPORT
               ■itir' ■



                                   TRANSMISSION • n



                                   TRANSACTION         =         00 7 4

                                   TT1                           COROM-RS

                                   CUNNEC'l ION TL!              0 212 0 0 12 4 9

     i                             CONNECTION     ID
     f                             START TI ML                   04 06 11:37

                                   I SAGE I IMl                      iO 3 o

                                   PAGES                             1
0 6 /0 4   '90   #1 1 : 4 1   © 0 7 4 2   726247           MEDICO     LGL   CNTER   ®   001




                                                   ACTIVITY REPORT



                                TRANSMISSION OK



                                TRANSACTION r             0076

                                TTI                       CORONERS

                                CONNECTION TEL            0251263707

                                CONNECTION ID                    G3

                                START TIME                04 06 11:40

                                USAGE TIME                  00 54

                                PAGES
         A                         -       11
■            i> H £ F F ie .L b   V fA R .      T W c b ftW               5 ATOi l W lo
                             J
                                  speech




                      INQUIRY
    ;VV !.




                                                                                          !» '    ■    {
                                                                                          ■*
                                                                                          ''1'■       I<




                                                                                      _           . JU I
                                                 ik.
                                                       ■•t*’a M :     'ihM'r
                                                                               *1::'      ''MtMM'iWl



              '■ VI




                                                        A SHOCK claim that L ^ < Justice
                                                        Taylor whitewashed his owttirtquirVitito
                                                        the Hillsborough disaStef toda" 4uU,‘*
                                                        ened to overshado^tltefirtiU|
                                                        6f th« 9     5     p            - z - r
                                                         The leader o f 3,{KH) *rank»aftd-file South
                                                        Yorkshir^bolicfem en claiffi|^hi^CoilfeagU6S
                                                        were barrea from the tellitig thft ttffift jit last
                                                        year's Sheffield nearing1
                                                           Chief Inso Bob Lax
                                                        told 400 officers at A
                                                        Police Federation meet­
                                                        ing Lofd Taylor had
                                                        been selective ill the evi­
                                                        dence he hcara atid that
                                                        was contrary to natural
                                                        ju.sticc.        , . ■ f
                                                            But ,a spokesman . for
                                                         Lord Justice Taylor said
                                                        today: “The inqiry M s open
                                                        to, this public and anyone
                                                        whd Attended it Will kftoW
                                                        that there wfere no Shackles
                                                        put ori anyone in the WitntSS
                                                         box.”
                                                            Mr Laic also slhgled out
                                                         “one or two" faitiilies bf the
                                                         dead and their supporters,
                                                         accusing them of making
                                                         “mischievous,       malicious
                                                         and Sometimes 'outrageous
                                                         allegations”.
 Q o       j »j
    Mr .Lax’i controversial
spccch i at          Sheffield's
Ranmdor Mouie outraged
memtx rs of the HUlsborugfi
Familjl Groiip lodayi" wro
called the remark! calkntt,
ill-tinyed ahd ill-inforttoiti.
TTTfl OTAH ttAYfl B j
  They may flow take ligtl.
advice after Mt> J jttV '
remaps. .■      '.
   Sheffield City. .Coilrlcii
was accused of “placating
their political bedfellows
from Merseysidi" rather
than backing its officers.
   Chief Constable Peter
Wright again embhaJiSW
his belief that the inquests
would give a different pic­
ture of where the blame for
the 95 deaths should lie.
       HAUNtED
   Mr I Wright IS; already
under;; investigation 1: foi*
those retriarks and M r LM
drtticipateS his Speech' —
IjgJly vetted before it was
^ ■t r e d -t- will rtieari com-
                                          E-b I t oR.1 ftL.
pm tS will also be filed
agSinSt him.        ' •;1, ;
   Mr Lax, based in feother-       4      THE STAR, Thursday, April 5, IMO
ham traffic, department,
said: ‘‘The message which
appeared to be Coming out
of Merseyside was that
normal human feelings of
grief and devastation did
not exist outside that
county.” Many officert were
still haunted, by. What
 happened.
   The Taylor riportt he
 said, was seriously flawed.
 “When it was so obvious the
 conduct ahd condition of a
                                    Tragedy facts
 significant minority of
 Liverpool supporters Was
 clearly relevant to the evehts
 of the tragic day, then t can
                                    still to come?
                                     ALMOST a year after the Hillsborough
 only come to the conclusion         tragedy, bitter accusations pnd arguments
 that the omission . was
 deliberate.                         continue.
 • Cumbria Chief Cori                    Today we report an astonishingly fierce
 stable Leslie Sharp has been        attack by a police spokesman on Lord
 — ointed to lead the Police
     nplqints          Authority     Taylor’s inquiry. Thunderous applause
     uiry into complaints            greeted comments by Police Federation
 against South Yort^hlre             leader Bob Lax who said the Inquiry was
                                     selective in the evidence it heard and that
                                     police were prevented from speaking out. He
                                     accused relatives of “ malicious" alle­
                                     gations, and Sheffield council of “placating
                                    their political bedfellows from Merseyside."
                                        These are extremely serious charges. To
                                    them must be added the statement by Chief
                                    Constable Peter Wright who qgaln
                                    expressed his belief that the Inquest due to
                                    open this month will produce a very different
                                    picture of what actually happened.
                                        It has been clear for a long time that the
                                    police feel they have been unjustly treated
                                   over Hillsborough. Their view Is that
                                   drunkenness and bad behaviour t>y a
                                   minority of Liverpool fans was a major factor
                                    In the disaster and has not been given due
                                   weight.
                                       This continuing dispute over Hillsborough
                                   Is regrettable because It revives agonising
                                   memories but it Is essential that the full truth
                                   is known and recorded.
                                       If it Is true that Lord Taylor's report falls to
                                   give the full picture, everyone will hope the
                                   inquest will correct that default. We shall
                                   soon know.
P . 05
2105




                                                                                                case goes to court
77?




                     ' J s-. ■
051




                                           Michael
                                       A TEST case in the battle fo r com­
                                       pensation for the victims of the
                                       Hillsborough soccer disaster has
                                                                                    Crucial test for 600
                                       gonetoeowrt.                                                                                                                                            w m sm
                                                                                                                                                                                               msmrn
                                       Mr Justice Steyn broke off fiim _
                                       murder trial to hold the hour-long
                                       preliminary hearing.           .. -
                                          The result of this single case will
                                       directly affect the outcome of almost
                                                                                   for compensation                                                                                  mm#*?**
                                       600 compensation claims lodged in                that compensation wrangles could
                ^A;.V '        j       the wake of the tragic FA Cup semi­                                                       long it will take but we can guaran­
                                       final. -                           ■             take years to settle.                   tee it will be as soon as possible.”
OFFICE




                                       ’ Itfinety-flve Liverpool ■ fans were         =, Mr justice Steyn directed all sties        Observers believe compensation
                                       crushed to death and hundreds hurt               to return to Liverpool High Court in    could top £30m when all the claims
                                       during a stampede just minutes into              October to set a trial date.            are eventually agreed. ■
                                       the match at Sheffield on April 15,                lie Said the trial, which is expec­      The findings of Lord Justice Tay­
                                                                                        ted to take between four and six        lor's public inquiry into Hillsborough                           ^l0W 3i
                                                   Wrangles
PRESS




                                                     '                   ■ -           weeks to complete, would take place      - due this week - are expected to
              S > rH                                                                   between April and July next year.        heavily influence the outcome of
                                            T ie test case has been brought %             Solicitors’ group. Spokeswoman        legal action. .
                                                                      ms' Group, ■ Nicola Harrison said the decision to
                                                                        s. on be-      pursue a single test case would help
MERPOL




                                                                   .     and her ■ speed up the process.                                      ■'      Cow m              -    , .
                                         children.                                     - "Legal history requires a test            A leaked interim dossier o f the
                                            14 is the result of a series o f writs - action to establish liability. If we       findings suggests Liverpool sup­
                                         Issued by the group against Smith - started to sue on every case we                    porters were not to blame
                                      • Yorkshire Police and Hillsborough              w »M ck>g the legal system up and         - An Independent dalw for compen­
                                         dub Sheffield Wednesday.          ' ‘         «5ause delay,” she said,                 sation in the region of £lm has
                                            Mr Justice Steyn called l i e hear-        _ Insurers representing Sheffield        already been made on behalf of a
                                      ' lag at Liverpool’s Queen Elizabeth II          Wednesday and the police b ate           fan, who has been lying in a coma
                                      1law courts after receiving detailed , already m et the solicitors'' group.               since Hillsborough.
                                         case papers from the solicitors*                 Steve Walker, claims manager for         Liverpool lawyer le x Maki* has
11=35




                                         group.              . .                       police Insurer Municipal Mutual,         issued writs against the police and
                                     .. He told their barrister, Ben Hytn-             said: "We reserve the right to fight     Sheffield Wednesday on benalf of 23-
                                       ■ er QC, on Wednesday it was “essen-            between ourselves as to liability but    year-old Andrew Devine.
                                       ! tial" the lead action should be tried         we are determined that that should         -■M aw hiie a Hillsborough work-
                                       I asquickly as possible.                        not have an effect on the claimants      ilkJf SHW^Nl1'fag- fg| 0£££§*2$4°| ft
01-RUG-1989




                                            The bearing was also attended I f             Brian Vincetft, liability claims      VCBUfffl iS O ilfel'ftltCC III B r s d f O F a t o
                                         barristers representing the police            manager for the dub's insurer Sun        fa»ar of tte'lewons learned since the ■
                                       land Sheffield  ;ld Wednesday
                                                                   S f amid fears     Alliance, added: “We can't say how        horrific fire at City’s ground in IMS,




              i ”:     "   . ■ ;.!
   V ol. tXXXIU N o . 30.        NOTTINGHAM. M ARCH 2 3 .1 9 9 1 . P rice 3 0p                                          » Page IS



       hurl

                                                                                                 N O T T S COUNTY had
                                                                                                 s e n t off, L e i c e s t e r City
                                                                                                 defender Steve Walsh for

   crush                                                                                         offences — and there w
                                                                                                 invasion by the crowd
                                                                                                 tension met relegation fear
          M eadow Lane                                                                           L a n e this afternoon.
 ga m e w as held up                                                                                Il was a heady, sometimes di
 for seven m in utes to                                                                          lure.
 treat t h r e e injured                                                                            T o add insult to Notts* anguish,
 fans after visiting                                                                             scored from the penalty resulting I
 supporters         spilled                                                                      foul to put City 2*0 ahead.
 on t o th e p i l c h foi                                                                          City had been given the lead (12 r
 lo w ing G ary Mills                                                                            N otts and Forest winger G ary Mil
 goal                                                                                            that brought visiting fans onto the p
   The referee slopped the                                                                          Neither side managed
game as both club physios,                                                                        to fully settle down after
the Si Jolm Ambulance                                                                             the stoppage-
and Nolls’ dub doctor                                                                               Notts abandoned their
mated on to treat the                                                                             sweeper system in a bid
stricken supjMjrters — and                                                                       to get back into the
to help oilier distressed                                                                        match altd only a finger­
fans ■— in front of the                                                                          tip save by Carl Muggle-
Spion Kop                                                                                        ton foiled captain Phil
  I k three were tarried
                                                                                                 Turner.
a»ay on stretchers* and                                                                             And Muggleton distin­
were all taken to the                                                                            guished  himself even
Queen's Medical Centre                                                                           further by saving a                    F IE S
                                                                                                                                       m il«
with minor Injuries                                                                              penalty   from    Mark                FIES
                                                                                                 Draper, who also missed               FI ES
                                                                                                 from the spot at Bristol              mu
        * T a lk                                                                                 Rovers last week.
                                                                                                                                       fllS
                                                                                                                                       F IE S
# .          and  Leicester                                                                         Mark Crossley was the              idhfc
 players gathered behind                                                                         hero as Forest hung on
                                                                                                                                       net
                                                                                                                                       mite*
 the goal to talk to other                                                                       for a 'goalless draw                  F IE S

 City fans before the                                                                            against rejuvenated Ever-.
                                                                                                                                       «$
 Injured supporters were                                                                         ton at Goodison Park in               F ° ,tl
 stretchered off                                                                                 a    game     of    missed            ESCI

   Inspector Alan Linlcy                                                                         chances.
of Notts ' Polite said the                                                                          Without captain Stuart             iSCf
incident happened after                                                                          Pearce     and     former             sp e c
City scored                                                                                      England under-21 captain              m e t
                                                                                                                                       e s c *
                                                                                                 Steve Chettle, the Reds               I f * tM ,
  A number of Leicester                                                                          created a great chance for            ES D
fans    Invaded    the   pitch                                                                   Gary     Charles,      who            fSC
through     open     security                                                                    missed from ten yards.
gates                                                                                               Then Evertou granted,
     As a result they                                                                            their    visitors     three
crushed themselves and                                                                           escapes in the space of
tpilled t« to the pitch,” lie                                                                    five minutes in the second
said                                                                                             half.
                                                                                                   Ak/feiwiHfcfittltt       #!*»■*«*
   He said several arrests                                                                       Third Division relegation
hud been made and some                                                                           fears by beating Shrews-
fans had been treated at                                                                         bury at Field Mill.
the ground for minor                                                                                Steve Wilkinson ■ (40
injuries.                                                                                        mins) and Wayne Fair-
   Police said there were                                                                        dough (46) put the Stags
no incidents outside the                                                                         in control.
                                                                                                                                       SAM
ground before the match.                                                                            But Neil Lyne, who is
   Notts County have one                                                                         on loan from Notting­
o f Ike best crowd behavi­                                                                       ham Forest, hauled the
our records ia the League.       Leicester keeper C a r ^ t t ^ le t o n a s d p o ic iT c ^ ^   Shrews back into conten­
                                                                                                 tion with a goal nine
                                                                                                 minutes from time.
                                                       WEATHER: CLOUDY;




ELANS .to.-rip~"up'the H iH » l                                                          since-
                                         improvements.?? -The long-c
                                   aw aited project,"" restoring-:
                                   -Sheffield Wednesday’s ground as            replaced by 2,200 seats, covered •;
                                   a major FA Cap semi-final, venue,;:;,       with a new root
replaced by seating at a cost of   'was' announced yesterday..and'
                                   should be --completed by .the start           The number of .turnstiles at the
                                    of next-season.    -;s ---     -><s- : -   Leppings Lane.end will not be
                                                                               increased. ,, >. ' ,            ,
                                                                                .But with 8,000 less-fens eater-
     in much-needed
m easures a t ' soccer
                                    i-?Thfire''liaTC

                                                                                       ers ana        rteis'-woo
                                                                    r>


                                                             \ - 2. - ^ |




                       mdM-M



    'ffitlMiiil                       I
                                  H illsb orough's official- f u l l -                                S8eS*te-«lsct»
                               1 capacity to 39,500, • ':
                              ' < Yesterday’s ann ounce-. b a l T f r u s t w ill be i n ' the record I
                                  ment underlines Wednes-
     vjnverted Into an d a y 's d e te rm in a tio n to addition to the £77,539 Imposed on i
    ler stand by the re g a in H illsb o ro u gh ’s ‘. nesday       recently awarded to Wed- month for
                                                                               to help towards ' tar paymenteto players. .
                                                                                                                                 ■
                               . gtgjygagjjgjfojyyj^apauie-;<
              -------------of staging the most impor- ;             new barriers, fetieing ■ M a n c h e s te r J l n l t e d
j r a U f y Graham                tant matches.        ■%■..     ■%
                                                                    removal ®and';l;« l n « i n c f , director Bo
 ’"^ll revealed fester*''* * <“The aim is for" Hills*; ■lighting; a project that wul ' has said he 1
   bat, as part of the borough to be restored as cost in aU £108,885.                                we
      dentation of th e . an PA Cup semifinal venue                   \.D .CRYSTAL P a la c e *o
            '* “ ■ y were and I am confident we can
                    360,000 i a c h i e v e t h a t , " s a i d
    : for t i e "existing Mackrell.
      e t o hottse 8,20 0, . “Such aspirations could
                                  not be considered until the
                           -» Leppings Lane end. was,
                 ond Divi- ■ deafi with. I believe Hills-
                             i , borough is already one of
                             ' th e c o u n t r y 's b e t t e r urfjad th at one body ■ Noades added his voicG
                                 igrottttdtfP-arid.^it'’ i s .,our. s h o u l d r u n E n g l l s n t0 the       for mie body to
                                                                    football. ..                 •     run English football, say*-
                                   improve it.                          He declared in a state-
                                                                     tri!*nt from Selhurst Park: the beltet that lor m e loi
                                              nithiie f t re not

                                "We have already had
                             _.,000’ in the ‘ground -this                                        HftiltiW
                 w«ra»«w season and we have to
                 r e m a i n Pro&ress” he said,                 the /vacancy.
            w u t from an -     The finance for the hew                                           the Footbsu
            f >the roof to seating should not present   regain. --.ifie’! aeatf .'S.i/tioml-
                                                      -..iiat'ed;-uilO pttdseds.bs
II                                                    ' another First D m sto n M #
   kthe plans are c o m - t h e Football Trust Grants :by':the> felr«ary:Jf>iead»                                          wamm
                            scheme and we have their l i n e . He h a s a l r e a d y                                    rSKs:s£P




                                                                                                 aog&lhii
                                                                                                fvotiigiiittfii
                                                                                                  C o m m i t t e e in 1988 o


                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                 jcritteisMs trf too w
ewe of fire t    jtnlled by the:
                tiSUSl?

                                    (Judge Cosgrove and a jury) of   '
Before'Lord Justice Farqohar* coBspiMct'teiteiifittii%Mclli he t
                              was sentenced to three years ' i
                                   ittirisonment.. ,    ■ '      i
{Judgment December 11]            : is Mr Oermbt Wright, who did '
                                   not appear bejow, assigned by
A defendant who exercised his the R ^stiiftdf Criminal Ap--
{A lt til Mlince by Hot answering. peats, for the appellant; M r
questions when interviewed by
the police after .Ms arrest .and
declined to give evidence at his
trial did not thereby in any way    LUKU, :JW;3 »1V.O '<r/Wfc
add credibility or weight to the.  QUHARSON said that H was
evidence of an accomplice or       the
W if;«tlif:irO$eetttion witness.   defendant and his broiher, a co-
                                   difeMant, stole care in the
that they still had to assess this * "ndon area which were then
pliability and' truthfulness of        vfen to premises in Kent run , ;
the witnesses’ evidence even if        a man who fcatanibaliied the .     to
no evidence, had been called by                                                ms tm m
                                                                                iiiis
the defence to cOhtradict it.                   that man, who had
   The Court of Appeal so st        pieaaco gatttflo iattdlint stolen ,
when allowing the appeal oi vehicles, was called to, give
David •. Hubbard against his ev M « « o i S ta f f «rfthe Crown
            on August 15, 1989 . mnuand *gave » th£
                                                  » main
                                                      » yevidence :
                                        ‘ the defendant.
                           C ourtf against
                                                                                 ON THE SHADOW OVER
                                                                                 ENGLAND               S e e P ag es 8 6 ,8 7




                                                      1
                                                                                                           Safety-first

                                                                                                               #■     f l K E t l c f A V
                                                                                             Itiilft           U                      I1J*
                                                                                             WA'
                                                                                                                      I f LYN CALLAGHAN
                                                                                                           ■A POTENTIAL crowd disaster was
                                                                                                            averted at Notts County yesterday
                                                                                             §«ii          •thanks to the club's safety m easures.
                                                                                                              Four Leicester Ians were taken to
                                                                                                vkm         hospital with injuries alter the crowd
                                                                                                      surged forward on the terraces when
                                                                                                      their team took the lead in a 2-0
                                                                                                      victory.
                                                                                                        Seven supporters received treatment
SAVED b y FORESIGHT . . . first a id fo r am     in ju red L eicester fa n at Notts Connty            after about 100 spilled on to the pitch
                                                                                                                    through open crush-gates
                                                                                                                    and halted the game for
                                                                                                                    seven minutes.




IfU A M
ImlflnN ilUn)
                                                                                                                  ' Police moved in quickly'
                                                                                                                    to control the more bois­
                                                                                                                    terous among them, while
                                                                                                                    St John Ambulance men
                                                                                                                    attended to the in|ured
                                                                                                                    on the pitch near the
                                                                                                                    Leicester goalmouth.
                                                                                                                  ■ E a rlie r, 16 Leicester
                                                                                                                    fans were arrested out­
                                                                                                                    side and inside the
                                                                                                                    ground for being drunk.




      TO COURT
                                                                                                                    Notts County chief execu­
                                                                                                                    tive Neal Hook said: 'The
                                                                                                                    St John Ambulance people
                                                                                                                    were going to give the
                                                                                                                    kiss of life to one Leices­
                                                                                                                    ter fan, but they realised
                                                                                                                    he was still breathing and
                                                                                                                    simply had a drinking
                                                                                                                    problem.'
                                                                                                                      The club's safety officer
                                                                                                                    Bob Davey said: 'The four
                                                                                                                  ' Infured were taken to the
      T H E controversial                                                   The High Court would not have           Queens Medical Hospital
      Aliysa affair is to be
        opened in the High               Bitter row                         allowed the application for a
                                                                            judicial review if they didn’t
                                                                            believe the case had merit.
                                                                             • ‘His Highness considers there
                                                                                                                    in Nottingham but their
                                                                                                                    injuries were not serious
                                                                                                                    as far as we know.
        ourt.                                                                  were a number of wrongs In the                   Praised
        T he A ga K han, w ho w ith ­                                        ■ Jockey Club’s handling of the            • 'I was pleased with the
      drew all h is horses from
      train in g in B ritain over the
      case, h a s decided to take up
                                         back in the                           Aliysa affair and feels this is
                                                                               essentially a protective step to
                                                                               preserve his rights. He feels this
                                                                               is the only action left to him.’
                                                                                                                         way the system worked
                                                                                                                          once we got the crowd
                                                                                                                          under control.'
                                                                                                                            Supt Peter B artlett,
      a ju d icial review, w hich                                                The Jockey Club, who govern             from the Nottingham
                                                                                                                         Constabulary, praised the
      could overturn th e Jockey
      C lub’s ruling.
        I n an hi st oric move, a
                                         spotlight                             horse ra cin g , decided the
                                                                               substance 3-Hydroxycamphor
                                                                               found in Aliysa could not have
                                                                               come in such a large quantity
                                                                                                                         St John Ambulance men
                                                                                                                         and his fellow officers for
                                                                                                                         the professional way they
      successful application was                                               from natural sources such as              dealt with the situation.
      made last Wednesday for the                                            ■ liniments, feed or bedding.                 'The gates were left
      Jockey Club disciplinary com­                                                                                      open because if is
      mittee’s inquiry into Aliysa’s
      disqualification from the 1989
                                              By MARK RYAN                             Relevant                          standard procedure now
                                                                                                                         following the Hillsborough
                                                                                 Hans Brandenberger, the Inde­           disaster,' he said, i was
      Oaks to be reviewed.              ‘The application to the High           pendent scientific assessor called
        It means one of the most Court was made on the last day It                                                       impressed with the way
                                                                               in by the Jockey Club to deal             the problem was handled.'
      acrimonious disputes in British . could have been done.                  with the Aliysa inquiry, told The
      horse racing will again be in the   ‘It will be between six and nine     Mail on Sunday last December              • GLASGOW Rangers
      spotlight.                        months before the case is actually     that scientific tests carried out by      were last night involved
                                                                               both sides were inconclusive and          in a tu g -o f-w ar with
        The Aga K h a n ’s law yer, heard, but when that happens it                                                      Nottingham Forest for
      Mathew McOloy, said last night: should only take a matter of days.       th a t fu rth er r e s e a rc h was
                                                                               required.                                 Morton's £350,000-rated
                                                                                                                         centre-half Brian Reid.



     LIVERPOOL won their third suc­
                                               in                                McCloy said: ‘Brandenberger’s
                                                                              statements are relevant because
                                                                             ■ he was the scientific assessor, but
                                                                               a number of grounds have been
                                                                                                                           The       20-year-ol d
                                                                                                                         defender, watched by half
                                                                                                                         the First Division clubs in
                                                                                                                         last week's Scottish Cup
                                           While Liverpool were thrashing      cited on our application to the           replay against Mother-
     cessive game yesterday to leave     Derby 7-1 at the Baseball Ground,     High Court.’
     ♦he Kop asking: 'Who needs                                                                                          w ell, saw Rangers 24
                                         Arsenal were being held to a            If the review ends with the Aga         hpurs after the Scottish
     Kenny Dalglish now?' Suddenly,      goalless draw at Norwich.             Khan being proved correct, it will
     the team written off as the                                                                                         champions said they were -
                                           That crushing Liverpool win put    not mean an Immediate return of            w ithdrawing from the
     championship favourites after       them a point clear at the top and     his horses. ‘There are wider Issues
     manager Dalglish's walk-out are                                                                                     race for Reid's Morton
                                         narrowed the goal difference gap      he wants to see put right,’ added         team-mate Alan Mahood.
     back in the driving seat.           between them and Arsenal.             McCloy.
                                                       Electrician is
THE TIMES WEDNESDAY JANUARY 31 1990
                                                         sentenced
                 - T ^ - n . i i 7 T I T T E T>AT>|T   a©? tad work
                                                       feat cost life           By David Sapsted
                                                       An electrician was found „ . , anyone, in fact, who
                                                       guilty of manslaughter yes­ undertakes work and makes a
                                                       terday for shoddy work that mistake that leads to some­
                                                       cost the iife o f a father.       one’s death is now _more
                                                           Lawyers immediately pre­ vulnerable to a criminal
                                                       dicted that the long-awaited prosecution. As the Crown
                                                       decision at Maidstone Crown Prosecution Service has
                                                       Court could have far-reaching shown over the decision to
                                                       consequences for anyone — prosecute both individuals
                                                       from car mechanics to doctors and P&O over the Zeebrugge
                                                       - deemed to have caused a ferry tragedy, it is more pre­
                                                       death by poor workmanship.        pared to pursue manslaughter
                                                                                         prosecutions after a fatality.”
                                                           After one o f the first
                                                       prosecutions of its kind, Ste­       The CPS decided to pros­
                                                       phen Holloway, aged 43, from ecute Holloway after receiving
                                                       Ashford, Kent, received a a report from Ashford CID,
                                                       nine-month suspended prison compiled because two South-
                                                       sentence for the manslaughter Eastern Electricity Board elec­
                                                       of Mr Stephen French, aged tricians called to the scene of
                                                       23. Mr French died in front of. the tragedy — and who found
                                                       his son aged one when he was the source of the problem
                                                       electrocuted after touching the within 30 minutes - consid­
                                                       steel sink at Ms grandmother’s ered the error to be so appall­
                                                       home in High Halden.              ingly elementary.
                                                           Holloway had wired up a           In finding Holloway guilty,      M r As
                                                       new central heating system at the jury found the crucial test
                                                       the house and had connected a of recklessness proved, despite
                                                        live wire in the programmer to the fact the electrician, who
                                                        an earth lead in the junction had pleaded not guilty, had
                                                        box. The error meant that, at been back to check his work.
                                                        certain times, anything con­         Mr Douglas Stewart, a lead­
                                                        nected to metal pipework in ing litigation solicitor, said the
                                                        the house was live.               decision to launch a criminal
                                                                                          prosecution after Zeebrugge
                                                            After members of the family had marked a change in the
                                                        had repeatedly -received CPS approach.                                Makins
                                                        shocks from the system and                                            as wri
                                                        after a delivery driver had          “Until recently, people who
                                                                                                                              posed c
                                                        been knocked from the top o f have suffered a loss have               Fergusc
                                                        an oil tank by the jolt he asked solicitors to seA huge                 Wher
                                                        received, the electrician had sums of money in compensa­              T h e S u i
                                                        twice checked his work and tion as a punitive measure                 was apj
                                                        declared it to be sound. Mr against those responsible.                on both
                                                        French, who was in stockinged        “In fact, the punitive ele­      Then, i:
                                                        feet and standing on a damp ment should come from the                 prophet;
                                                        floor when he received the Crown Prosecution Service                  career, 1
                                                         shock, died five months after and their decision to prosecute        have to
                                                         the installation.                in this and other cases reflects    centrate
                                                            Last night, Sir David a change in policy which, I                 Times, 1
                                                        Mapfey,                           beKeve, has the support of the      up and
                                                         most criminal solicitors, said: P»W*Cat large.                       licity frc
                                                         “In this modem age life has         Lawyers pointed out that            And I
                                                         become cheap and I think that Holloway, who was originally           ing a ri
                                                         where someone has, by reason tried at Maidstone last year            and Mr:
                                                         o f recklessness, _ terminated but on that occasion the jury         ing to
                                                         someone eise’s life, it is de­ was unable to reach a verdict,        Tele vis:
                                                         sirable they be prosecuted. It would not have faced any              Gibralt;
                                                         is a warning to others. If such criminal charge had Mr               newspa;
                                                         prosecutions enforce the French not died. “If Mr                     news as
                                                         message that people have a French had been paralysed for                A fre
                                                         duty to take care to safeguard life, there could have been no        and tek
                                                         the lives o f others, then it criminal proceedings. There            been e
                                                         must be welcomed.” .             would have been no lesser           anythin,
                                                            A leading-criminal lawyer criminal charge than man­               and the
                                                         said: “This is the first case slaughter that could have been         eliite tel
                                                         anyone can recall of its kind. brought,” one said.                   Althoug
                                                         The ramifications eoiikkbe^          Mr Michael Worsley, QC,          quick-w
                                                         enormous: electricians,- build­ for -the -prosecution; ■-had -told
                                                         ers,' car .'mechanics, doctors the jury the work was done
                                                                                          “badly, negligently, and in­
                                                                                          deed recklessly.”
                                                                                              Sentencing Holloway, Mr
                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                          Justice Boreham said: “Your
                                                                                          greatest error was despite at
                                                                                           least two visits, maybe three,
                                                                                                                                 tl
                                                                                          you failed to detect that fault
                                                                                           by wholly inadequate testing
                                                                                           by you.”
                                                                                                                                ba     B
                                                                MIS                           After the hearing, Mr           The p i
                                                                                          French’s mother said: “I al­        may ha
                                                                                          ways knew he was guilty. I am       Mr Ju
                                                                                          glad the court has decided that     during t
                                                                                          too. The sentence was satisfac­
                                                                                                                              but the
                                                                                          tory but nothing is going to        rock th
                                                                                          bring Nicholas back.”               who ha;
                                                                                              Holloway said: “This is a       high-pn
                                                          M r French: Use! stockinged great tragedy for everyone
                                                              feet on a damp floor.       involved. I am considering an         At th
                                                                                                                              England
                                                                                          appeal.”
                                                                                              The Electrical Contractors’     judge, ai
                                                                                          Association said tha case car­      for the 1
                                                           S s S it i                     ried “a tragic warning that         that resi
                                                                                           people should not rely on          million
                                                                                          ‘cowboys’ to undertake skilled      Aldingtoi
                                                                                           work for them, even if the         vative Pa
                                                                                IfsI
                                                                                           price appears more att­              Theme
                                                                                           ractive.”.                         wrath m<
                                                                                              Customers should always         Michael »
                                                                                           insist that electricians who       on the to
                                                                                           undertake work are members         the press
                                                                                           o f a recognized trade associ­     ordered th
                                                                                           ation, it said. “Holloway was      to keep
                                                                                           not and, unfortunately, there      seats. Mi
                                                                                           are too many independents          made his di
                                                                                           operating outside any controls     The Sun i
                                                            Stephen Holloway: Work         at all.”                           court £1 ;
                                                              defective and reckless.             Leading article, page 15    with Elton«
                                                                                                                              hi* w a« due
r ®        4                                             H            ^                   ,    * . H                        H               ”W” ^        + •




                        :;& &    iit v w a iw j.   J   % \j- &,%,%.                                                          lk llc    t lll C
  and not decide this important question oothe                                      CSCE (Conference "on                             securityan<T                   F
  streets', then it should be a matter of urgency                                   operation in Europe).



                                                                                                                                                                              From M
 T h e co n v ictio n o f a n                                                                                                                                                 Surrey I
                                                                                    3:»                                                                                       (Consen
                                                                                                 installed th e electrical side o f a                                         Sir, Tht
                                                                                     central heating system . U n fortunately a live
                                                          lan w ill h av e to                                                                                                 tian Dei
                                                                                                                Members of the household
                                                                                                                                                                              fives in t
                                                                                                                                                                              was not i
 trained will have nothing to fear, ofcourse; but                                                                                                                             groups oi
 those who have made a living out of shoddy
 w o rk a re henceforth 'on notice th a t th ey are                                 Slectpci         and declared the system safe.


                                                                                    tou ched th e metal kitchen sink while stan                                                 The
                                   'c |a ,;fi|itlie rm o re
                                                                                              ks o n a damp floor.Afterwards ittook
                                                                                                                                                                                t he pr<
                                                                                                                                                                              serable th<
                                                                                               Holloway's
                                                                                                                                                                             .'^partisan.
                                            red; there isa need for                 jail sentence, consisted not merely                                                      ?jfchenie^:i
     me:i®ic5eMi                    iiii& ltfrif f n wQ t f A m W a ^
                             y«Quifa!ent.        to “atteni|rte3                ;   WFf^1£ G(%nnpgrfinn f i n t                   W e f m h it
   manslaughter” or causing serious injury by                                                             :riously enough to discover the
  ir
   vev
     wMr
       i ui*w*c
              ec
               unv<*
                   oca«. .                                     -3-                  v i         as4w*i.   u j   a u v i^ u a iw    ita u n g .   ¥ ¥ i i y U i c r :•U I C
      T h e law of involuntary manslaughter has                                     *m t a ct w ould alone have been sufficient to
. loric neflrt a fllffirailt: are a          nlFp.tir‘<»miwittc                     SUDIIOrt^'&Vchai^e^bf^afislauehtftr was nnf
           ltially, of causing death by gross ne
  Mgence. The offence is not defined by statute,


favour of the public, for no one can                                                          skilled man              should have had little
advance where the lin
                                                                                                                                                                             that the t
                                                                                    static electricity and a live connection once he
                           -p:
                                        dow n the years
                                                                                    tests would have confirmed i t But house-
                                                                                    holders are at the mercy of anyone with — or                                             this not e




                                                                                                                                  with bluff or
 Queen’s Bench Divisional Court                                                                                          Law Report Janu                                       1987                                            Queen’s Bt
                                                                                            M      m      ,

                  Coroner’s directions on                                                                                                                                                         Power to order
Regina v West London                         after he had been detained and         neglect would suffice. The jury   would so hold. That standard that was incidental to the ver­              Regina v Greater Manchester
Coroners’ Court, Ex' parte                   removed to Custody.                    had been gravely misdirected,                                                                                                             LORD JUSTIC1
                                                                                                                      would apply where death was dict and could not be legislated              Coroner, Ex parte Worch and said that the applies
Gray and Others                                At the inquest before the            and could not have been other­    alleged to have been caused by a . against. Rule 42 of the 1984           Another                     deceased’s widow
Regina V West London                        coroner the cause of death was          wise than confused by what they   criminal offence., Any other Rules had accordingly been
                                                                                    had been told and what they had                                                                               Before Lord Justice Watkins         dent of an organi,
Coroners’ Court, £ x parte                  found to be inhalation of vomit.                                          standard would be unthinkable.' complied with.                                                                  the Chesed Shel !
                                                                                    read from the notes. That by         Proof on the balance of                                               ; and M r Justice Macpherson
Duncan and Others ,                         The jury after their deliberations                                                                               Although it was to be accepted                                           dealt with burial n
                                            announced that the deceased             itself had to lead to the verdict probabilities would suffice in that there might be instances             ‘ [Judgment December 14]
 Before Lord Justice Watkins                                                        being quashed.                                                                                                                                    for Jewish persoi
and Mr Justice Mann                         had been “unlawfully killed,                                              relation to the other verdicts where the jury’s statutory duty                A coroner’s jurisdiction to       portant aspect wa
                                            attributed to the degree of care           The jury should have been      referred to in the precedent ■ . under section 4(3) of the Coro­         , order a post-mortem examina-         sunset on the day oi
 [Judgment December 19] * ,                 after he was overpowered”.              told that they had to be satisfiedattached to the 1984 Rules, save i ners Act 1887 might appear to         : tion for the purpose of showing
      The Queen’s Bench , D i­                                                                                                                                                                                                        mortem examin:
                                                                                   (i) thatia police officer had had  in the case of an opeh verdict.     clash with the prohibition in           that an inquest would be un­        forbidden by Jewis)
 visional Court gave guidance*                 The applicants sought to                                                  The coroner’s notes had been rule 42 of the 1984 Rules,                  necessary was limited to cases
                                            challenge the verdict on the           the responsibility of having                                                                                                                          In the present c
 i n t e r a l i a , as to the proper,                                             regard to Mikkelsen’s health and   handed to the jury as an aide- careful framing of the verdict            ' where the coroner’s reasonable
direction to be given, by a                 grounds that las framed it ap­                                                                                                                                                            ceased had been r
                                                                                                                    ’ memoire at the jury’s request could avoid a conflict. Rule 42
                                                                                   welfare; (ii) that he had failed to                                                                         ! belief was that the death was        motorway on Aug'
coroner to the jury on man­                 peared to determine a question                                            over a lunchtime adjournment; was accordingly i n t r a v i r e s the      sudden and the caiise unknown.
                                            of civil liability, and was there­     do so; (iii) that such failure had                                                                                                                 had lost control, i
slaughter, and the standard of                                                     caused the death; and (iv) that    in the absence of counsel. The i 1887 Act.                                    If the coroner suspected that     was subsequently ft
proof to be applied.                        fore in breach of rule 42 of the                                                                                                                   ; the-cause of death might have
                                            Coroners Rules (SI 1984 No             the officer had acted recklessly.  notes Were bulky, lacked clarity, ;    The development o f the ju­                                                 Both applicants
     Their Lordships granted to                                                                                       contained misdirections and dicial review procedure could                : been violent, he could do no         cerned to have a t
                                            552); that the coroner’s direc­           The failure on the part of the  were not intelligible to the jury. hot possibly allow a situation        ‘ other than hold an inquest, in
the first group of applicants,              tion to the jury on the meaning        officer to appreciate the risk was                                                                                                                 and to try to av
Glyn Roger Gray, Dean Morris                                                                                          They could not have provided where verdicts should stand                 ’ which event his jurisdiction to      mortem. It seemed
                                            of “unlawful killing” was wrong,       not enough. The jury had to
Thompson and Michael Ber­                                                                                             the jury with clear guidance, and ‘ where they had been based on           Order a post-mortem examina-         her that there wen
                                            inadequate and confusing; that         conclude that there was an         only served to heap confusion no or insufficient evidence. The           : tion stemmed from his powers
nard Howard, and to the second              the direction as to the standard       obvious and serious risk to the                                                                                                                    grounds for assumn
group of applicants, Thomas                                                                                           upon confusion.                     was nothing in section 6 o f the     : in relation to the ordering of an    might have been c;
                                           o f proof necessary to return a         health and welfare of the de­         If some direction were not 1887i Act which ran counter to             , inquest under the provisions of
Duncan, Charles Morris, Roger               verdict of unlawful killing was        ceased, and that the police                                                                                                                        by the crash itself
Kent, Raymond Catling and                                                                                             clear to the jury, the coroner that proposition.                           the Coroners Act 1887.               medical reason
                                            wrong, and that the finding of         officer had been indifferent       should have, with assistance                                                  The Queen’s Bench Di-
John Kynaston, an order of                  unlawful killing, was not sup­         thereto or* recognizing the risk,                                         However, that was not the                                                caused the crash.
c e r t i o r a r i to quash the verdict                                                                              from counsel, repeated what he                                             visional Court so held in grant­        The coroner thor
                                            ported by the evidence.                he deliberately chose to run a     had already told them or given position         here. His Lordship         ing a declaration that the
and inquisition returned at West                                                   risk by doing nothing.                                                 would express no opinion on the                                             inquest might be ii'
London Coroners’ Court on                      It was further alleged that                                            further instructions with the strength of the evidence.                    decision of the Greater Man­         asked the pathologi:
March 27, 1986 in respect of the           there was a material irregularity          The jury should have been       assistance of counsel. Thei.notes                                          chester Coroner to order a post­     report and that con-
                                           in the course of the proceedings                                                                                ! In the event the verdict would      mortem examination on the
death of John Mikkelsen, and an                                                    directed that they should only     should have been seen by.coun- i?e quashed and a fresh in­                                                      had been as a resui
order directing a fresh inquest. ■         in that the cojoner in the              return a verdict of Unlawful       sel, before being passed to' the quisition ordered.                       body of Colin Worch, was              received and there i
                                           absence of counsel supplied to                                            jUry.
                                                                                 ' killing if it was attributable to a                                                                          unlawful. A declaration that a        natural cause. The
  Mr R. Alim Jones for the first           the jury a copy ofjiis own typed        particular police officer, whom       His Lordship did not agree ■ < M r Justice Roch delivered a            decisiort by - the coroner to        the inquest was .v
group; M r Edmund Lawson for               notes entitled “Conclusions as          they should on no account          with the submission that the concurring judgment.                         withhold a burial order until         August 6.
the second group; Mr Kieran                to type of death” which had           1name.                              jury’s verdict appeared to deter­     I Solicitors: Edward Fail, Neale     after the opening of the inquest
                                           formed the basis of his direction                                                                                                                    was unlawful was refused.                The second appli
Coonan for the coroner: Mr                                                                                            mine a question of civil liability & Co, Twickenham; Russell                                                   point asked for a 1
                                           to the jury on the Jaw.             They should have considered by reason of the way it was Jones & Walker; Beachcrofts;
Michael Beloff, Q C . and ; M r                                              each police officer in turn, the framed. It might be a legitimate Powell Magrath & Spencer,                            M r Richard Gordon for the       The coroner refused
Oscar del Fabbro for the next of              In the notes there was no­ role he played, the opportunities inference from the verdict, but ■ Highgate.                                          applicants; M r Giles Kavanagh       that he wanted best
kin of John Mikkelsen.                     where to be found a definition of given to him, and other relevant                                                                                   for the respondent.                  identification at tin
                                           manslaughter. Nowhere did the circumstances.           ;                                                                                                                                  the inquest.
   LORD JUSTICE WATKINS
said that John Mikkeisen had
died on July 16, 1985 at the
West Middlesex Hospital. Seri­
                                           coroner direct the jury that the
                                           act of a single person must have
                                           The jury was left with the
                                                                                As  to   the standard   of proof
                                                                             there was little authority. The
                                           led to the death of the deceased. case   of R v C i t y o f L o n d o n
                                                                                                                         When husbandnotliableforrates
                                                                                                                      Doncaster Metropolitan Bor­ that the husband no longer had                caster Metropolitan Borough
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        In that respect i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     had acted prudently
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     his discretion and t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tion sought in rcsj
ous allegations had been made                                                                                                                                                                   Council by way of case stated
against the applicants, who were           impression that the conduct of C o r o n e r , E x   p a rte  B a rb e r
                                                                                                                     ough    Council v Lockwood           any responsiblity for the wife, he                                         refusal of the burial <
police officers; against the first         the police officers in aggregate ([1975] 1 WLR 1310) was a case                                                was not in rateable occupation        against the refusal of Doncaster
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     be refused.
group relating to the use of               was sufficient toV found the on suicide. Lord Widgery, Lord                   A husband who had separated and therefore would not be                •Justices to issue a distress
                                           verdict.             :            Chief Justice, there alluded to from his wife and left the liable for the rates, even though                       warrant against M r Brian               In respect of the
violence against him during the                                              the stringency of the standard matrimonial home was not the house remained in his name                             Lockwood in respect of rates, on     order the post moru
coursc of his detention and                  Manslaughter by neglect was without reference to the con­ necessarily liable for the rates on or in the spouses’ joint names.                     :the house which he had formerly      turned on the cons
removal to custody after his               seldom met with, and it was a ventional standard.                          the home p rio r to the                                                  :occupiedjointly with his former      section 21(1) and
arrest, and against the second             matter upon which it was diffi­      His Lordship could not be- pronouncement of the decree                       Mr Justice McCullough so           wife, for the period between the     Corners (Amend r
group of neglect in failing to             cult to direct a ^jury. The jieve that the standard in the absolute. Where on the facts the held in the Queen’s Bench                                date when he had left the home       1926. Section 21 of ti
summon an ambulance to the                 coroner’s reference to neglect instant case would be other than husband had left the home and Division on January 13,                                and the pronouncement of the         had given coroners
police station in proper time              gave the impression, that plain beyond reasonable doubt, and the separation was so complete dismissing an appeal by Don­                             decree absolute.                     order a post mortem
                                                          L n — *y <




                                                    /!cr.




                    INQUEST     TRAINING     DAY

                            6 October 1989




                                CONTENTS

                                                   Page

Introduction                                         1



The Inquest


Optional Legal Strategies


Provision of Deceased Personal Detail
to the Bereaved                                     13


Zeebrugge                                           17


Summary and Recommendations                         22


Addresses/Telephone numbers                         26
INTRODUCTION


The information contained in the following pages has been summarised
from the Inquest Training Day held at Lodge Moor Hospital, Sheffield
on the 6th October, 1989.

The day was chaired by John Pilling, Assistant Director, Sheffield
Family & Community Services Department.    In his opening address, he
acknowledged the reason for our need .to come together on-sach-a’Training
Day and therefore asked for one minute's silence as a mark of respect to
all those who died at Hillsborough on the 15th April, 1989.

The talks of each of the main contributors have been reproduced and
therefore some duplication of facts and points will be found. The major
recommendations however have been summarised at the end of this document.

It must also be noted that some of the information is general to
disasters and some specific to particular ones, e.g. Zeebrugge and King's
Cross. The information on inquests is also general, as at this stage it
is not possible to say exactly what the scenario will be for the
Hillsborough Inquests. It is, however, hoped to run a further Training
Day once the date and details of the Inquests are known.




Hillsborough Task Team
Sheffield

February, 1990
MR. K. D. POTTER - Coroner, South Yorkshire East District

Mr Potter began by indicating that he would be unable to comment
Specifically on the Hillsborough disaster. He stressed that he had
no connection with the incident and that as such his knowledge of
what had happened on the day of the disaster was the same as (no greater
than) any intelligent individual who read newspapers and watched television.

Mr Potter then talked about the history of the Coroner's Court and how
it has evolvedinto its present form with specific reference to the
inquisitorial, as opposed to accusatorial, nature of the Court. For
the purpose of this paper, it is not necessary to go into detail
about the the history of the Coroner's Court. Suffice it to say that
over the years, many of the previous responsibilities of the Coroner
have been shed, until the Coroner of the present day is involved almost
totally with the investigation of death, though some vestigial
interests such as treasure trove still remain.

The Coroner today is an independent officer appointed by the Local
Authority. He/she is independent of Central or Local Government and
must be qualified either medically and/or legally. The Home Secretary
offers support and advice to the Coroner but he has no control over
him/her. A Coroner is appointed for life or until voluntary retirement
and cannot be dismissed, except for a grave breech of behaviour.

Circumstances requiring an Inquest

Certain types of death cannot be disposed of without an inquest.
These comprise criminal cases (murder, manslaughter and infanticide);
suicides; road, rail, aviation, domestic and other accidents;
industrial accidents and diseases; deaths in prison or police custody;
deaths where negligent medical treatment is alleged; deaths from
neglect and any other case where the Coroner feels that a public
hearing would be beneficial.

Certain of these cases must be held with a Jury (see Section on Jury).

Adjournment of Inquests

In some cases , it is necessary for a Coroner to open an inquest and
then adjourn it. This would be the case if the death was an obvious
criminal one, in order to allow time for criminal proceedings to take
place. An adjournment also is necessary if the Director of Public
Prosecutions is asked to examine the circumstances surrounding a
death in order to make a decision whether or not to prosecute. This
has been the case with the Hillsborough disaster.

Functions of'the Coroner's Court

The Court has two functions in relation to a death:

(1)    To establish the medical cause of death;
(2)    To enquire into the circumstances and cause of a death if the
       death is violent or unnatural.

The Coroner has the power to order a post mortem if he feels it
necessary. As all accidents are reportable to the Coroner, a major
incident involving a number of deaths, as in the case of Hillsborough,
would be referred to a Coroner, and post mortems would be required to
establish the cause of death in each case.
Reporting of Deaths

The majority of reports of a death are made by the Police, but in
some cases, a doctor or the Registrar will notify the Coroner of a
death in his/her jurisdiction.

Jurisdiction

The Coroner to whom an inquest would be referred depends on where the
body of the deceased is found. In the case of the 95 people who died
at Hillsborough, it will be necessary for the Inquest to be held in
Sheffield under the jurisdiction of the Sheffield Coroner.

The Jury at an Inquest

There are four circumstances where a Coroner must summon a jury.
These are:-

(a)        that the death occurred in prison.
(b)        that the death occurred while the deceased was in Police
          custody.
(c)        that the death was caused by an accident, poisoning, or
          disease, notice of which is required to be given under any
          act to a Government department.
(d)        that the death occurred in circumstances where the continuance
          or possible recurrence of which is prejudicial to the health
          and safety of the public or any section of the public.

Under category (a) therefore the Hillsborough Inquests will have a Jury.

Qualifications of Jurors

The same rules and qualifications apply to Jurors summoned to attend a
Coroner's Inquest as those who might be summoned to attend a Crown Court.

Number of Jurors

The Coroner shall summon no less than seven and no more than eleven
Jurors.

¥erdict

A unanimous verdict must be sought; the majority can be accepted
with no greater minority than two, but the Coroner is only obliged
to accept a unanimous verdict. If the minority is greater than two
then the Jury is discharged and a further Inquest must follow with
a fresh Jury.. In order to reach the verdict, the Jury must retire
from the Court and consider their verdict in private, without either
Coroner or anyone else present.

The Jury can visit the scene of an incident where the death occured
if it helps them to reach a verdict. Dr Popper may decide to take
the Jury to Hillsborough to look over the scene of the incident.

After snmming up, the Coroner or Jury must consider what verdict is
to be returned.
The List of possible verdicts includes:

             Natural causes
             Industrial disease
             Dependence on drugs/non/dependent abuse of drugs
             Suicide
             Accident/Misadventure
            •Sentence of death
             Lawful killing
             Open verdict
             Unlawful killing
             Stillbirth
             Want of attention at birth
             Attempted/Self induced abortion

Further explanations of these verdicts can be found in Jervis - Book
on Coroner's 16.12.

Mr Potter gave further details on an unlawful killing verdict and
noted that it covers murder, manslaughter, infanticide, and causing
death by reckless driving. A gross negligence manslaughter verdict
requires proof beyond reasonable doubt of gross negligence - going
beyond a mere matter of compensation and showing such disregard for
the life and safety of others as to amount to a Crime against the
State and conduct deserving punishment.

Witnesses

All witnesses at an Inquest are under oath, but the rules of evidence
are not applied as strictly as they are in other Courts. For example,
witnesses in a Coroner's Court have three privileges:

(1)         Against Self incrimination
(2)         Privacy between their lawyer and themselves
(3)         Public interest immunity.

Any person who satisfies the Coroner that he falls within one of the
following categories of person is entitled to examine witnesses at an
Inquest, either in person, by counsel or a solicitor:

(a)         Parent, child, spouse and any personal representative of
             the deceased;
(b)         any beneficiary under a policy of insurance issued on the
             life of the deceased;
(c)         the insurer who issued such a policy of insurance;
(d)         any person whose act or omission or that of his agentor servant
            may in the opinion of the Coroner have caused, or contributed
             to, the death of the deceased;
(e)         any person appointed by a trades union to which the deceased
             at the time of his death belonged, if the death of the deceased
            may have been caused by an injury received in the course of
            his employment or by an industrial disease;
(f)         an inspector appointed by, or a representative of, an enforcing
            authority, or any person appointed by a government department
             to attend the Inquest;
(g)         the chief officer of police:
(h)         any other person who in the opinion of the Coroner isa properly
             interested person.
            Jervis 13.2
                                   5


The evidence given by witnesses at an Inquest is usually oral, but
documentary evidence can also be used, including photographs. Written
statements made earlier by witnesses can also be used.

A witness must first be examined by a Coroner, after the conclusion
of which any properly interested party may examine the witness. The
witnesses' own representatives should examine him/her last of all.
An important point to note here is that Legal Aid is not yet available
for representation in Coroner's Court.

Joinder of Inquests

Where an incident involving many deaths occurs it is common for the
Inquests to be held concurrently. It is the right of each person to
have his/her own seperate inquest even where as at a multiple inquest
the cause of death may be the same in many cases.

The Hillsborough Inquests

If the Director of Public Prosecutions decides not to bring charges
the Coroner's Court can commence and will take place with a Jury and
witnesses.

IF however the D.P.P. decides to bring a charge of manslaughter then
Section 16 of the Coroner's Act 1988 requires the Coroner to adjourn
the Inquest until after the conclusion of the relevant criminal
proceedings.

The findings of the Inquest as to the cause of death must not be
inconsistent with the outcome of any relevant criminal proceedings,
i.e. IF the ensuing verdict is a conviction of manslaughter then the
Inquest Jury must return a verdict of unlawful killing, but if there
had been an aquittal then presumably only a verdict of Accidental
Death or Misadventure or an Open Verdict would be allowed.

IF no charges are preferred, then in due course the Coroner's Inquest
will be resumed and verdicts returned. Should there be a verdict of
Unlawful Killing the Coroner could refer all the papers to the D.P.P.
for further consideration.




HTT.AG.BW
7.2.90
Optional Legal Strategies

Doug Fraser - Solicitor from Liverpool Steering Committee


Mr Doug Fraser is a partner in the Liverpool firm of Silverman and
Livermore, which was contacted within the first week of the disaster.
He is also a member of the Liverpool Steering Committee. Within that
first week, Liverpool's local Law Society thought about forming a
Steering Committee. This Committee was duly elected at an open meeting
at the Law Society in Liverpool. Six lawyers were elected and they
have gone on to represent over 130 firms of solicitors around the
country who are acting for the bereaved and injured. They call them­
selves the Hillsborough Solicitors Group. The Steering Committee see
their priorities as falling into five main areas. These are:-

(i)      The Inquiry. To represent relatives en bloc. The Home
          Office had given approval for this to happen and paid for
          this representation.

(ii)     Inquests. To represent relatives en bloc once again. This
          had worked well at the Inquiry and seems an appropriate way
          of handling the Inquests.

(iii)     Trust Fund. To have some legal input to the Fund.

(iv)      Civil claims. To represent families in any claims they
          might wish to make for compensation.

(v)      Information. The Committee publishes regular bulletins
          which are sent out to various firms of solicitors which
          make up the Hillsborough Solicitors Group. These solicitors
          are then able to take from the Bulletins relevant information
          to pass on to their clients.

Having given a background description about the Steering Committee, Mr
Fraser went on to describe how his talk would give a flavour of other
legal matters, including the Inquests themselves, and he divided this
part of his talk into eight sections:-

1.       Effects of the Disaster on families.
2.       Timetable of events.
3.       Criminal Proceedings.
4.       Public Inquiry.
5.       Civil Claims for damages.
6.       Distribution of Trust Funds.
7.       Inquests.
8.       Questions and Answers.


Effects of the Disaster

It is recognised that the physical damage incurred as a result of an
accident or disaster is easier to see and assess then emotional and
psychological damage. The lawyers have to try and assess the emotional
damage in financial terms for compensation. This, by necessity, will
take some time,as it needs to be at least a year after the event before
the full extent of the damage is known, i.e. is it permanent; has it
passed and if so how long did it last for? One area that the Steering
Committee is looking at is the Press and the effect it had in terms
of psychological damage.

Timetable of Legal Events

(i)     . The original timetable of events would have been as follows:-

          (a)   Public Inquiry and the publication of its findings in
                two parts.

          (b)   Inquests. They had been due to start in January, 1990
                and would have had a very high profile.

          (c)   Civil Claims.

          (d)   Steering Committee would then have invited the Director
                of Public Prosecutions to look at all the papers and
                evidence available with a view to a question of criminal
                proceedings.

However, asPeter Wright, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, sent
a copy ofLord Justice Taylor’s report to D.P.P., the timetable of events
has had to be revised.

(ii)     The revised timetable is as follows:-

          (a)   Public Inquiry.

          (b)   D.P.P. must now consider Lord Justice Taylor’s Report
                and evidence being gathered by West Midlands Police.
                If no charges or minor charges are brought then the
                original timetable would come back into effect, with
                either the Inquests or the Civil Cases coming first.
                However, if the D.P.P. recommends Prosecution then
                those charges must be heard before either the Inquests
                or the Civil Cases.

If there are serious prosecutions, i.e. manslaughter, then solicitors
would expect every procedural opportunity and device to be used that
would prolong and delay the event. Those prosecuted will almost
certainly seek an oral committal before Magistrates, and seek to have
it thrown out. Then there would be a full blown Crown Court trial. All
this would extend the timescale by some months, meaning that the Inquests
would be severely delayed.

Criminal Proceedings

Since the Zeebrugge disaster, it has been possible to charge a corporate
body with manslaughter. This is because manslaughter can carry a fine as
a sentence, whereas the sentence for murder is life imprisonment.
Currently, the West Midlands Police are investigating various agencies
and bodies in a corporate sense, and individuals within these organisations
These include the South Yorkshire Police; Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club and the Football Association; Sheffield City Council; the
engineeering company who designed the barriers in the pens, and the fans
in their broadest sense are under consideration. There may also be others
who are being investigated. The charges that could be brought range
from manslaughter to minor breaches of rules and regulations.
Public Inquiry

The injured and bereaved were represented at the Public Inquiry by way
of bloc representation. The Liverpool Steering Committee therefore had
a team of lawyers at the Inquiry. This bloc representation took the
form of:-

(a)       A Q.C.
(b)       A junior barrister.
(c)       Input from the six lawyers representing the Steering Committee.

At the Inquiry, the various solicitors in the Hillsborough Solicitors
Group gave information obtained from their clients to the six lawyers
representing the Steering Committee. They then acted as filters of this
information, i.e. as information came.in, it was sifted and then
presented to the barristers.

There was a massive amount of evidence to be dealt with at the Public
Inquiry and it made sense to have bloc representation in order to avoid
a situation whereby over 150 solicitors were acting on behalf of
individual clients.

The Steering Committee believe that bloc representation should also be
used at the Inquest. Doug Fraser has already discussed this with the
Coroner, Dr Popper, who also agrees that it is an appropriate way to
represent the bereaved at the Inquest.

Civil Claims

In Doug Fraser's opinion, the system of compensating the victims of
disaster in this country is woefully inadequate, but it can only be
changed by Parliament.

In relation to civil claims, the Liverpool Steering Committee met the
insurers of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the Police in
July, 1989. The insurers denied liability so writs were issued by the
Committee and statements of claims served.

Since this time, the Police insurers have in fact agreed to pay in full
claims for killed, injured or those suffering from shock as a result
of their experience at the match. Seven hundred (700) claims have been
dealt with. Liability has not however been accepted and the insurers
have not agreed to compensate any other category of people affected by the
disaster. The Steering Committee are seeking to extend the category of
compensation to include those who saw the events unfold on the television
and were severely affected by what they saw. Test cases have been selected
from this group of people, including relatives of the deceased and
injured, and will, be put before the insurers in June, 1990.

The Steering Committee believe that the victims of disaster who suffer
from post traumatic stress disorder should be adequately compensated
and they are seeking to push back the barriers of compensation to include
this group of people.

It is also the opinion of the Steering Committee that someone was
responsible for the disaster at Hillsborough, that it was not "just one
of those things” , which the denial of liability might suggest.
In relation to payments made to individuals from the Trust Fund, it is
important to note that civil claims are not affected by Trust Fund
payments. It is therefore possible for people to be given money by the
Trust Fund and claim against insurers. The main difference to note is
that money paid to children in Civil Claims will be invested by the
Court who have absolute authority to do this.

The Trust Fund

The Trust Fund was set up with the intention of making financial payments
to people affected by the disaster from donations given by the general
public as an expression of sympathy.

At the present time (January, 1990) the total amount of money received
into the Trust Fund is £11.5 million.    The Trustees have paid out
approximately £6 million to the bereaved and £2 million to the seriously
injured. Seven hundred and fifty (750) claims have been received and
four hundred (400) have been dealt with.

The Fund is administered by a group of Trustees who are experienced
lawyers and accountants. Individual levels of need have been, and
continue to be, assessed by a group of doctors and lawyers who contribute
to the decision as to who should get what.

The Liverpool Steering Committee have no active part in the decisions of
the Trust Fund, but they are in a position to offer financial advice to
families, many of whom will receive substantial amounts of money. Never
having had vast amounts of money before, they will benefit from professional
advice on investing the money for their children, etc.

The Inquest

At the time of writing (January, 1990), the date of the Inquest remains
unknown.

(1)      Where the Inquest comes in the.timetable of events.
(2)      What the "opposition” are going to do.

Both of these will influence the type of profile that the Inquest has and
therefore the nature of the Inquest.

Listed below are possible scenarios that will dictate the nature of the
Inquest.

HIGH PROFILE                               LOW PROFILE

IF the D.P.P. decides not to make         IF the D.P.P. decides to prosecute
criminal charges the Inquest will         and brings minor charges, the
be used to try to bring a verdict         Coroner may decide to defer the
of unlawful killing and will              Inquest, in which case the
therefore be high profile,                Inquest will not be held until
involving many witnesses and              after the Criminal proceedings
substantial representation from           and will therefore be low
Solicitors.                               profile.
HIGH PROFILE                               LOW PROFILE

IF the D.P.P. decides to make              IF the D.P.P. decides to bring
minor criminal charges, the                major charges, e.g. manslaughter,
Coroner may decide to go ahead             the Coroner must defer the
with the Inquest. A verdict of             Inquests until after the
unlawful killing by the Inquest            criminal proceedings and again
jury could still be sought and             the Inquest will be low profile.
the Police and the Club decide
to have representation at the
Inquest, thus making it high
profile.

It is the Coroner's reponsibility to each individual family to investigate
into the cause of death of a relative; the main questions being where,
when and how the person met his/her d'eath. Every family is entitled to
have representation at the Inquest. The majority of families will be
legally represented by the Steering Committee Solicitors.

Doug Fraser has had a number of discussions with the Coroner, Dr Popper,
and will remain in contact with him to discuss issues arising regarding
the Inquest.

Dr Popper is likely to hold the Inquest in two parts. The first part will
be a generic inquiry into the events of 15th April, 1989. This may be
done in a relatively short time because Dr Popper will have the information
from the public inquiry available to him.

The second part will be the actual Inquests. Dr Popper is keen to have
95 separate inquests, one for each bereaved family, to give them as much
information as possible about the way in which the relative met his/her
death.

In fact, many of the families have already had access to post-mortem
reports, because the Coroner has released them to solicitors if the families
have requested them.

At Dr Popper's request, the West Midlands Police are currently preparing
95 files, one on each of the deceased. Solicitors so far do not have
access to these files. (See question iv).

Timetable of Inquest

In Doug Fraser's opinion, Dr Popper is likely to structure the order of
the inquests around the Pathologists who examined the bodies. This means
that the order may appear to be random.

Logistics of the Inquest

According to the Steering Committee, the Medico Legal Centre is not big
enough to hold the Hillsborough Inquests even if they are low profile.

The bereaved families have already told their solicitors that they would
like certain facilities made available to them, and these includes-

(1)      A private room to get away from the attention of the media and
         where they can sit quietly if things get too difficult.
                                       11



    (2)         Separate facilities for the client to talk to the lawyer in
                private, should they so wish.

    Finally, Doug Fraser stressed that individual families should make sure
    that their lawyers spend sufficient time with them before and throughout
    the Inquest.




    HTT.AR.MH
    26.1.90




I
Questions & Answers - Doug Fraser

Robert Quinn of Knowsley Borough Council asked if T.V. companies
were being considered for liability, as some people had suffered
shock through watching the event on T.V.

"The Steering Committee looked at T.V. companies and newspapers,
but you have the option to turn off your T.V. set. The Steering
Committee decided to concentrate on one or two people to blame.
If we receive specific instructions from clients, as individual
solicitors, to look at other issues like T.V. we will do so."

Mary Gaylor of Gloucestershire Social Serviced commented that
as the Steering Committee had said they were not going to have
anything to do with the national press, could some sort of
statement be made that would help to deflect some of the press
interest.

"The Steering Committee have a press officer. We are not
prepared to give lerigthy interviews to the media. We would be
prepared to give a press statement, but these are often not
published. Television is different; it has an air of
respectability. We will talk to the T.V. if our clients want
it, but not to the press."

David Alexander of Sefton wondered how clients would get on
at the Inquests if the Inquests were managed in an adversarial
fashion and those clients were represented by solicitors who
were outside the umbrella of the Steering Committee.

"The Steering Committee would like to think that those
solicitors who had the best interests of their client at least
would come under the Steering Committee umbrella, but if a
particular solicitor did not want to be represented under the
Steering Committee then Dr Popper would be informed of this:"

David Wilkins replied "One family at the Zeebrugge inquest
was represented by a very eminent Q.C. outside the bloc
representation. He did a lot to probe into the area of
corporate responsibility. A solicitor working on his own
can do some good work."

Anne Harvey of Sefton commented that in relation to files
held by the West Midlands Police on the 95 deceased, social
workers had already had access to these files and been able
to pass on relevant information to the families.

"I know that social workers have seen the files, but lawyers
haven’t. With respect it’s not the same as a lawyer seeing it
and explaining the legal implications. The main thing is that
families are entitled to the information and should get it."

Phil Hynes of Warrington asked if it was still possible for
people to make claims to the Trust Fund.

"The Steering Committee can only deal with those people who
come forward. People should be encouraged to come forward.
People see the Trust Fund for people who were bereaved or
seriously injured and would rather claim against Insurers.
The Trustees decide who gets paid, not lawyers."
THE PROVISION OF THE DECEASED’S PERSONAL DETAILS TO THE BEREAVED

Sophie Tarassenko - Chairman, Kings Cross Action Group

Aileen Walker-Smith - Team Leader, Kings Cross Support Group


Following a disaster, a significant number of bereaved want, need,
detailed information concerning - in the words of one of the bereaved
following King's Cross - "exactly wh&t happened to the person they
loved: how, where, how quickly they died."

Following King's Cross this was done in private consultations with
Public Inquiry lawyers representing victims. These took place during
the Inquest.

Following Clapham Junction this was done by Individual Inquest for each
family.

This information, and the manner of its transmission, can be of very
great importance in the process of coming to terms with grief. The
following points have emerged.

1.       It must be remembered that not every bereaved wants this
          information, but every bereaved person should be offered it
          without having to request it. Naturally, if the bereaved
          person does not want the information it does not have to be
          given.

2.       The- information when given should be both full and frank
          and not edited (much less distorted) with kindly intent to
          be less hurtful to the feelings of the bereaved.

3.       Timing is important. Experience indicates that the need to
          know arises after months rather than weeks (with one exception,
          see para. 4 below). It is often prompted by the media coverage
          of the public inquiry. In some cases, the need to know arises
          after a year or more has elapsed. Therefore, the bereaved
          should be told both that they can have access to the information
          at an Individual Inquest (see para. 5 below) and that a proper
          documentary record of that Inquest will be available to them.

4.       The exception is seeing the body. Whereas the great majority
          will not be strong enough to want or need the detailed information
          with which we are here concerned for at least several weeks it
          appears that the strongest member of a family has often wanted
          to see the body in the immediate aftermath. Out of a wish to
          avoid injury to feelings such a request has on occasions been
          discouraged or refused. This has sometimes given rise to long-
          lasting anger. Every deceased should be offered the opportunity
          to see the body without having to request it. This should be
          done with skilled support before, during and after the viewing.
          The bereaved should also be told that they can have access to
          any photographs taken of the body. Even where these offers are
          not taken up the fact of their having been made is important.
                                      14




5.          Returning to the provision of detailed information, the best
             approach seems to be by individual Coroner's Inquests
             expressly focused on these details, held several months
             after the disaster, and where the bereaved are represented
             by one of the team representing the victims in the public
             inquiry if there is one.

6.          This approach leans heavily on the Clapham Junction experience,
             which appeared to work very well. Apart from ensuring that
             there is formal structure for addressing the question this
             approach has the following advantages

            (a)    it treats   each deceased individually.

            (b)    whereboth Coroner and public inquiry lawyer are   involved
                    it doubly ensures that all information will be brought
                    out.

            (c)    since the inquests will be consecutive, bereaved will be
                    brought together in a way which affords a natural
                    (rather than contrived) opportunity for sharing their
                    grief, which can, for some, be valuable.

            (d)    there is, or should be, transcripted record so that where
                    bereaved do not attend, given that the detailed information
                    will be elicited in just as exacting a way, there will be
                    a proper record in case they should one day feel the need
                    to know (see para. 3 above).

7.          Some further matters should be noted.

8.          Where there is no public inquiry, the bereaved should still have
             legal representation for the Inquest. Experience indicates a
             compelling case for a lawyer to be at their side to de-mystify
             the procedure and explain everything in layman's terms.

9.          It should be emphasised that the Individual Inquests would be
             limited to this purpose. In the usual case they would all then
             be adjourned to deal with the other statutory obligations of an
             Inquest in such fora as the Coroner deems appropriate.

10.         At the Individual Inquest a room should be set aside for private
             consultation. Sometimes, this detailed information is best
             transmitted initially in private.

11.         If Recommendation 151 of the Fennel Report becomes law (the
             duplication involved in holding both a public inquiry and a
             coroner's inquest should be avoided), the Inquiry Inspector
             should hold Individual Inquiries.




HTT.AR.MH
30.1.90
Questions and Answers
- Aileen Walker^Smith and Sophie Tarasenko


Bill Pemberton, a member of the H.F.S.G., asked whether or not
the claims for liability were settled before the Inquest or
afterwards.

Sophie Tarasenko replied that most of them were not settled
yet. Writs had not been issued before the Inquest and liability
had not been admitted to date (6.10.89).

Bill Pemberton then queried whether or not the Inquest result
would have any bearing on liability claims.

Sophie Tarasenko said that the Inquest result would only have     a
a bearing on Criminal proceedings, not civil liability.           f

Doug Fraser said that although in theory it doesn't, the
result of the Inquest does have a bearing on civil liability.

Tony Rothwell', social worker, Sefton, asked whether there were
any families at King's Cross who were not represented or did
not want to attend the Inquest.

Aileen Walker-Smith - Yes. Several families were not present
initially, because some members of families had tried to
dissuade those who wanted to attend the Inquest from doing so.
Not all families were represented initially, but by the second
day, all the families were represented because there was a lot
of anger about the way the families were being treated. Eventually,
one lawyer represented all the families.

David Wilkinson stressed the role of the caring profession,
which had to be to help people to do what they want to do.        A
This can be problematic because of conflict with other family     "
members. Social workers themselves will need strength and
support around the Inquest to support the families.

Julie Smith, Runcorn Social Services, asked whetherfamilies
had information about their relatives' death prior to the
Inquest.

Sophie Tarasenko - The King's Cross families had a death
certificate but had to wait ten months for this. They had
post mortem details indicating carbon monoxide levels prior
to the inquest, but no details of where their relative was
in the station and how long they may have survived for. At
King's Cross, this was important because where they were
affected how they died.

Bob Jones, Sefton, asked if the families do not want to attend
the Inquest, will it do them a disservice.

Doug fraser indicated it won't make any difference in legal
terms, but may in psychological terms.
                                      16



               Sophie Tarasenko recommended individual inquests with
               transcripts of the dialogue between the lawyer representing
               the family and the Coroner. Details of how, where, when
               their relative died are a necessity so that families can
               look at them if and when they are ready.

               David Wilkinson - At Zeebrugge, the individual lawyers got
               the transcripts to hold for families for the future. He
               indicated that it may be two years before a family might
               want to see the information and that it could be useful for
               social workers to have the information available to them
               for counselling purposes.

Q.   5.        Cynthia May, social worker, Alder Hey Unit, asked if the
               individual time spent with the lawyers answered the questions
               that the families wanted. -

A.             Sophie Tarasenko - Yes. With the Inquiry and Police reports,
               it was possible to establish the whereabouts of people. The
               lawyer showed them a map of where their relative was and also
               showed them the fuller pathologist report, which answered
               all their questions.

Q.   6.        Bill Pemberton asked whether the alcohol levels in blood were
               taken into account.

A.             Sophie Tarasenko - No. The only blood levels measured were
               carbon monoxide and cyanide and the general state of the body,
               whether the person was fit and healthy, overweight or
               whatever.




     HTT.MH
     31.1.90
David Wilkinson - Area Manager, Swale Social Services

Involved in the Herald of Free Enterprise disaster at Zeebrugge


In the Herald of Free Enterprise disaster, 193 people died and there were
346 survivors. Potentially, every one of the survivors with relatives,
and bereaved relatives, could have attended the Inquest and been
represented. This could have an intimidating impact on 'carers' and as
much preparation as possible is important.

The Inquest was the first time the families came together again since
the tragedy as they were scattered around the country. The Inquiry
had had little impact on families, many of whom were still in a state of
shock. Therefore, the Inquest was their first opportunity to take in
what actually happened.

Preparing Families

It is very important to share as much information with families as early
as possible before the inquest. Some only heard the details of what
happened to their loved ones for the first time in the Inquest. (This also
applies to survivors and their families). So, they need to have heard the
description of the body and the circumstances (e.g. where and when) of
death before they go to the Court. At Zeebrugge, a body's appearance had
been changed by chemicals in the water. The family had not known this and
the 'wrong' description they heard gave rise to false ‘'hope' and great
distress - an unforgivable mistake. Social workers therefore need to do
their homework on all the reports available - although you can never
eliminate all risks.

Survivors

Survivors will also be present at the Inquest in large numbers as
interested parties, or many may be called as witnesses. They and their
families must not be forgotten and considered to be the "lucky ones".
They too will need the offer of care and support.

The Inquest

Humber of People

At Dover, in addition to the Coroner, his/her officers, and the jury,
there were lawyers for groups of families, individual families, survivors,
crew, company and Police. With all these groups and individuals and their
legal representatives, the Court fills up very easily. All of these are
potentially in need of some sort of support at some stage of the hearing.

The local Coroner's Court was inadequate, so the Inquest was held in
the ballroom of the Town Hall.

Scheduling of Individual Inquests

Families were told beforehand on which day they could expect to have their
individual inquest heard. There were problems however when (as can happen
in the case of a full-scale adversarial affair) arguments over points of
law arose causing adjournments for advice or rulings. If this happens, it
can mean delays of minutes, hours or days. There is no way of avoiding
this and it does need to be anticipated by carers - what do you do when
families have travelled for their particular inquest and have to wait?

Needs of Families

Exhibits, such as models or drawings, can be valuable so that families
can identify precisely where their loved one died. At Dover, it was
important for carers to be with them as it was at this point that people
could put different pieces of stories together, perhaps for the first
time.

Some families may wish/need to sit through the complete hearing, which
at Dover lasted 3\ weeks. Consideration needs to be given to how such
families may be provided for. Even families who are there throughout
will not hear and take in all of what is said, and may need to go back
over the information at a later date.. Social workers need to take this
into account.

Conflicting Needs

What lawyers need to do in order to establish blame, and what the families
need to hear can often be very different. Ultimately, the end result may
come together, but the processof gettingthere may involve conflicts of
needs.

Similarly, a very upsetting aspect of the inquest can be if bodies are
identified as numbers, e.g. during pathologists' evidence. This makes
things easier for the pathologists but it is extremely distressing for
relatives. Thought and attention need to be given to this before coming
to the hearing.

Somefamily members may be called to give   evidence as well as to hear it,
which can be doubly difficult.Thought has to be given to    caring for
these people as witnesses and observers.

Private Rooms

In Dover, there was inadequate provision for rooms where people could
speak with their lawyers and carers in private or just take 'time out'
- protected from the public and press.   It is important for people to
have this. Families may also need a base in Sheffield, separate from the
hearing venue, where they can go.

The need for accommodation also has to be considered.

Role of Social Workers

David Wilkinson felt that the inquest was more difficult than the 'impact'
phase, with carers having to sit and listen, calmly and quietly, watching
what is happening in all quarters for long stretches of time. There was
therefore a need for adequate numbers of carers, but there has to be a
limit.

They always had present in Court three members of the Herald Assistance
Unit who were not connected with the individual family, as well as any
particular carer that a family may wish to have with them.
In advance, they tried to establish what would be the role of the Herald
Assistance Unit during the Inquest. This included:

(i)       To support families and individuals through the Inquest and
          afterwards.   (Families may not wish to leave immediately after
          the Inquest, but stay and talk to other families); and to
          provide 'time out' facilities within or near Inquest setting.

          This involved negotiating with families and individual carers
          what support they required: This ranged from meeting people
          at the station and taking them to the Unit, to holding their
          hand and comforting them when giving or hearing evidence. It
          is about responding to what the individual needs - including
          them not wanting you! (But still being available just in case).

(ii)      To respond to requests of assistance form anyone in the Inquest
          setting.

         This means that social workers have conflicting roles working
         with bereaved f&milies and survivors as well as with the
         'culprits' and 'villains'. In Dover, this particularly meant
         the crew (in Sheffield, it could mean Police, club employees,
         stewards, council employees, etc.). Some of these may be
         facing charges. They will be under extreme pressure at the
         Inquest (Witnesses can refuse to answer questions which may
         incriminate them - in Dover, no-one refused to answer questions).
         They are people who made mistakes and who deserve care and
         support if they require it. A person needs to be allocated to
         this group.

         This can be hard for the vereaved relatives to understand, and
         carers may be subjected to their anger for helping the 'culprits'.

Other Participants

All witnesses should be offered support.

Pathologists often appear blase and callous, but the one iri Dover was hurt
by the experience and was changed as a result. Who cares for them?

Who cares for the Coroner? They could not get near theirs in Dover, but
he did write a lto about it and may have had some influence on others.
(Although not ideal, the Zeebrugge inquest was-handled sensitively).

The jurors may require support after the Inquest.

Press

Another aspect of the social worker's role relates to the press. They will
be there and will focus on the most distressed people. The job of the
carers is to protect people when required. It is useful for local carers
to know the building well - e.g. knowledge of rooms, corridors and exits,
and making an ally of the janitor - in order to enable people to avoid
the press as much as possible.
                                    20



 Visiting Ground

 David felt that many people will also want to visit the place where
 their loved ones died when they come for the Inquest. This may be
 difficult to organise, so that it is dealt with sympathetically, and
 have the -press kept away. Negotiations would need to be made with the
 football club to discuss this.

 Caring for the carers

 The Inquest will also be a very stressful experience for the carers.
 Despite preparation they cannot predict what will happen, and will be
 trying to support people they have never met in some cases, not knowing
 how they will react or what they will require of them. As has been said,
 they may be treated in a hostile manner when they try to help the 'villains'.
 Thought has to be given to caring for the carers.

 Also, it is only natural that during the course of events there may be
 some things which happen or are said which are funny. Nobody can be
 serious for weeks. This can feel difficult and awkward in the circumstances,
 but despite the pain around we are all human and have to laugh.

After the Inquest

Reports

Families should be able to have access to verbatim reports of the Inquest
hearing, although a family who does not wish to attend may want the social
worker to tell it to them in his/her own words. If a family is not in
attendance, the social worker needs to pay special attention to what is
being said, or make sure the lawyer knows that you want that information,
so that if at a later date the family ask you for it, you have it. This
service has to be made available for when the family feel they need it,
even if it means the social worker taking notes and storing them.

Jurors

In Dover, a de-briefing service for jurors was offered for after the
Inquest. The Coroner agreed to this and wrote to jurors but they did not
take it up.




HTT.MH
2.2.90
QUESTIONS iSND ANSWERS - DAVID WILKINSON


Does the Inquest help the healing process?

Getting the information is very important and can help some families
move forward.

Getting the death certificate, having identification positively proven,
knowing how a person died, etc. are things that people may take away
from an Inquest which may allow them to move on. For others, it is a
resurrection of the feelings, particularly for survivors who have to
re-live the events.

How do you prepare people for the Inquest?

In Dover, they were not in a good position to prepare people. They went
into it cold - most had not previously been to an Inquest, or to a
Training Day. They did not know what to expect, and in any case, it was
not like an ordinary inquest - more 'theatrical' with large numbers of
lawyers and press.

When verdicts were given, the foreman of the jury had to read out 'Unlawful
killing' 192 times, and three crew members had to listen to it - how do
you prepare for that?

Number of workers in Court?

This has to be gauged in accordance with what is reasonable for the
families.   You must not swamp the Court with carers.

In Dover, they had permission from the Coroner to come and go as required.
He would call on them if he felt a witness needed assistance.

How did you liaise with other agencies?

There weren't any other agencies as such. The large number of people
scattered all over the country made it difficult to ensure that all had
support agencies involved. For those people outside the immediate vicinity,
it was very difficult as people forget very quickly and did not understand
the families' needs, leaving them extremely isolated.

The Dover team visited 80% of the families 'away' from the area, used
lawyers and contacted local branches of CRUSE and Social Services
Departments.

(a)       Was there provision for accommodation for families wishing to
          stay over?

(b)       Is there a role for the clergy or medics at the Inquest?

(a)       Families did wish to stay in Dover and Zeebrugge.   Whenever
          this was needed Townsend Thoresen paid the bill.

(b)       People should be allowed to have whatever support system they
          require, so clergy should certainly be available for those who
          wish to have them.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS


These recommendations have been summarised from the text of the various
contributors to the day.

In the afternoon, the participants were divided into groups to look at
reactions to the day and to plan for the future. Their contribution is
also included in the following summary.


General Observations

1.       In all the build up of the Inquests, it is vital to remember
          that the most important people there are the families.

2.       The verdicts for the families are not just a formality to be
          gone through. The outcome for them will be important.

3.       It was thought important to note that Sheffield's feelings
          around the time of the Inquest may be quite different to
          those of Liverpool.

A.       The study day was useful as a way for people to meet; exchange
          views, ideas and information.

5.       A refresher study day to be held, once the date of the Inquests
          is known.

Social Workers

1.       Social workers need to help famililes be as informed and
          prepared as possible before the Inquest re circumstances of
          death and description of body. To do this, the social workers
          need to do their homework and be as well prepared as possible.

2.       Social workers could arrange locally to attend a Coroner's
          Court for a day to help them in their work with families.

3.       There may be conflicts within families about whether or not
          to attend the Inquest. The role of carers is to help people
          do what they want to do.

A.       Numbers of carers needs to be gauged carefully. There need
         to be adequate numbers, but there has to be a limit - should
         not swamp the Court.

5.       Social workers should provide a rota cover for the Inquests.
         The role of the social worker at   the Inquest could be
         discussed by all the authorities who would provide cover
          for this rota.

6. .     The Inquest is not a place for counselling, but for support
          and clarification of what is going on.

7.       Social workers should negotiate their role/relationship with
          people, responding to what they want.
                                     23



8.         Survivors also need care and support. They are not the
           "lucky ones. "

9.         All those involved in the Inquests may need some support
            at some time. (Families, survivors, witnesses, jurors,
            Coroner, Sheffield Wednesday F.C. and council staff.)

10.        There would be a need to support the Police and other agencies
            during the Inquest. The question was raised as to whether the
            social work support for the various agencies should come from
            a different group of social workers than those working with
            the bereaved.

11.        Witnesses may be cross-examined very severely.   They will need
            support.

12.        Carers need to be supported and cared for during and after
            the Inquests, and need to prepare themselves for it.

13.        Sheffield Team should be kept informed of which social workers
            and families are likely to be attending the Inquest.

14.        Social workers from teams other than core teams often feel
            isolated and lacking in information. Could they be linked
            or adopted by core teams?

15.        Co-ordinators of core teams should take responsibility for
            disseminating information to isolated workers.

16.        As some teams may not be in existence at the time of the
            Inquests, it was considered necessary that managers needed to
            take this into account when closing teams, to ensure a
           continuation of a smooth flow of information and to help
            reduce administrative problems.

Families

1.         It was acknowledged that families need to be aware of what
            information is available to them and the importance of having
            access to this information before the Inquests. They should
            be offered the information without needing to request it. •

2.         Post mortem reports are available from the Coroner.
            Families should be offered the opportunity to see these before
            the Inquest.

3.         West Midlands Police have files on each of the deceased.
           Social workers can contact the West Midlands Police for
            information contained in the files which can then be passed
           on to families.

4.         Information should not be edited or distorted in an attempt
            to protect the feelings of the bereaved.

5.         All bereaved should have legal representation and if possible
           someone to sit with them to de-mystify and explain the
           procedure.
Families should make sure lawyers give them sufficient time
before and during the Inquest. It is important for people
to get to know their lawyer before the proceedings.

There should be 95 separate inquests to give as much
information as possible to bereaved families.

The Sheffield Medico-Legal Centre will not be big enough
for the Inquests even if low profile.

Whether or not the bereaved attend,a transcript record of
the Inquest should be made and kept, so that information is
not lost to the family and can be referred to at a later
date.

A schedule of individual inguests helps families. Carers
need to try to be prepared for the delays in the schedule.

Families may wish to attend the whole Inquest.   They need to
be catered for.

Prbvide a close-circuit T.V. for families or relatives if
they feel unable to go into the Court itself.

Telephones should be provided so that families can keep in
touch with relatives to give information and receive support.

It was stressed how necessary it would be for the deceased
to be always referred to by name during the Inquest, and never
by number.


Accommodation may need to be provided for families who need
or wish to stay in Sheffield.

Private rooms should be provided for relatives to have
'space' and privacy, and to be able to consult with lawyers.
A separate room should also be provided for witnesses for
the same reason.

Families may also need a base, separate from the Inquests.

Bereaved families may wish to visit the ground at the time
of the Inquest. Negotiations need to be made in advance.

People should be allowed the support they want, e.g. clergy,
social workers, relatives, friends, etc.
Families will be assisted by the Coroner being prepared to
listen to them, and direct information to them as well as to
lawyers.



Press be excluded from the Coroner's Court itself - maybe
watch the proceedings via closed-circuit T.V.
                                        25



    2.          The families should be protected from the Press.

    3.          Social workers to be given advice/training on dealing with
                 the press and the media. It helps for them to know the
                 building and the area.

    4.          At the Kings Cross Inquest, the families got together and
                 nominated a group of four to represent them with the press.
                These gave prepared statements to the press while the rest
                left by a back door.




    HTT.AG.MH
    2.2.90




\
                                    26



   LIST OF USEFUL ADDRESSES AND TELEPHONE NUMBERS


Name                    Address                        Telephone No.

Mr. B. Pemberton
Vice Chair



Doug Fraser             Silverman and Livermore
Steering Committee      11-13 Victoria Street
Solicitor               LIVERPOOL
                        L2 5QQ                         051 227 1871

Assistant Chief         West Midlands Polcie H.Q.
Constable Jones         Lloyd House
                        BIRMINGHAM
                        B4 6NQ

Dr. S. Popper           Medico-Legal Centre
Coroner                 WateryrStreet
                        SHEFFIELD, 3.                  0742 738721

Superintendent Taylor   West Midlands Police H.Q.
                        Lloyd House
                        BIRMINGHAM
                        B4 6NQ

Aileen Walker-Smith     c/o London Borough of Camden
Co-ordinator            Social Services Department
King's Cross            Willing House
                        356 Grays Inn Road
                        LONDON
                        WC1X 8BH                       01 837 3363

David Wilkinson         Area Manager
                        Swale Social Services Dept.
                        Divisional County Offices
                        Avenue of Remembrance
                        SITTINGBOURNE
                        Kent
                        ME10 4DD
LIST OF USEFUL ADDRESSES AND TELEPHONE NUMBERS

CORE TEAMS


Hillsborough Centre      Stanley Park
                         1 Anfield Road
                         LIVERPOOL 4                         ___
                                                             1      _____ 1
Knowsley Helpline        Staff House No* 1
                         The Connaughtons
                         Tarbuck Road
                         HUYTON
                         Merseyside
                         L36 5XW                             051 443 3549

Sefton Helpline          Marbent
                         14 Marine Terrace
                         Waterloo
                         LIVERPOOL
                         L22 5PR                             051 928 1571

Wirral Support Team      c/o Birkenhead Town Hall
                         Brandon Street
                         BIRKENHEAD                          051 647 2306 br
                         Merseyside                          051 647 7000 Ext


Sheffield
Hillsborough Task Team   c/o Hillsborough Library
                         Middlewood Road
                         SHEFFIELD, 6.




John Pilling             Family & Community Services Department
Assistant Director       Redvers House
                         Union Street
                         SHEFFIELD, 1.                   . p— -
                                                           \U   / i t s / [h r* .




 DRAFT PRESS RELEASE

Her Majesty's Coroner for South Yorkshire (West District) wishes to
announce that he has decided to have a meeting with with the legal
representatives of interested parties on        March 1990.
 The purpose of this meeting is to consider the feasability of
resuming the Inquests into the deaths of the persons who died as a
result of the tragedy at Hillsborough on 15th April 1989 for the
purposes of taking evidence of a limited nature prior to the
conclusion of the Director of Public Prosecutions enquiries.

It must be clearly understood that any evidence which were to taken
at such interim inquest would be designed to ensure that it does not
in anyway impede the ongoing investigation being undertaken by the
Director of Public Prosecution.

It is the intention of the H.M. Coroner as soon as may be practical
after the holding of the above meeting to announce whether or not
a resumption of the Inquests for the above mentioned purpose are
to take place and if the decision is to proceed the date for the
resumption of the Inquests.

Further enquiries regarding this should be addressed to:
Notes for Press Officer: (if further information required).

Additional information:

1. Location of meeting:   Medico-Legal Centre , Watery St., Sheffield.

2. Time of meeting   2.pm.

3. In addition to above matters it is anticipated that administrative
matters such as the duration of the proceeds, location etc will be
discussed.

4. Issues if any of representation will be sorted out.
                                                               ■fr
                              BRITISH                    RED   CROSS    SOCIETY
                                        SOUTH             YORKSHIRE   BRANCH
President: Dr. A. K. ADMANI                                                    COUNTY H.Q.
O.B.E., J.P., B.Sc.(Hons.)     D .T.M .& H ., F.R.C.P.                         53 CLARKEGROVE ROAD
Deputy President: LADY SCARBROUGH                                              SHEFFIELD   S10 2NH
Director: Mrs. B. GODBER                                                       Telephone: (0742) 660656 / 662962



r
     Mr S L Popper                                                             Your Reference    SLP/PAD
     H. M. Coroner
     Medico-Legal Centre                                                       Our Reference    HILL/012
     Watery Street
     Sheffield                                                                 Date     29 June 1989
     S3 7ET
L                                                              J


     Dear Mr Popper

     Re;      Hillsborough Disaster, 15 April 1969

     In response to your recent enquiry into the above event I can now confirsa
     that no BRCS faesaber was on site prior to, or as, the incident developed.

     In fact all our members indicated in the summary previously provided
     responded to our emergency callout timed 15,14 hours or on their own
     initiative after hearing a general call for medical and first aid
     assistance broadcast by the local media some time around 15.07 hours.

     The first of our individuals arrived on site within 15 minutes of the
     callout at approximately 15,25 hours, the remainder of staff who responded
     immediately to Hillsborough arrived within a fairly short time thereafter.

     Our first ambulance and crew was on site by approximately 15.45 hours but
     was not used to evacuate any casualty until 16.20 hours. Our remaining
     three ambulances involved arrived at intervals between 15.45 and 16.15
     hours.

     I trust the foregoing is the information required.                   Please do not hesitate
     to contact me for further details if necessary.

     Yours sincerely




          f* Berry   j/
          istant Branch Director (Operations)
                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                               WATERY STREET,
                                           (West District)     SHEFFIELD
                                                               S3 7ET
    STEFAN L. POPPER. LLB.,B.MED.Sci.,B.M.,B.S.,MR.CGP
                                                CORONER

                        Telephone: SHEFFIELD   (07421 738721
                                                               18th May           -jg 89

                                                               Posted 23rd May 1989.
SLP/PAD

Mrs. J. Strong,
Assistant Se c r e t a r y , ,
Principal Probate Registrar,
Principal Registry Family Division,
Somerset House,
Strand,
London,
LC2R 1LT.


Dear Mrs Strong,

With reference to our telephone conversation on 10th May, I was very
pleased indeed to learn that you would endeavour to make arrangements
for^ i-he j-amilies of the deceased to be able to administer the estates
without having to wait for the conclusion of the Inquest.     As you
will appreciace this m a y still be Quite a long way off.

I now enclose

     Sheets numbered 1 to 95 which give you the names, dates of birth
     and addresses of all the deceased whom we are aware of at che
     £>rssent t i m e .

     Would you please note that they all died on the 15th April 1989
     except for Lee Nicol (No. 95) who died on 18th April 1989.

     We have had verification of personal details by moans of a signed
     questionaire in respect of all the deceased-except for case 2 17
     30, 32 and 72.

    I have included these for the sake of completeness but it m a y be
    that we might have to write to you again should any amendments to
    name or address be required.

    Despite what I have just said I would be very grateful if you
    could let me know if you should learn of any discrepancies in
    any of these cases.

    You will notice that the list is in numerical order which is the
    way we are handling matters but I enclose for your assistance a
    photocopy of an internal list which we have prepared for our own
    use listing the people in alphabetical order in case this might
    help you.

    ^ 3-lso enclose a list of those cases where we believe people are
    related.

    Uniortunatlv I am not in a position to tell you the order in which
    Lhosa people might have died, it may be that when the investigation
    is complete we m a y be able to shed some l i g h t .on this but I am
    not particularly hopeful.
             i




                                OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                                 MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                 WATERY STREET,
                                               (West District)   SHEFFIELD
                                                                 S3 7ET
        STEFAN L. POPPER. LLB.,B.MED,Sci„B.M.,B,S„MR.CGP
                                                  CORONER

                           Telephone: SHEFFIELD (07421 738721
                                                                    18th May        1Q 89


( 2 )


M r s . J . Strong


Needless to say I confirm that I opened inquests into the deaths
of all these people and have issued Intrim Certificates of the
Fact of Death in all of these cases.

I would like to write to the bereaved relatives (or their solicitors
where we have been informed of representation) informing them of the
arrangements which you nave made regarding probate.

I would therefore be grateful if you could please let me know as
soon as possible when your administrative arrangements have been
put in place so that I can get the letter off as quickly as-possible.
Ref: Hillsbor002


Alphabetical list of names of deceased as at 20th May 1989
as a result of the disaster at Hillsborough Football Ground
Sheffield on 15th April 1989.
                    t


 * = Names not yet confirmed as correct by informant.______


 Name                             Ref No


ANDERSON    John Alfred              76
ASHCROFT    Colin Mark                9
ASPINALL    James Gary                5


BALL        Kester Roger Marcus      74
BARON       Gerard Bernard Patrick   69
BELL        Simon                    52
BENNETT     Barry Sidney             88
BENSON      David John               80
BIRTLE      David William            47
BRADY       Paul        David        84
BROOKES     Andrew Mark              50
BROWN       Carl                     46
BROWN       David Steven             10
BURKE       Henry Thomas             31
BURKETT     Peter Andrew             23


CARLILE     Paul William             73
CHAPMAN     Raymond Thomas           67
CHURCH      Gary Christopher         14
CLARK       Joseph                   25
CLARK       Paul                     58
COLLINS     Gary                     48
COPOC       Stephen Paul             71
COX         Tracey Elizabeth         19


DELANEY     James Philip             33
DEVONSIDE   Christopher Barry        17


EDWARDS     Christopher              38


FITZSIMMONS Vincent Michael          21
FOX         Thomas Steven            66
 GILHOOLEY     Jon Paul           83
 GLOVER        Barry              62
 GLOVER        Ian Thomas         37
 GODWIN        Derrick George     75


 HAMILTON     Roy Harry           12
 HAMMOND      Philip              93
 HANKIN       Eric                29
HARRISON      Gary                 3
 HARRISON     Peter Andrew        11
HARRISON      Stephen Francis    91
HAWLEY        David                8
HENNESSY      James Robert         7
HEWITSON      Paul Anthony       42
HEWITT        Carl Darren        44
HEWITT        Nicholas Michael   55
HICKS         Sarah Louise       64
HICKS         Victoria Jane      89
HORN          Gordon Rodney      59
HORROCKS      Arthur             92
HOWARD        Thomas             81
HOWARD        Thomas Anthony      1
HUGHES        Eric George        41


JONES        Christine Anne      35
JONES        Gary Philip         86
JONES        Richard             63
JOHNSTON     Alan                30 *
JOYNES       Nicholas Peter      45


KELLY       Anthony Peter        54
KELLY       Michael David        72 *


LEWIS       Carl David           85
MATHER      David William              56
MATTHEWS    Brian Christopher          22
McALLISTER Francis Joseph              26
McBRIEN               John             68
McCABE      Marian Hazel               20
McCARTHY    Joseph Daniel              27
McDONNELL Peter                        40
McGLONE     Alan                       70
McGRATH     Keith                      32 *
MURRAY        Paul Brian               16


NICOL       Lee                        95


O'NEILL    Stephen Francis             87
OWENS      Jonathon                    34


PEMBERTON William Roy                  65


RIMMER     Carl William                15
RIMMER     David George                 4
ROBERTS     Graham John                79
ROBINSON Steven Joseph                 28
ROGERS     Henry Charles               24


SEFTON     Colin Andrew Hugh William   61
SHAH       Inger                        2 *
SMITH      Paula Ann                   18
SPEARRITT Adam Edward                  94
STEELE     Philip John                 82


THOMAS     David Leonard               90
THOMPSON Patrick John                  49
THOMPSON Peter Reuben                  78
THOMPSON Stuart Paul William           53
TOOTLE     Peter Francis               39
TRAYNOR    Christopher James           60
TRAYNOR    Martin Kevin                57
TYRRELL    Kevin                       36


WAFER      Colin                       13
WHELAN     Ian    David                 6
WILD       Martin Kenneth              77
WILLIAMS Kevin Daniel                  51
WRIGHT     Graham John                 43
RELATED DECEASED




64    SARAH LOUISE HICKS         )
                                 )
89    VICTORIA JANE HICKS        )




44    CARL DARREN HEWITT         )
                                 )
55    NICHOLAS MICHAEL HEWITT    )




 1    THOMAS ANTHONY HOWARD      )




81    THOMAS HOWARD              )




 3    GARY HARRISON              )

                                 )



91   STEPHEN FRANCIS HARRISON    J




57   MARTIN KEVIN TRAYNOR        )



60   CHRISTOPHER JAMES TRAYNOR   )
RELATED DECEASED




64    SARAH LOUISE HICKS         )
                                 )
89    VICTORIA JANE HICKS        )




44    CARL DARREN HEWITT         )
                                 )
55    NICHOLAS MICHAEL HEWITT    )




 1    THOMAS ANTHONY HOWARD      )




81    THOMAS HOWARD              )




 3    GARY HARRISON              )

                                 )
                                 )
                                 )
91   STEPHEN FRANCIS HARRISON    )




57   MARTIN KEVIN TRAYNOR        )

                                 )

60   CHRISTOPHER JAMES TRAYNOR   )
    a   Date and place of birth   L iv e rp o o l            e Date and place of death                         Footbal
                                  28th F eb ru a ry   1975     1 5 th A p r i l 1989     H ills b o ro u g h    ground
    b   Name and surname of deceased                         f Occupation and usual address
                                                              S c h o o l b o y , son o f Thomas      Howard a
          Thomas       Anthony      Howard                    C hem ical pro cess w o rk e r,         and L in d a
j   c Sex         Male                                        Joan Howard
I
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
©




f       a   Date and place of birth                     e   Date and pface of death
              13th O ctober 1950             Denmark        15.4.89      H ills b o ro u c rh   F o o tb a ll   Groum
    j   b   Name and surname of deceased                f    Occupation and usual address

              In g e r   Shah                               S ecretarv
I       c Sex

        d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                   Agerup
r »   *Date and place of birth                          e Date and place of death
                                 01.01.62   Liverpool    15.4.89 H illsborough             Football   Ground
  b    Name and surname of deceased                     f   Occupation and usual address
        GARY     HARRISON

  c Sex      Male
  d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
      N/A
r#  Date and place of birth
     15th S e p t e m b e r   1950    Ormskirk
                                                 e Date and place of death
                                                 15.4.89 Hillsborough               Football   Ground
b   Name and surname of deceased                 f   Occupation and usual address
     DAVID     GEORGE      RIMMER

c Sex        Male
d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
   N/A
     >ate and place of birth                  e Date and place of death
    8.6.1969 C o lchester                     15.4.89 H illsborough              Football   Ground
b   Name and surname of deceased              f   Occupation and usual address
    COLIN M A R K A S H CR OF T                   Ga rd e n e r .____________________________

c   Sex    Male
d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
          N/A
1                    ~ ------------------------------------------ ---- — -------- 3 = ^
    ^ p D a t e and place of birth                                                      e Date and place of death
       1 1 th March 1970 W a rrin g to n                                                15.4.89 H illsborough       Football   Ground
    b    Name and surname of deceased                                        f   Occupation and usual address
        IAN DA VID WHE LAN                                                  Junior       clerk

;   c Sex        Male

    d    Maiden surname of,a woman who has married
                         N/A
I
    ©




r-gfcp=====--------------,,-------- — .. .
i       Date and place of birth
        24th     September          1959   Liverpool   'l5%'                  ft     Hillsborough
                                                                                   Football   Ground
    b   Name and surname o f deceased                  f   Occupation and usual address

        JAMES      ROBERT         HENNESSY             Plasterer
    c   Sex       Male
    d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
      N/A
r #   Date and place of birth                   e    Date and place of death
      26.1.1950            Liverpool            15.4.89        Hillsborough         Football   Groun

  b   Name and surname of deceased               f   Occupation and usual address
        D A V ID   HAWLEY                       Diesel       Fitter


  c   Sex          Male

  d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
            N/A
     Date and place of birth                      e    Date and place of death
    13-3.71      L i v e r p o o l _________      15.4.89        H illsborough        F ootball   Ground
b    Name and surname of deceased                  f   Occupation and usual address

    J AMBS   GARY      ASPINALL                   O ffice       Worker
c    Sex     Male                                 ______________________________

d            surname of a woman who has married
      N /A
     VO




     ate and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
    29.9.63 Wrexham                             15.4.89      H illsborough         F ootball   Ground
b   Name and surname of deceased                f   Occupation and usual address
    D A V ID   ST E V E N   BROWN               M achine      operator

c Sex          M a le
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
             N /A
 ©




                                                                                      teataaaiutoMiM&ta
r m     ate and place of birth                                                  e   Date and place of death
      4.5.73      Liverpool                                                     15.4.89               H illsborough F ootball            Ground
  b    Name and surname of deceased                                             f   Occupation and usual address

        PETER      ANDREW H A R R I S O N                                      Schoolboy                  son   of   John   H arrison,
  c SpT      ~    --------- ------ -----------------------------------------    a n HGV d r i v e r             & P a tric ia   M argaret
  ______ M a l e _________ _____________________________                       H arrison J
  d Maiden surname of a woman who has married                                  Liverpool
      N/A
 \7v




i« h Date and place of birth                       e Date and place of death
  22.5.1955 Liverpool                              15.4.89 Hillsborough               Football   Ground
  b    Name and surname of deceased                f   Occupation and usual address
       ROY HARRY HAMILTON                           Railway       Technician

  c    Sex M a l e
  d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
           N /A
r~QrDate and place of birth                         e Date and place of death
        5.1.1970        Liverpool                   15.4.89 H illsborough               F ootball   Ground
    b   Name and surname of deceased                 f   Occupation and usual address
          COLIN     WAFER                            Bank     C lerk

    c   Sex    M a le
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
              N /A
r if t
     ate and place of birth                        e Date and place of death
  31.12.1969 L iverpool                            15.4.89      H illsborough        F ootball   Ground
   b Name and surname of deceased                  f Occupation arid usual address
       GARY C H R IS T O P H E R    CHURCH         Joiner

   c   Sex
              -M a i.
   d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
        N /A
     Date and place of birth                    e   Date and place of death
21.2.68          Liverpool                      15.4.89       Hillsborough           Football          Ground
b Name and surname of deceased                  f   Occupation and usual address

    CARL W IL L IA M       RIMMER               V id e o    T e c h n i c i a n ____________________
    Sex
             Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
             N /A
     \ b




      )ate and place of birth                    e Date and place of death
12 Ap r i l 1 9 7 5 . S t o k e     on   Trent   15.4.89 H illsborough             Football    Ground
b Name and surname of deceased                    f Occupation and usual address
      PAUL     BR IA N     MURRAY                S choolboy, son of Anthony             John   Murray
                                                 a te le p h o n e e n g in e e r /1
c Sex        M a le
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
             N /A
©




r - J fc = = r -     —      .......       — ....................
i          Dateandplaceof birth                                        e Date and place of death
        1.4.71              Bebbington,                 Wirrall        15.4.89 Hillsborough                            Football   Ground
     b Name and surname of deceased                                     f   Occupation and usual address

        CHRISTOPHER                   BARRY     D E V O N S IDE        College            Student

I   * Sex          M a le                        !      1          '   ---------------------------------------------
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
               n/ a
#




r#-   Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
            27.6.62     Liverpool                 15.4.89 H illsborough            F ootball   Ground
 b Name and surname of deceased                   f Occupation and usual address

      PAULA ANN         SM ITH                    No   known    O ccupation

      Sex
                fe m a le
 d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                  N /A
     Date and place of birth                                        e   Date and place of death
    4 . 8 .65        W a l t o n &W e y b r i d g e , S u r r e y   15.4.89         H illsborough      Football   Ground
b   Name and surname of deceased                                    f   Occupation and usual address

    TRACEY      E L IZ A B E T H   COX                              S tu d en t
    Sex
              F e m a le
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
              N /A
    Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
    1 3 .2 .6 8 S tro o d ,    K ent             1 5 . 4 . 8 9 H illsb o r o u g h   F o o tb a ll   G round
b Name and surname of deceased                  f   Occupation and usual address
    MARIAN     HAZEL McCABE                     F a cto ry    W orker

c   Sex     Female
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
1   ^ J 5 a t e and place of birth   '                         e   Date and place of death
    .1,0.1 . 5 5 _____L i v e r p o o l                        1 5 .4.89 H illsborough              Football         Ground
     b Name and surname of deceased                             f Occupation and usual address
         V IN C E N T     M ICHAEL       F IT Z S IM M O N S   M oulding       T e c h n i c i a n ___________________

;   c ^ex        Male
    d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
;                N /A
t              —             ...................   '   L-   ^
                 .




i   T^K)ate and place of birth                                  e    Date and place of death
    19.10.50              L i v e r p o o l ___________         15.4.89        H illsborough        Football   Ground
    b Name and surname of deceased                               f   Occupation and usual address

    BR IA N      CHRI STOPHER               MATTHEWS            Financial Consultant


    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    _________ N / A
    Date and place of birth                      e Date and place of death
16.2.65        Birkenhead                       15.4.89 H illsborough               Football   Ground
b Name and surname of deceased                   f   Occupation and usual address
PETER      ANDREW BURKETT                        Insurance         clerk

c   Sex      Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
            N /A
   •ate and place of birth                      e    Date and place of death
14.2.72 H ertford            Hampshire              15.4.89 H illsborough       Football     Ground
b Name          and surname of deceased         f Occupation and usual address
HENRY CHARLES ROGERS                            Schoolboy, son of StephenC harles
 ___________________ ______________________      R o g e r s a c o m m e r c i a l m anager and
c Sex M a l e                                   V e r o n i c a Mary R o g e r s

d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
i— ^
i ^ ^ D a t e and place of birth                    e   Date and place of death
   26.2.60          Kirby                           15.4.89         H illsborough      Football   Groun
    b Name and surname of deceased                  f   Occupation and usual address

                   JOSEPH          CLARK            Fork      l i f t   truck     driver
    c Sex          m i
                  Ma l e
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                  N /A
                                                                                 -------------- v tiT ir r i-iiT in » m m n n im u u u i ih n ii rii II
     ate and place of birth                        e   Date and place of death
JLQ.1 0 . 6 1    L i v e r p o o l _________       15.4.89 H illsborough                       Football                                      Grou
b Name and surname of deceased                      f Occupation and usual address
 FRANCI S JOSEPH Mc ALLI STER                      Fireman                                                            __ __________ __

c Sex
--------------- M.a.l e ______________________ _
d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                   N /A
I
1   T ^D ate and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
       11.2.68          London                      15.4.89 H illsborough              Football   Ground
    b Name and surname of deceased                  f   Occupation and usual address
        JOSEPH     DANIEL      MCCARTHY             Student

        Sex      Male
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                 N /A
                                 -                                                                : _
       and place of birth                       e Date and place of death
    11.8.71       Liverpool                     15.4.89 H illsborough              Football   Ground
b Name and surname of deceased                  f   Occupation and usual address

    STEVEN     JOSEPH     ROBINSON              Auto     ele c tr ic ia n

c   Sex    Male

d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
           N /A
     fate and place of birth                        e Date and place of death
    26.10.55          Liverpool                     15.4.89      H illsborough F ootb all   Ground
b Name and surname of deceased                       f   Occupation and usual address

    ERIC HA N K I N                                 Male nurse

c Sex      Male                                 '   ------------ ----------
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                  N /A
n p    Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
      6.3.60       Liverpool                       15.4.89      H illsborough F ootball   Ground

  b Name and surname of deceased                   f   Occupation and usual address

      ALAN J OHNS ON                               Trainee       accountant

  c    Sex   Male

  d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                    N /A
     ►ate and place of birth                    e Date and place of death
23.3.42        Liverpool                        15.4.89 H illsborough              Football   Ground
b Name and surname of deceased                  f   Occupation and usual address

HENRY THOMAS             BURKE                  Roofing       contractor
    Sex
          Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
          N /A
       te and place of birth                       e Date and place of death
    18th September             1971   Liverpool   15.4.89 H illsborough               Football   Ground
b Name and surname of deceased                     f   Occupation and usual address
    KEITH     Mc GRATH                             A pprentice         Painter        _

c Sex              Male
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                           N /A
P i j j j p r D a t e and place of birth "™           e Date and place of death
         1.0* 1 0 . 1 9 6 9       W irrall            15.4.89 H illsborough               Football   Ground
     b Name and surname of deceased                    f   Occupation and usual address
         JAMES        PHILIP DELANEY                  C ar   assem bly       worker

         Sex          Male
     d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                   N /A
n j T w 5 5 H # i r,th5t. Helens, '"‘erseyside     e 1                             ^borough Football
                                                    G round, S h e f f i e l d ,
   b Name and surname of deceased                  f Occupation and usual address
     Jonathon OWiiJNS                               C le r ic a l O ffic er,
                                                    C h ester.               -----------------------------------
   c Sex    Male
   d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
f
j
            "=-   j
                      ...............
                       .   ft * *                   — ............»•»■’ ' «*""
                                                                                  „„......
                                                                                 w w » « w iw
                                                                                        *" *lJ|i —
                                                                                                  ...             .
                                                                                                    ~ f« -‘ *» -....
                                                                                                                       __             „
1   ^^FDate and place of birth                      e        Date and place of death
        3 November 1961, Lancaster                      15 -/4-8 9 ,                                                   Football Ground,

    b Name and surname of deceased                    f Occupation and usual address
     C h r i s t i n e Anne JONjLS                  R a d io g ra p h er, w i f e o f S tep h en J o n e s ,

    c Sex         Female
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
        A ld erso n
     Date and place of birth                     e   Date: and  ________
                                                           a n cplace      __
                                                                      of death
    19-6-1973, Liverpool                         15-'»~o9,                          Ground,
b Name and surname of deceased
                                                 f   Occupation and usual address
    Kevin TYRRELL                                    Schoolboy, son of Francis Tyrrell, a
                                                     P.S.V. Driver,________________________
c Sex Hale

d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
* ■n J a t e   and place ofbirth                  p   Date anti place of death
  10 January 1969                              15_t|_59 t Hillshorou^Ji l^QtJgll Ground,

 b Name and surname of deceased                  f Occupation and usual address
    Ian Thomas GLOVER                            S tr e e t Paver.


 c Sex H a l e

 d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                                              itH l'W u n



                                                            15 Ipfile ^ M j ceI ? M W o u g h   Football Ground,
                                                                           Sheffield,__________________________ _
b Name and surname of deceased                                  f Occupation and usual address
   Christopher EDWARDS                                         S te e lw o r k e r

c Sex
        Male
d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
*     •ateand place
       ebruary        L->§, Liverpool           15-;)-8 9 , Hiilsbaoeronu{plaC^oo^l»ail Ground,   Sheffield.

b Name and surname of deceased                                f Occupation and usual address
    Peter Francis TOOTLE                                     Labourer,
                                                             Liverpool
c Sex Male

d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
  Date and place ofbirth                                     e Date and place of death
9-2-68, Liverpool                               15-'!-89 , Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield.
b Name and surname ofdeceased                              f .Occupation and usual address
  FILTER Me DONNELL                                        R n r»lr I n   ______________________



    Sex
             Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    Mate and place of birth
    28-10-%, Liverpool                   15_it_89, Hillsborou(|ie ^od^lfafi^round, Sheffield.

b Name and surname of deceased                            f Occupation and usual address
  Eric °eorge HUGHES                                         pr   ^y p n n H vp


c Sex Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
©




r• * Date and place ofbirth                                   e Date and place ofdeath
        18-9-62, Liverpool                    15_ii_89 , Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield,
                                                               , Occupation and usual address
                                                               'pnpral   Hn-j 1 rlor*


    c   Sex       Mali
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    1-7-711 PLivefrrool                    15-L-39, iliU=b'oroDuag,an« « a ° i f f t o u n d ,    Sheffield.

b Name and surname of deceased                                 f   Occupation and usual address
Graham John WRIGHT                           Insurance Clerk, son of George Francis
 ___________ _______________________________ Wripht. I~~
 c Sex    Male

d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    Rly aj? W ceofbirthLeicester                ipril lq«*,                                u round, Sheffield.
b Name and surname of deceased                            f Occupation and usual address
Carl uarren ^ewitt                                       Apprentice Cabinet Maker, son of Michael
                                                         Marry Hewitt, a Plasterer,
c Sex      Male

d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                                            "— ••’•’TYflW.v.n.iiiu iwrmaaiiv-fH 1*1

   Date and place of birth                                                            e Date and place of death
20-9-61, Liverpool                                   l5_/f_89,
b Name and surname of deceased                                                        f Occupation and usual address
Nicholas Peter JOYNES                                                                    Industrial Engineer

c Sex     Male

d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    5 D , ^ d p , E „ ^ ;,hGreater Hanchester     iRlSSSoSoul!dfSotball “round, Sheffield.

b Name and surname of deceased                   f Occupation and usual address
  Carl BROWN                                     Student

c Sex Hale
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
V ' l




     Date and place of birth                       e Date and place of death
     6th May 1966 W e s t         Bromlch        15.^. 89- Hillsborough Football Ground,Sheffie]d]
 b Name and surname of deceased                      Occupation and usual address

     DAVID WILLIAM BIRTLE                             Heavy Goods Driver

 c Sex
          Male
 d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
a Date and place of birth                       e Date and place of death
   7th August 1966^Liverpool.                      15 .^.89 Hillsborough Football Ground
                                                              ..Sheffield*___________________
b Name and surname of deceased                  f Occupation and usual address
    GARY COLLINS

c Sex
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                                                      lft .-SAtJa   iv v * i
    Date and place ofbirth                       e Date and place of death
    4th September 1953 -Liverpool               15^4.89 gjilljpborgugh Football Ground,
b Name and surname of deceased                   f Occupation and usual address
                                                   Railway Guard -
    PATRICK JOHN THOMPSON
c Sex     Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
m   r   Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
        10 th December 1962 , Bromsgrove.           15«4«89-Hillsborough Football Ground,
                                                    __________                      Shftffiftlri.
    b   Name and surname of deceased                f Occupation and usual address
                                                      Fitter -
        ANDREW MARK BROOKES

        Sex
                 Male
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
     Date and place ofbirth                       e Date and place of death
     27th May 1973 - Southport                   1 5 . 89-Hillsborough Football Ground,Sheffie!
b    Name and surname of deceased                f   Occupation and usual address
    KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS                            Schoolboy son of JAMES STEPHEN WILLIAMS

c Sex           Male
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
        Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death   15th April I 989
         15th August 1971 - Liverpool
                                                     Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield.
    b   Name and surname of deceased                f Occupation and usual address


■                                                      Bell
    c Sex          ,
                 Male
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    Date and place ofbirth                      e Date and place of death 15th April 1989
    l6th September 1971 - Liverpool               Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield.
    Name and surname of deceased                f Occupation and usual address   Api)renticofoiner
    STUART PAUL WILLIAM THOMPSON

    Sex
               Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
;w       Date and place ofbirth                      e Date and place of death 15*4.89
         12th August 1959- Birkenhead                  Hillsborough Football uroundf Sheffield.
     b Name and surname of deceased                  f Occupation and usual address   Serving Sol di p»r
         ANTHONY PETER KELLY

         Sex
                 Male
     d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
'
— A :
         ate and place of birth                                                  15.4 .89
                                                             e Date and place of death                                     j
  5 th       March 1 9 7 3 - L e i c e s t e r ___________      Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield.
  b Name and surname of deceased                             f Ornmafinn nnrl nciml nrlrltTlH! .Q/'VlrtrtlKrtir nnn « -P
      NICHOLAS MICHAEL HEWITT                                  Michael Harry HewittJ

       Sex       Male
  d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
•       Date and place of birth                   e Date and place of death 15• 4. 89
      17th October 1969 - Liverpool               Hillsborough *ootball Ground, Sheffield.
    b Name and surname of deceased                f Occupation and usual address   Post Office Counter
         DAVID WILLIAM MATHER

    c Sex        Male
    d Maiden surname of a woman who has married

    —
r m:-'.... ............
'<       Date and place of birth                                e Date and place of death
          20-3-1972, Birkenhead                      15-'>-89, Hillsborough Football uround, Sheffield.
     b Name and surname of deceased                                Occupation and usual address
          Martin Kevin TRAYNOR                                        Apprentice Joiner.

         Sex
     d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    ^-3-^'f,!aCfioiferook, Derby                15-'i-89, HillsborougK* ^So^ai^thGround, Sheffield.

b Name and surname of deceased                                f Occupation and usual address
 Paul CLARK                                                   Armrftntice Ml pctri ci an.

c   Sex    Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                 of birth ,
                iverpool                        15-4-89, Hilfsl30?'loligftce3^^?;^all ^round, Sheffield

b Name and surname of deceased                              f Occupation and usual address
 Gordon Rodney HORN                                       No knowh occupation

c Sex
             Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    Date and place of birth                                e Date and place of death,       n   ■   _ _, , ,
     18-1-63» Birkenhead                        15 April 1909, Hillsborough F00tball ^round, Sheffield.
b Name and surname of deceased                             f Occupation and usual address
    Christopher James Traynor                              Joiner______________

    Sex   Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
     Date and placcjofbirth _
    25-3-d d , Liverpool                   15-4-89, HillsborougV^fPcA;^aile!\jround, Sheffield.

b Name and surname of deceased                             f Occupation and usual address
 Colin Andrew Flugh William S.b'FTON                           Security Officer

c Sex           Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
a Date and place of birth                        e Date and place of death    15*4.1989
    30,. 3.1962        Bury                       Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield
b Name and surname of deceased                   f Occupation and usual address
             Barry Glover                         Greengrocer
     Sex        Male
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
r-------

           a Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death    15.4.89
                5,10.1963        Liverpool
                                                         Hillsbofcough      football        ^round, Sheffield
              Name and surname of deceased               f   Occupation and usual address
                   Richard Jones                         Office Worker

           c Sex
                                  Male
           d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
Tr^fi
    arficulars 16f IHg~nniC'TCitigTequTn5troy-nitriTCgtgii«vitfit-TTicTO-»o»ja-gi.e,»1'
       a   Date and place of birth                                                       e   Date and place of death
           10.4.1970 feesside                      wo r t h                              15.4.89       H ills b o ro u g h   F o o tb a ll   Ground

      b    Name and surname of deceased                                                  f   Occupation and usual address

            SARAH      LO U ISE          HICKS                                            S tu d en t

           Sex         F em ale
      d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                                     m   / a   .     .................................
| — — —--------
i       —
                  ---------------- =a.Tg=rr-- = = 1
    a Date
    a   D   and place of birth                            e Date and place of death 15.fy.89
      18th January 1966 - Liverpool                       Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield •
    b Name and surname of deceased                        f Occupation and usual address Student
        WILLIAM ROY PEMBERTON
                                                      —
    c Sex      Male
    d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
a Date and place of birth                       e Date and place of death 15.4.89
    lAth June 1967 - Birkenhead                  Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield,
b   Name and surname of deceased                f   Occupation and usual address   Production worker
    THOMAS STEVEN FOX
c   Sex       Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
b n




a Date and place of birth                      e   Date and place of death
    29.6.1938      Birkenhead                 15.4.89       H illsborough         Football   Ground
b    Name and surname of deceased              f   Occupation and usual address

 RA YM O ND T HO MA S CHAPMAN                 Machine ^etter_______________ _ _ ____
     Sex
                 Male
d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
       N /A
a   Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
15.2.1971                                       15.4.89 H illsborough               Football   Ground
b   Name and surname of deceased                f, Occu|j>at^Qp and usual address
    JOHN M c B R I E N


c   Sex          t „
              M ale
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
     N /A
< o< \




 a Date and place of birth                      e   Date and place of death
  25*6.1921           Preston                   15»^»89* Hillsborough Football Ground
b Name and surname of deceased                  f Occupation and usual address
    Gerard Bernard Patrick Baron                    Retired Postal Worker
    Sex        Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
               N /A
                              _
!   a Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
    13.9.I960 Liverpool                           15.4.89 Hillsborough             Football   Ground

     b   Name and surname of deceased             f Occupation and usual address
    ALAN McG L O N E                              Fa ct or y Wor ker

.   c    Sex       Male
    d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
           N/A
s>




a Date and place of birth                       e Date and piacc of death
    1.8.1968      Liverpool                     15.4.89 Hillsborough Football     Ground
b   Name and surname of deceased                 f Occupation and usual address

    STEP H E N PAUL COPOC                       La n d s ca ne   aarde nsr
c Sex    ,, ,
         Ma le
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
0




a    Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
    1.3.1951 Liverpool                           15.4.89     H illsborough          F ootball   Ground
b    Name and surname of deceased                f   Occupation and usual address
M I C H A E L DAVID KELLY                        Warehouseman

     Sex         Male
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                 N /A
a   Date and place of birth                     e   Date and place of death
8.8.1969 L iverpool                             15.4.89       H illsborough      F ootball   Ground
b Name and surname of deceased                  f Occupation and usual address

 Paul     William                               Plasterer
c   Sex
                 Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
      N /A
a    Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
    2.8.1972 Ormskirk,              Lancs        1 5 . 4 . 8 9 Hillsborough         Fo ot ba ll   Ground
b    Name and surname of deceased                f   Occupation and usual address
Kester       Roger Ma rc us         Ball         Sc h o o l b o y son of Roger Char les            Ball,
                                                 a ban ker and Brenda Jean Ball
c Sex              Male
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                          N /A
 a Date and place of birth
                                              e Date and place of death
24 . 1 0 . 1 9 6 4 C i r e n c e s t e r      15.4.89 H illsborough                   Football   Ground
 b   Name and surname of deceased             f    Occupation and usual address
     DERRI CK       GEORGE       GODWIN        Accounts         clerk
                                               »     ■   1      4A   ..   «   .   .
c
  Sex       Male
d Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                       N /A
a    Date and place of birth                      e Date and place of death
    2.6.1926                                     15.4.89 H illsborough               Football   Ground
b Name and surname of deceased                    f   Occupation and usual address

    JOHN A L F R E D A N D ER SO N                Security        O fficer

     Sex          Male
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
a    Date and place of birth                     e Date and place of death
15.7.1959                   Stockport            15.4.89 H illsborough            F ootball   Ground

b Name and surname of deceased                   f Occupation and usual address
MA R T I N KEN NE T H WILD                       Printing      worker

     Sex                 Male
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
...................................... N / A
a   Date and place of birth                     e    Date and place of death
    27.4.1958            Whiston                    15.4.89      Hillsborough Football Ground
b   Name and surname of deceased                f    Occupation and usual address
    Peter Reuben Thompson                           Engineer

    Sex         Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                                                                         .... --.1        ...--—   lf|- |M   IlU | .11..-
a   Date and place of birth                     e    Date and place of death         15*4*89
    5.5*1964         Liverpool
                                                    Hillsborough Football uround, Sheffield
b   Name and surname of deceased
                                                f    Occupation and usual address

    Graham John Roberts                                Engineer (Gas Board)

C Sex       Male_______________
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
a   Date and place of birth                     e   Date and place of death        15« 4 . 8 9
20.11.1966         Liverpool                    Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield
b   Name and surname of deceased                f   Occupation and usual address

           David John Benson                            Sales Representative_______________

c ^ex      Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
a   Date and place of birth                     e   Date and place of death
          ..
    24 5 19^9                                       15*4.89 Hillsborough Football Ground
b   Name and surname of deceased                f    Occupation and usual address

    Thomas Howard                                     Chemical Process Worker

    Sex
                  Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
a   Date and place of birth                     Date and place of death
                              24.5.1973          15.4.89       Hillsborough Football Ground
b   Name and surname of deceased                Occupation and usual address

    Philip John Steele                            Schoolboy son of Leslie Maurice Steele
                                                  a Buliders Buyer and Dolores Steele
    Sex           Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
         and place of birth                             e   Date and place of death
                              25.10.1978   Merseyside
b   Name and surname of deceased                        f   Occupation and usual address
            Paul Gilhooley                                   Schoolboy son of Ronald Gilhooley a
    :3o n                                                    building worker
c Sex       Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
f t 'ate and place of birth
      23.8.1967               Bootle
                                                e   Date and place of death          .
                                                                                   15 4.89

b   Name and surname of deceased                f   Occupation and usual address

    Paul David Brady                                 Refrigeration Engineer

c   Sex
                              Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
I                                                            ■arrK PSA ’-w to fB tg

    a   Date and place of birth fyth H ay 1 9 7 0   e   Date and place of death       1 5. 4 , 8 9
                                 Liverpool
    b   Name and surname of deceased                f   Occupation and usual address
         Carl David Lewis                                Labourer

    c   Sex
              Male .
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    Date and place of birth                     e   Date and place of death
     18.12.1970               Merseyside             15.4.89
b   Name and surname of deceased                f   Occupation and usual addr

    Gary Philip Jones                                  Student
c   Sex
              Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    Date and place of birth   ^    y   1971         e   Date and place of death
                              Douglas Isle of Han       15.4.89
b   Name and surname of deceased                    f   Occupation and usual address
                                                         Student son of Kevin O'Neill, a Cable
    Stephen Francis O'Neill
                                                         Jointer's Mate
c   Sex
                     Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
!         ate and place of birth                    e         te gnd place of death
        26.4.1962         Anfield                       15
    b Name and surname of deceased                  f    Occupation and usual address
        Barry Sidney Bennett                                 Seaman

        Sex          Hale
    d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    Date and place of birth                     e    Date and place of death
    20.7.1973           Bedford                      15.*+.89
b Name and surname of deceased                  f Occupation and usual address
     Victoria Jane Hicks                            Schoolgirl daughter of Trevor Hicks a Manag;ii
                                                    Director
c Sex      Female
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    Date and place of birlh                     e    Date and place of death
          5«1965          Birkenhead                15.iu 89
b Name and surname of deceased                  f    Occupation and usual address
     David Leonard Thomas                               Joiner
    Sex
                   Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
r #     Date and place of birth                      e   Date and place of death
      6 .^ .1 9 5 8  Huyton with Roby, Liverpool.   15.*+.89
  b Name and surname of deceased                     f   Occupation and usual address
                                                         Driver
        Stephen Francis Harrison
  c Sex      Male
  d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    Date and place of birth                     e   Date and place of death
     19*1.19^8                Liverpool             15.*+.89
b Name and surname of deceased                  f   Occupation and usual address
                                                      Insurance Agent
    Arthur Horrocks
    Sex
          Mai p
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
    Date and place of birth                     e    Date and place of death                       j
    8.12.197^           Liverpool               15.^ . 8 9      Northerns General Hospital, Sheffielc
b   Name and surname of deceased                f    Occupation and usual address
    Philip Hammond                                  Schoolboy, son of Philip Hammond a Post Of! i<
                                                    Manager
    Sex          Male
d   Maiden surname of a woman who has married
+




    ' 3D
       T -^T L «pool                             e   Date and place of death

b    Name and surname of deceased                f Occupation and usual address
Adam B d w a rd S p e ^ r r i t t                    Schoolboy, son of Bdward Spearrltt, a
                                                     xagi Driver,__________________________
c Sex         ale
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
a Date and place of birth                        e   Date and place of death
    3.1.1975       Liverpool                     18.*4.89      Northern Caeneral Hospital, Sheffiel
b    Name and surname of deceased                f Occupation and usual address
                                                     Schoolboy son of Donald Alfred Nicol a
      Lee Nicol                                      FnrVrl i ft. T rn r.lf D r i v e r a n d Patrinia N ir .n l
     Sex              Male
d    Maiden surname of a woman who has married
                                                                  7 7 1s c




Points raised at Meeting with Staff at the Medico Legal Centre,

2nd April 1990,___ __________________________________________




1.   Arrange for Security on back stairs although J. Batley
     is arranging something about that.

2.   Ask Press etc to leave room on Oar Park for staff.

3.   Tell people that normal work is still carying on
     (inquests etc) during the Hillsborough Disaster Inquests.
:=+=: *   T R fi N S M I T         C O N F       I         M R T I

                    J o u. r na 1 N u .        UU i
                    Re c e ive r               0742 72b247
                    I ra n            s r ni   S11. eLr . POPPER .
                    Da t e                       31 O c t 9 0      9
                    T i T; e                   00 ’34
                                               NORM
                    D'-     '- -■*               1    p   ege




                                                                       JltMxMS
 GROUP               SOLICITOR             REPRESENTED BY                ATTENDED
                                                                         30/10/90
1 . BEREAVED         HILLSBOROUGH
                     STEERRING COM.
                     SILVERMAN & LIVER.          MR. KING        (C)           YES
                                                 MR. FRAZER      (S)           YES


2. SYP               HAMMOND SUDDARD             MISS NORCLIFFE(S)             YES




3. POLICE FED        RUSSELL JONES &             MR. HOLROYD                   YES
INCDL SMITH &        WALKER
ILLINGWORTH


4. SHEFFIELD         DAVIES ARNOLD               MR. CATCHPOLE (C)             YES
   WED. CLUB         COOPER


5. SHEFFIELD CC      KEEBLE HAWSON               MR. GREGORY       (S)         YES


6. FOOTBALL          HILL DICKENSON
SUPPORTER ASS        DAVIS CAMPBELL              PETER JACKSON     (S)         YES

7.EASTWOODS          REYNOLD PORTER
                     CHAMBERLAIN                                                NO


7 .CH. SUPT           HEPWORTH & CHADWICK         PAUL ISSACS          (C)     YES
 DUCKENFIELD                                      SOLICITOR ?


8. SUPT MURRAY       WALKER MORRIS SCOTT         MR. MANNING           (S)     YES
                      & TURNBULL



9. SUPT MARSHALL     VINCENT HALE                MR. HALE              (S)     YES



10. SUPT GREENWOOD     BARLOW LYDE & GILBERT     MR. RUSSELL           (C)     YES


11. MR. MCBRIEN                                  MRS. MCBRIEN                  YES


12 .EASTWOODS      REYNOLD PORTER
                   CHAMBERLAIN                                                  NO




                                          Page   1

                                                                             ft }
 THE INSTITUTION OF STRUCTURAL ENGINEERS
*■




     Appraisal of

     existing structures




JULY 1980


The Institution of Structural Engineers
11 U PPE R BELG RAV E STR EET, L O N D O N S W 1X 8BH
       2 Procedure




 2.1 TERMS OF REFERENCE
      Tht fust stage is the receipt in writing of a brief from the client in which he states his
      requOTments^tes for reporting and confidentiality. It is essential to find out at the
      S £ l.? .u y                   needs’.how d*tailed     “PPraisal is to be and to what use
      the results are to be put. An appraising engineer must recognize that he may be called in
      by someone who does not understand or define his problem. Thus it may fall to the
      engineer to develop his own bnef, together with the client
      Theclient will probably be inoneofthefollowingcategories, each of which may require
      a different approach to the appraisal and a different type of report:
                   government department
                • national corporation
                • local authority
                • industrialist
                • property company
                • private owner
                • corporate or private tenant
               • architect, consulting engineer or other designer
               • contractor or supplier
               • civic group
               • insurance company

 2.2 POINTS TO BE ESTABLISHED
     The engineer will need:
              • to clarify the brief and its implications with the client and to state these in
                wnting with any qualifications. This should be done before accepting the
                commission or as soon after as is practicable. The client must know clearly
                what is being done and on what he will get a report
             • to define the line of responsibility especially when making an appraisal
               jointly or on behalf of more than one party
             • to isolate and state the factors that are central to the issue as soon as
                possible and to let the client know immediately when any new problems or


              • to state in general terms how he will proceed with the appraisal and what he
                will aim to establish, and to work within         terms
             • 5 K      ?   CXtent ° f thC appralsal 3,1(1 to *»ve toe client an initial estimate

             • *° ?d™ e °" wh*ther other experts or testing houses are to be employed
                and, if so, how they are to be paid
            • to establish the time available
            • to keep the client folly infonnedofall continuing financial implications and
               to get approval o f any special expenditure (tests, scaffolding, etc.)
            • to advise the client on the need to seek legal advice
            • to reach definite conclusions and to state these clearly in a written report-
               teconunendations should be included in the report only if It has first been
              agreed with the client that these are required.

2.3 RESPONSIBILITIES .
   No engineer can avoid responsibility for his actions. However if th* Bnnr.i.in.


         -Mum him era, if hi, opinio™          I p ™ ,*                     ^       S S S


                                                  8
         The engineer should:
                 • decide whether the brief is morally and professionally acceptable; decide
                   whether to accept it, reject it or persuade the client to alter it
                 • remain objective at all times
                 • be aware of his responsibility for public safety and decide whether to report
                     factors or findings not covered by the original brief
                  • respect the reputations and feelings of others involved; in particular to
                    avoid defamation by irrelevant or derogatory statements even If this is
                    apparently in the client’s interests
                  • avoid playing too safe in the appraisal or giving undue thought to personal
                    responsibilities rather'than the client’s best interest
        A note1by Lord Justice Graham on duty of care and professional responsibility states:           1 Duty of cnc and profcutanil respon-
                                                                                                        tibtlity, Slrw runl Engineer, S1A . no. 5.
        ‘It is not possible nor appropriate. . . to define duty of care and professional                May 1979, p. 168
        responsibility in any detail. Apart from cases where there can be shown to be breach of
        contract, this is a matter largely based on the Common Law of negligence, which is
        being developed from day to day by the Courts. The following are some general
        principles of the law, as it stands at present, which may help to clarify the position in
        regard to negligence.
        Duty o f can
        The professional person has a duty, just as much as anyone else, in the particular
        circumstances to exercise reasonable care to avoid acts and omissions which can be
        reasonably foreseen to be likely to cause physical or financial Injury to persons or
        property. Negligence is failure to exercise that care.
       ^5n Pl?«fice * profession>811 or c?l,in8 whlch. by nature, demands some special
        skill, ability or experience, carries with it a duty to exercise, to a reasonable extent, the
       amount of skill, ability and experience which that practice demands. If a person
       professing to practise such a profession, art or calling fails to possess that amount of
       skill, ability and experience which is usual in that profession, art or calling or if he
       neglects to use the skill, ability and experience which he possesses or which is
       demanded or professed, he will be liable for breach of duty. This duty is owed not only
       to those parties with whom he has a contractual arrangementle.g. by whom he has been
       employed or consulted, but also to all persons who are so dolely or directly affected by
       me negligent act that they ought reasonably to have been foreseen as likely to suffer
       from that act
       Duty of care thus arises where there is such proximity between two persons that the
       negligence of one is likely to affect the other injuriously.
       Liability for damages
       Liability attaches to negligence not only where it is the sole effective cause but where it
       is also a contributory cause of an injury.
       Negligence of a professional person thus gives rise to liability under Common Law in
       tort, apart from the more obvious liability for breach of contract. Where an employee is
       negligent, both he and his employer will normally be liable. A person who has been sued
       w "eS !gence’ ^though liable himself, may in some circumstances, be able to pass on
       ms liabilty to someone else (e.g. an independent contractoror a professional man who is
       actually.responsible for the particular negligent act).
      In ail cases, it is for the courts to decide who, if anyone, is liable. The position in any
      given case will depend on the particular facts and circumstances of that case, and the
      taking of legal advice should be considered as soon as any serious question of liability
      seems likely to arise. . .
      Further information can be found in Halsbury’s Laws of England' Neelieence (Vol
      28), 3rd Edition, and 1977 Supplement.’                              *

 2.4 REPORTING
2.4.1 General considerations
      The writing of the report requires much careful.tjiought, review and redrafting The
      meaning of each sentence must be examined critically. The report will often be used by
      non-technical readers and lawyers, and it must therefore be simple and clear At the
      same time it must be technically accurate and precise, and proper weight must be given
      to interpretation. Symbols and abbreviations must be generally understod or be given
      precise meaning to avoid confusion.
     The report should be logical, have continuity and be easy to follow. The contents must
     be relevant to the brief, nothing of importance should be left out or any unnecessary
     materials included. The report must be based on factual data and should be objective in
     abroach. ^ r e s e n ^ o n s or limitations implicit in the method, technique employed
     or interpretations oTreiults should Be clearly stated.                                             /




                                                                                                                                                     f
         3 Process o f appraisal




3-1 g e n e r a l                              Q


                                                                    ---------------

                                      Sr ,d” ^ b^ ™ ^ e^ CMde cicC|8i" eer,n8jUd«ment ° n




    I ts denvationlEven if a stru^!. “ ^ 8 Am principles to rmdth°na,,y ** ?ecessary to
   code assumptions mav nn# t.      f-l* constnicted using DrB, , ^ e.assun,Pt,onsniadein
   ''n g t h a n d c L p S L T    VaLd- Cod« must,          ^     "      methods. certain
   structural layout.          annot a,,ow for the infinite S S L " " 0?8’ ** ,imited in
  I t is sometimes                                                “ Possible variations in


  “»e of o l d ^ r ^ 0- 8^ ^ t Is now c o n s i d e r mbered that ■" old code is
 combined special c a iS h o u ld ^ * avofcfcd “"less a b s o l S ^ 8^ ' ^ combined
 “ ed in calculations            ** taken ^ s^ y hcton 'Z T '* * * * ? -If]^ a' e
 Certain
 9 - * *  phenomen
            —    ...:___________          .               —
« ^ U.ationandlntJ
structure  or m e m b e r f c | E ^ oftheresu,t». for l n » 2 r un,Pt,,0,B ford
structure or



                         “          " re,y ® c™ ^ - t e r x s -




                                              h- - 5 ir :s ,

                                                     “ e joints using forces and
 moments from a simplified but reasonably accurate analysis of the building as a whole.
 It may therefore be useftil to set out a list of the calculations as envisaged and check the
 refinement of each operation against that of the others before carrying out any
 numerical work.
 When failures are investigated they are usually found to be caused by combinations of
 several factors. It is rare for failures to be attributable to shortcomings that would be
 shown up by a conventional design calculation. This should be borne in mlnH when
 planning the calculation checks.



 THE PATH OF ASSESSMENT: THE FLOW CHARTS
 Introduction
The process of appraisal is cyclical as shown in the flow charts (see Figs. 1 and 2).
Information is collected and assessed. If the result shows that the structure is adequate
the process can stop there. If inconclusive more information can be collected, assessed
more thoroughly and so on. The action required should be taken in stages, each stage
depending on the findings of the previous one.
The stages can be as given in clauses 3.2.2 to 3.2.6 below.

            Dstm# th»                                                                     1. Process o f appraisal
            Structure


                                                                    Con    n ,             Ho
                                                             th# structure b t
                                                             S . r«d«ftn*d >



      A*s#ss feress on
      structure o« o wfcots
      Q*d thotli stobilHy                       Vfl                                                 No

                                         Con forcss               No
                                    or sofsty fociort b r
                                    Vrteonikifffd /
                                                                                                         ( InvssttfOls \
                                                                                                         'othor pottibitl
                                                                                                         i cousss of j
                                                                                                         V cotlopst /
          X wi )l \
                                                    Con
                                           crttieel •l»m«nt(s)                    / P*ot#ct or >
      tonfsr dtobility of                                                           strsn g tn sn
      £ * •1* ttru itu ft                  w it» t occidental
      \ ® r p o rts ? y /                 \       fore##T >                       \ slsm snts >

                  No                                  |v#s

             actual loads on
 MCfi aiam snt on* in srt
 t tr tn y tn tij of mattrtols
                                                                            Rm i i i i i toads «
                                                                            •lamant considarsd
                                    R t o t i t u itrtfl9th(«)
        chacfc calculation          s i ta s and/or
                                    assum ptions                             He

                                                                    Do in tint
                                                              conditions justify atl                      C lw itnt it]
                                                             ['N. assumptions ^                          .o tft^ io tt j



                                            /       Art rtol                                  Con   >
                                            .conditions o t b          ot                element shod
                                                    assumed                              s. toad to   .
                                                                                          ^SjMher*
                 Ho
                                                             HO

                                                                                                                 NO

                                                       Will
 ftechecfc stability of itructur#           /     eorly yield ot
       ond/or p o rts                        element affect stability
                                            V ol ether ports y *
                                              ^S J> f structure


                                                         IHo
                                                                                      /      Are post N ,            HO
                                                                                       assum ptions too
                                                                                      NS s c onservottv#/«*

               Ho
Were refined analysts r«qu«r*d!
                                                                                    Mote refm ed analysis
                                                                                    m«y be hdiptwt
                                                                    vJ' H i l l s b o r o u g h 1 5 . 4 , 8 9
                                i n w h ic h t h e y a p p e a r i n th e e v id e n c e o f D r, F o r e s t
                                                          ^             68        -t      t i e        A (COL. * t            T /M £ £

                                                                              A lc o h o lp M l^ iim e a r r iv a l:
                     1 HOWARD THOMAS ANTHONY                                                    201451± .
                                                                                                   0 1 3 0 0 -1 4 1 0
                    ■XJHARR1SON GAR Y -  =r^ _ ................................................    0 ... ................
                                           ----                               l e s s t h a n l 0 I4 2 5 ^ I4 3 5
                  — 5-.ASHCROFT, COLIN MARK                                                     .. 0

                X ^EN N ESSY JAMES R                          ..................................................    3 5 1440 +       _
           ^=j=sg                                                                                                    6
                                                                 -                                       — .      0 1330 -   ^
-    -Vs ;          j q : BROWB DAVID STEVEN                                                                     15 1415
       _ ---------— 1 1-HARRISON-PETER-ANDREW                                                                    21 1430 ^ = :
 -                                        3-^"-                                                              ---118' '-r^- =

              = = ^ " 1 4 €HURCH GARY           -                                                                     0 1445 -
—— ~                                                                 , ., ,, .. . .                                144 1437 +

      ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ l ^ B ^ V O N S I DE^eHRXSIOHiER BARRY                                                          32        1430
          ^                                                     "                                                  0       ‘
             v . . . 19_COX TRACEY EL IZ ABETH                                                                      0       1455
         vr     i^^S O -M cC A B E MARIAN^                               '                                         0      1300 - 1410
     - .    -.^ = = 2 ^ £ 3 Z P M M B N S L K 1 H G E H ^ N IC H A E L      ^                                 .    0      1457
                                                                       ■ ■■                                     - o       G a te C -
                    ; 23 BURKETT PETER                                                                           ,9 9     G a te C ^


                                                                                                                      "fllSate^V
               ______________            DANIEL JOSEPH                                                             - 4 8 1445 +
                                         S.Jj-       ‘                                                               141 1440 +
               ^ e e e ^ 29 £JANKIN=ERIG                                                                            132 1445 _•+.
              s s = = = 3 g ^ o H N S T O ir m m =
                          H=BURKErHENRYTHOMAS,                                                                       16
                                                                                                                      0 1446 =
              ^ = ^ 3     DELANEY JAMES PHI L I P                                                                   3 8 1440 +
                                                                                                                      0 G a te C
            r —^ r - 3S^JQN ES--GHRI S TINEANN                                                                        0 1350 —
                     ^ ^ T T R R E E I f TSEVI I f ^ ^                                                                0 1320
                           GLOVER IAN THOMAS                                                                          0
            ^ = = 3 S - E D W M D S CHRI STOPHER                                                                - 0       1440
                                                                                                                .,. 0     G a te
               =^ 3 < P M c D 0 N & E L t P                                                                       172     1445     - 1500
               = = ^ 1 = H U G H E S :E R IG                                                                   . 32       G a te   C
                            HEWITSON PAUL ANTHONY                                                                  88     G a te   C "      =
                    E ^ % m iiP lH S R A H A M # E A N =                                    le s s       t h a n 10       1330     -
                      ^ H E W I T T SMREFT CARL                                             le ss
                     s 4 5 ;JONES zNICHQLAS - -                                                                      7 2 145 ^ r,..;=======
                    =fFMRJWP^BIS!ffir                                                                                83 1445 +
                   =4 £ r BIRTLErDAVID WILLIAM
                     ^ 8 r COLLINS GARY                                                                              29   1437
                    :49uTH0MPS0N PATRICK JOHN                                                                        93   1450 - 1455
                     StJ^BROOKES ANDREW                                                                              89   1455
                s^=&feWILMAMSbKEVINrj;DANIEL                                                                         56   1330
                   = 52^B E ttrC H R I5 T 0 F H E R MICHAEL (SIMON) l e s s t h a n                                  10   1450 - 1 4 5 5
                                                                                                                     78   1440
                             d e c e a s e d p e r s o h s - H i1Isb o ro u g h 1 5 .4 ,8 9
I n t h e o r d e r i n w h ic h t h e y a p p e a r i n t h e e v i d e n c e o f D r . F o r e s t
                                                        68     +
                                                                   A lc o h o l
         54K EL LY A N T H 0N Y PE TE R


                                          KEVIN                                   r : 60     1430         1440v
                                                                                      67     1430
                                                                                      55     G a te    G
             TRAYNOR                                                                  54     1430      - 1440
         6 1 5EFT0H COLIN ANDREW                                                             1400      - 1450
                                                                                             G a te    C
                                                                   le s s
         j 6 4 H IC K S _   SARAHLOUIS E
                                  m   o   m


                             STEVEN
                         RAYMOND^
                         -JOHN_______
             :BARON GERARD r :
          70-McGLQNE ALAN-
            i£9F^^G0POG?=STEPHEN PAUL
         J2JC E L L Y MICHAEL DAVID
 ^-~ f ;;:73 CARLISLE <CARLILE) PAUL; '
          74-BALL-KESIER-R0GER- MARCUS
           5-G G D w IR B
              ANDERSON JOHNALFRED



                                                                    l e s s t h a n 10           1430
                                                                                    34           1451
                                                                         . ________0.            1400
                             JS R P A U L                                            0           1450: — 1 4 5 ^ 1 s l
           34::^RA DY-PAUL-:-:                                                      13           1445 +
^ ^ = 8 B ^ E W I5 ^ A R triJ A M E & -                                                  0
                              -P H IL IP
                                       FRANCIS                                           0 1 4 5 0 — 1455
    ^ = M =BENNETT_MRRY:

                                    LEONARD,                                             48 1445
                            ^STEPHEN-                                                m       m     m


          92 HORROCKS_ARTHUR                                                        92 1445
                            P H IL IP -                             l e s s t h a n 10 1 3 3 0 -
          9 4 S P E A R R IT ADAM                                                    0 G a te C
          9 5 NICOL LEE                                                              0 1315
                                              r s c m s 1 H ill s b o jo a t lg h 1 5 . 4 . 8 9
I n t h e o r d e r i n w h ic h      y a p p e a r i n t i i ^ ^ f d i r t c e o f D r. F o r e s t
                                            64 t o

                                                                  A lc o h o l          T i» € : a r r i v a l ;
          76 ANDERSON JOHN ALFRED                                                    76 G a te
                                ;COLIH JSARK                                          0
             9 ASPINALL JAMES GARY                                                    0 1330 -
           p lIB A E S H S T E R lpD G E R = MARCUS                                   0 1454-
          69 BARON GERARD                                                             6 1315
                                             IMICHAEL (SIMON) l e s s t h a n        10 1450 -
           88 BENNETT BARRY
      £ g g BEHSOR DA V I8 J 0 H N                            . l e s s th a n       10     1430
           4 7 BIRTLE DAVID WILLIAM                                                  42       ;...7
                          PAUL                                                       13     1445
           50 BROOKES ANDREW                                                         89     1455
                          CARL                                              .        83     1445
           10 BROWN DAVID STEVEN                                                     15     1415
        131 ^BURR&HERRYTHOMAS                                                        16
           23 BURKETT PETER                                                          99     G a te
        i f S H i R H S i i i f e i » E I L E ] L PAUL                               61     M5m
           67 CHAPMAN RAYMOND                                                        91  1440
                CHURCH GARY                                                              1445 -
            25 CLARK JOSEPH                                                         177 1415
        V38-CLARK P A U L p^                                                         6? 1430
            48 COLLINS GARY                                                          29 1437 +
       I P f " COPOL                    "  STEPHEN PAUL                              49 G a t e ©
            19 COX TRACEY ELIZABETH                                                    6 1455
          V33=DELANE¥^JAMES P H IL IP                                                38 1440 +
            17 DEVONSIDE CHRISTOPHER BARRY                                           32 1430
                                                                                     1SM44K
          21 FITZSIMMONS VINCENT MICHAEL                                               0 1457
                                                                                     8 2 1440
           83 GILHOOLEY JON PAUL                                                       0 1450 - 1455
                -GLOVER: BARRY                                                      138 G a t e C
           37 GLOVER IAN THOMAS                                                        0 1430
                 GODWIN D iG i
           12 HAMILTON ROY                                                       118
               iHAMMORD P H IL IP i                                ie iiltM S u E l0
           29 HANKIN ERIC                                                 ~      132
          5 3 HARRISON GARf
           11 HARRISON PETER ANDREW                                                   21 1430
        g31sUaSRIS0NfSTEPHEN                                             .       . . 3 0
         __ 8 HAWLEY DAVID                                                                 0 1450 -      1455
            m    HERNESSY JAMES R                                                     35
           42 HEWITSON PAUL ANTHONY                                                   88 G a te C
           4 4 HEWITT DARREN GARL                                  l e s s t h a n 10
           55_HEWITT NICHOLAS M                                                        0
         H flH IC K S lS A S A H LOUISE                                                0 1355
           89 HICKS VICTORIA JANE                                                      0 1355
                 HORN W i GORDON JT                                                   55 G a t e C
          .9 2 HORROCKS ARTHUR                                                        92 1445
                 HOWARDiTHOMAS                                                        3 4 1451 +
                  HOWARDJHOMAS. ANTHONY                                               20 1451
       z 4 i 3!USHES?IMG                                                              32 G a te
            30. JOHNS TON ALAN                                                        34
           I S i p R i S i S H R i S T i R E ANN                                           0 1350
            86 JONES GARY PH IL IP                                                         0
                                                  H ills b q r o u g h 1 5 .4 .8 9
     In th e o r d e r in w h ic h th e y             e v id e n c e o f D r. f o r e s t


                                                        A lc o h o l            T im e a rriv a li
             45 JONES NICHOLAS                                             n vm
                                                        l e s s .th a ii ;10 1450
            I T IfL L f^ fH M        PETER                                 0 1450
                                                                           0
             85 LEWIS CARt JAMES                                                1437
                                                                                1230
             22 MATTHEWS BRIAN CHRISTOPHER                                 0    Gate C
                                                                           0    G a te C
             68 McBRIEN JOHN                                               0    G a te C
                       IHARIASMi                                                1300=
             27 MCCARTHY DANIEL JOSEPH                                     18   1445 *

             70 McGLONE ALAN
                                                                                1446 -
              16 MURRAY PAUL BRIAN
          = 3 5 ? H IG 0 E e L E E -;                                           1315
              34 OWENS JONATHON                                             0 G a te
       ==V isg7VO?REILLSTEPHEN FRANCIS                                      0 1450         '1455:^117^
              65 PEMBERTON W. ROY                                           0
             =15^RIHMERSARLr WILLIAM                                    144 1437
                4 RIMMER DAVID                           l e s s t h a n 10 1425 - 1435
         ilV fp R O B E R T S G ^ T                                      79vGate£^
              28 ROBINSON S . J .                                       141 1440 -
                                                                         1 3 1450 :r - r ?
              61 SEFTON COLIN ANDREW                                         1400 - 1450

                18 SMITH PAULA ANN
                                H 6a M " R
                8 2 STEELE P H I L I P JOHN                                 0    1400
^ lil^ i^ S ilH E H ^ ^ D A V IirL E O N A R D                             w m m
                49 THOMPSON PATRICK JOHN                                   93 1450 - 1455
                                         REUBEN                             0 1437 if
                53 THOMPSON S

              60 TRAYNOR C . J .                                                 1430 -

              36 TYRRELL KEVIN

               6 WHELAN IAN
             fSP&IHPM ARHR-KENNETH -
              51 WILLIAMS KEVIN DANIEL
                 WRIGHTGRAHAMSEAN ^                               th a n
                                                    Q f J t l-C oM L                     C V N T & tC T

                                                o f decease                r s o n s - H i 1 I s b o ro u g h 15>4«89                j
                        I n t h e o r d e r i n w h ic h t         a  p  p e  a r ^ 4 r l f t h e e v i d e n c e o f Dr . F o r e s t
                                                         i P a t e i : ' 64-^t o '

                                                                                                 A lc o h o l            Tim e
                                         I GODWIN D, G.
                                       IfH S R R IS S R IS A fH r
                                         I,W ILD MARTIN KENNETH
                                    ^ ^ M i ^ R i i f i S i i K S E R M a rc us
                                         5 PEMBERTON W. ROY
                                         6 WAFER COLIN
                                         7 BARON GERARD
                                l = S i l O N i S i i 8 R ! S f i S i ANN
                                         9 -KELLY MICHAEL DAVID
                             = = lft= T O O T L E P E flR
                                      l l A S H C R O F T C O L I N MARK
                                   t ^ l 2VCHURCHGARY
                                      1 3 McCABE. MARIAN                                                                       - 1410
                                        t # s p e a r r i t ad Am                                                        iSafsiii
                                    T15 WHELAN, IA N
                                     16? SMI TH^PAUliS^ ANN                                                          0
                                    J 7-MATHER D. W.           ...                                                        1230
                                     1 S 5 H A H IH G E R                                                                 13061=111111
                                     19 HAWLEY DAVID                                                                      1450 - 1455
                                    ?20IBWARD5=CHRISTOPHER                                                           0    1440
                                   —-21—Q ?N ElL L S I EPHEN FRANCIS                                                 0    1450 - 1455
                                    §2I=5E FT 0N i^L IfN ftN D R E W                                                 0    1400
--------------------------           23   OW ENSJONATHON                                                             0    G a te C
                                                                     PETER                                            m
                                                                      GARY                                            0 1330 -

                                                                      M
                                                                      REUBEN                                          0 1437
                             ^ ^ ^ L Q K S S A R A H L O U I S E                                                      0 1355

                                       1 HICKS, VICTORIA JANE
                                       f M T H E W g BRIAN CHRISTOPHER                                                0 Gate:
                                                                                                                      0 1315
                                                                PAUL
                                                              BRIAN-
                                                         KEVIN                                                        0 1320
                                    : ;.37-M gGRATH KEITH                                                               1446 -
                                        I S ^ P f R l B K P M ! ZABETH
                                   ■= 3 9 J0NES GARY PH I L I P
                                                            -THOMAS
                                      tL F IT   7 STMM 0 N S   VINCENT       MICHAEL
                                      42 STEElE P H IL IP JOHN                                       0 1400 - :
                                      43 LEWIS CARL JAMES                         _                  0     1437 +     __
                                     " 4 ^ R lM E i= lA V fD                l  e s  s     t h a n      10  1425 -  1435
                                      45 BENSON DAVID JOHN                  l e s s th a n            10 1430 +
                                      4 6 BELL CHRISTOPHER MlCHAF.L (SIMON} l  e s  s     t h a n     10   1450 — 1455
                                      47 HEWITT DARREN CARL                 l e s s t h a n 10 __ _____ _
                                                                            l e s s th a n             10 14iO V s==€i==
                                      4 9 HAMMOND P H IL IP                 l  e s s      t h a n      10 1330
                                       50 WRIGHT GRAHAM SEAN                 l e  s  s  t  h  a n i O    1330 -
                                      5 1 : BRADY PAUL                          _      -       ___  13     1445 +____
                                     '52-R0GERS"HENRY CHARLES                                       13    1450
                                      53 BROWN DAVID STEVEN                                         151415




                             y U       Q P veR           o f-         /i- u o H v L           com aH T
                              O f        H C o tH L           C o tn e H T

                             d e c e a s e d p e r s o n s - H i l l s b o r o u g h 1 5 , 4 .J t 9
    theorder         i n whi c h t h e y a p p e a r i n t h e e v i d e n c e o f D r . F o r e s t
                                 = P a g e s 64 t o 68

N u m M r^ N A M E                                                 A lc o h o l          T im e a ifliv s l
                BURKE HENRY THOMAS
                                           JOSEPH
      ^ 5 6 HOWARD THOMAS ANTHONY
      ^ l S S R f t l i 0 » i f E T E R ANDREW
           58 COLLINS GARY
               iH S R R IS O lP iflF H E R
           60;rDEVQNSIDE CHRIS TOPH ER BARRY
  :             HUGHES ERIC                                                              G a te E -
           62 HOWARD THOMAS
                                 ALAN
          J . 4 HENNESSI JAMES R
                                JAMES PHI LI P
                BIRTLE_DAVIDWILLIAM
           6 ? THOMAS DAVID LEONARD                                                      1445 *
           6 8 C O P O L ( C O P O C ) STEPHEN PAUL                                      G a te C
                                                                                    54   1430
                HORN G (GORDON)                                                     55   G a te C
          71 WILLIAMS kEVIN DANIEL                                                  56   1330        '
       - 7 2 T R A Y N O R MARTIN KEVIN                                             60   1430 - 1440
       -7 3 G A R L I S L E ( CARLILE) PAUL                                         61   1454+
           74 CLARK P A U L _                                                       67   1430___
                JONES NICHOLAS                                                      72   1456-!:
                McGLONE ALAN                                                        75   1415
                                    ALFRED
                             S = T r r = = r , _ . r ....
                            BARRY
                R 0 M R m ,a ,J ^                                                   79 G a t e
             I FOXTHOMAS STEVEN                                                     8 2 1440
           8 2 , BROWN CARL-                                                        83 1445 +
                HEWITSON J PAUL ANTHONY
           8 4 BROOKES-ANDREW                                                       89 1455
                                                                                         _________
          SPeHAPMAff-RAYMOND                                                        91 1 4 4 0 * L;
          86H0RR0CKSARTHUR                                                          92 1445
         -87THOMPSOS PATRICK JOHN
        - 8 8 BURKETT PETER                                                        99    G a te A
         w h m ! I t o i ?=r o y                                                  118             =
           90 HANKIN ERIC                                                         132    1445 +
         ^ p g l o v e r ^ barry                                                  138    G a te ; '
           92 ROBINSON S . J .                                                    141    1440
           93 RIMMER CARL WILLIAM                                                 144    1437
           94 McDONNELL P                                                         172    1445_ - 1500
           9 5 CLARK JOS E PH                                                     177    1415
                                                                                             f# A   f^ n r z.




                                                                            ■   3
  . ,                             h     '
           •      '    ' V ; . r v ;'                                     - J



    |      T H E T IM E S M O N D A Y J A N U A R Y 14 1991




                                                                                     »*•(>
               ■r . V . ; i #                                  *      *         fR
                                                     soccercTus
                                , , 7 Froro R euter in Johannesburg
                  FORTY people were trampled to      Orkney between twq o f A e coun*
                 death yesterday in a stampede to    try’s top teams, K aj^rJ^iefe and
                 escape spectators fighting at a     Orlando Pirates.
                 football match on the Rand south­      More than 50
                 west pf Johannesburg.               injured. A police spokesman said
                   <The victims, who included two    trouble erupted when Wme o f the
                 CjjiMieo^ «*re crushed as they      20.00Q spectators started arguing
                 tried to squeeze through a jammed   over the referee’s decision to allow
                 Stadium exit during a match in      a goal by Kaiser
- i~ £ .
'14-JAN-1991   14:03                MERF'OL PRESS OFFICE                                           051 777 6099                        F'.tf;




                                                                                          ■■M l                 ■



                                                                                          ccm cx




                                                                                                                    Muwtsito
                  A     SEStlOR          police
                               mm th e


                                                    FAHS’
                  o ffic e r              H ills-
                  borough inquest t h a t                                                                           •LIV ER PO O L tin* ft
                  h e beliiefved h e h a d                                                                          tthOot a n o n apldMnte, a
                  " k ille d all th o s e                                                                           L  a b— o_ u r— & i l uc fot u
                                                                                                                    j.Ij.1                       ■—
                                                                                                                                                    n-acliii l _l o r
                  fans.”                                                                                            cuuviiM m. trw. frMNHifiQ*
                                                                                                                       car Roger U iS % Said
                   ^S uperintendent Roger                                                                           Li
                                                                                                                    rw
                                                                                                                      m  .——B--B,
                                                                                                                           j
                                                                                                                           w u
                                                                                                                                  i-mr* nit r” - ^ —
                                                                                                                                     s O o ^ w n fp g l     W    lr
                   Marshall, who ordered                                                                            the number of arson
                 , the j a t w open at the
                   staddium before the trag­                                                                        attack* en tthodfa and
                   edy. described the after-                                                                        the failure to apprehend
                   math as '*nell on earth."                                                                        the culprits.




                                                    DEATHS
                 I He said in a, written                                                                               Mr Shirpl#* dOwptwt
                 : statem ent th at it took all                                                                     thara was a partteulw
                 Lthe experience he had for                                                                         problem and said the
                   lam to be able to tel! jun­                                                                      matter was taken very
                   ior officers -what to do.
                                                                                                                    Mrioualy.
                    '
                   . The statem ent, read to
                  tibe IMP#** by Cheshire'*
                  4tpuit chief constable
                                                                                                                    D riv e to a
                  Mervya Jotms, added; “1
                                                                                  •    The               were       e a * h c « v iiig
                  WHHMiMilfwfcitt-                                                                                  •TH E force’s switch to
                  faced MUceflMa, wh*                                                T bejiuyt !                    unleaded petrol has been
                  www « a * th eirtaat I                                          in otter to                       a success, the meeting
                  « m in * CMftatt state                                          ber of technical i
                  of sl*«ck.                                                      i n b a i t i i o a » to            *More than £20.000 has
                                 1 tm «M* ttft      fairly empty because          discussed awf thea                b e e n sa v e d b y , th e
                               W4MP «Htr VMiTAi     tt e > , y » m u i fia*       titered by South                  change, which was intro­
                  mim tMbmuMtttir                                                                « t Dr 5*«#i       duced last April- ■
                  tM tficscsrarti                     He a»#jh» celliastsl th e   Potter,                              And white fluctuations
                                                    attitude of some s u b -          N ett week, it I* ettee-      in petrol prices because
                                                                      tte m -                                       of the Gulf crisis are
                  * P
                  _g3jfg5f^
                                                    hat m t e men m t t try-      fflS S .S rS K H B                b«ing taken into account,

                  ssr             tlitt the
                                                    S t« « « p          tmm
                                                       Tbt inquest heard that
                                                    S*»t           Iotas! the
                                                                                  ordered the o rtn ia i of
                                                                                  the m m leaduic to tte
                                                                                  Leprtngs L m terra* * ,
                                                                                              btr in th e           IM M
                                                                                                                    » * • * » » » .« i t ,          i < ■ “ ■ • *-
                   Liverpool ead of t ie            j»6«r more than W yean
                                                                                  wummlme,               4
                  ..gtouai Must fcavt bees          atto.
14-JAN-1991    14=02                   MERPOL PRESS OFFICE                                              051 77? buyy
                                                                                                                8099          P
                                                                                                                              r a* 02
                                                                                                                                   Ui
                                                                                        ft




DAILY POST
              /nqu?sf A U hteSnsborou«h
              *0 f p r « r t ^ S l
                                                      -s evi(^ence rejected
                                                          Bv
                                                          By H               C H .. —
                                                               l c h a r r t Elias
                                                             Wchard                          He   a d rijv t-
                                                           Daily Post Staff              ignore * f o ^ y o u T ^ c o n ^ ^
              w1 ° policed                                                              at ion anythin^ BL*           <!?r-
              Dr StUe f a n ^ W ^ f rL , cof ° ner
                                                                                        M ^ h a l I h4 o SJ ! sy ;hA “ P ‘
                                                     # § i* ®
                                                     way to proceed i*VA e best
                                                     totally (org^Zh J    you
                                                                                        s«n.or officer t0 £ railed £
                                                                                        £ s ,* ? s r v ^ ,hiss^
                                                                                        video o f his £ £ 0urt and «
                                                     heard or sitn.    you have         potice w at n o « ‘ ne n 7ews by
                                                                                          But s t i m ' y ^ow n. y
                                                       We are           to start
                                                                                        S W fi a £ » r s
                                                                                        a t e H F 's i
                                                      I-
                                                     *A
                                      HfwcMrwrBe u n n e -

                               5SfS&SS».SSfiOTi-i^TL!. sa*s
          toiiililiSM                           ice does nol               .   .4-             ‘    ' ’       . ’
                            ._      q f Habbard                  (Judge Cosgrave and a jury) of At the b
                                                                 = s n r t s r s .s                 S A fia r

                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                         ' $M }


                                                                                                                                                  MSS;
                                                                 Crown,
                                               evidence at His
                                                                 LOUD    i i i s f t c i ’:
                                                                 Q U H A R S o fi^ W i.™            S     i
                                                                 tie
                                  the Jury should be directed OWenwmH ■ ■ » , -y ~ »        „ --    WAS COnflaam OW fW * • ■ . ■          •■aill*
                               that they still had to assess the London «rea «tocli <■■; - ■ ■; ■   flli ,, ..,.,   .;
                                                                 driven to Dretniscs lit tvsni..                                   *.....
                                                                                                                                      1 M L
                               flo'evidenec'Mi; t e n called by cars                                                                  i f itljat
mm         litiils?®           fti'iiftu ce t##fttradict it.                                                                             ®S:S®
                                               Appeal s6 stated pleaded p |l t | |o« * T * &        S     S    ”
                               when' allowing; the appeal of vehictes, ^as.
l lllll

                        IIS IS fB
                        Sli®
Doctors to
over death
of patient
Two doctors were yesterday
sent for trial charged with the
manslaughter o f a leukaemia
sufferer, Mic-
aged 25, and :
aged 27, wei
wrongly admimstenrig ^ Ga—
                         h-
into the spine ol        ®
Savage, aged 16, from Moul­
ton, Lincolnshire.
  He died two weeks later m
the intensive care unit at
Peterborough district hospital.
Dr Prentice, now training as a
GP in Stamford, Lincolnshire,
and D r Sullman, who is
 working sx a London nospjtai,
 were granted bail by Peter­
 borough magistrates.
                                         HAMMOND SUDDARDS                                                 027 4 7 3 7 5 4 ?
      iB -1 9 9 1   1 5 :2 1




                       , ,




 .•'RACING 29, 30
 / • CRICKET 30
  • FOOTBALL 31



                                                                                                         Enquir



                                        ■ By J ohn G oodbooy
                                                            -share                                          iPtff



  LORD Justice Taylor, whose          improvements. The League as a *'paric-and-ridc'’ facility
  report on the Hillsborough          has estimated that it will cost for people going into the
. disaster set the agenda for the     more than £600 million to centre.
  future of British football stadi­   convert grounds to allocater        Although he is well aware of
  ums, yesterday said he was          stadiums.                        the opposition of many
                4i»piK»int«f4.£ that ! Lord Taylor said he would supporters in making stadi­
  ; more dubs were-not prepared also like to see stadiums have ums al!*seater, Lord Taylor
    to share grounds.                 other sports and community pointed out that scats need not
   ■      W ith th e G overnm ent facilities, but these projects are necessarily be expensive. “I
    insisting that all first and limited “because many clubs was immensely impressed
    second division stadiums be­ are playing on cramped, 80*' with Ibrox stadium, where the
    come all-seater by 1994-5, in year-old sites’4. “This is how cheapest seats are £6,50. That
     line with Lord Taylor’s recom­ the disaster occurred at is only the cost o f what
     mendations, many clubs, at* Hillsborough, when people supporters might spend on
    ready hard-pressed ftnan* were coming late to the travelling to the ground or for
     cially, will have to find extra cramped Loppings Lane end a few drinks.”
  -money for the new facilities.       of the ground,” he said.           He said that one positive
J a f f a an interview with The          Lord Taylor accepted there result from the report had
Crimes, Lord Taylor said: were problems in building been the attention local
     "There is a lot of bleating new stadiums because o f the authorities were spending on
     about ground-sharing. Clubs restrictions on planning by safety: “In some cases, they
     would reduce by 50 per cent local authorities. “At the mo­ have been tediously and
     their costs through this ment, many clubs do not have pedantically alive to inspec­
     method. People say there is a the room to extend facilities tions. There has also been a
     long tradition against this, but for the 21st century. 1 hope the great improvement on medi­
     this is rubbish. Clubs share in planning people become more cal provision.”
     Italy, where supporters are no flexible and that it will be          Lord Taylor felt that gen­
     less partisan than in England.” possible occasionally to des­ erally the standard of behav­
     Among Football League dubs, ecrate the green belt,” he said. iour of the supporters has got
      only Charlton Athletic and          He also pointed out that on much better, although the
     Crystal Palace play at the the continent, where the incidents in Bournemouth last                         Armed andl
      same stadium, but Chariton municipal authority often season when Leeds United
 , still hope to leave Selhurst owns the ground and clubs supporters became involved
      fcarfc and return to their rent the facility for matches, in running fights, were
      previous home at The Valley. there is a complex set of "terrible”.
         Speaking a year after his services, including athletics
      final report into the Hills­ tracks, used by the commu­ • Sheffield Wednesday yes­
                                                                                                             A sf
      borough disaster. Lord Taylor nity, allowing stadiums to be terday announced that next                    By M aRCV
      said he was “surprised" that used more often*                     season they would reopen the
      the Government had cut, by          Lord Taylor cited the exam­ Leppings Lane terrace where        THE Indian cri*
      two-and-a-half per cent to 40 ple o f Mines in southern 94 Liverpool supporters died               terday spoke ouf
      per cent the tax on football France, where the football in April 1989. The terrace is              disgraceful scene*
           IS, so returning £100 mil* club's car park, on the out- being converted into an area          Trophy final, in ’
   C       1 to the game for ground ■ Skirts of the town, is even used for 2,200 seats.                  attacked Raman I
                                                                                                         and the match to

     The long arms of Ferguson’s                                                                         after a crowd riot
                                                                                                            A committee 0
                                                                                                         meet next Mond*

       M ’W r **•>****•»
                                                                           ticket                        confrontation, w |
                                                                                                         o f West Zone, «

                     By P eter Bau .                                       protest                       many bouncers ».

   BRUCE Grobbelaar and FA be restricted to “what he is. a                  B v C u v e W hitb    .
                                ^ R ^ H l i T O C T WEDNESDAY. FEBBUARY JM jg^

                                                                                                                                                     IliM?



                                                                                                                   M Jm &w




                               Iv^lWlW;      S    '



         u W c A ir w a s              S £ « r * - a                                               « »                                                   mm
         ! S r a S S i i f i n n StS I clubs’
                                       data and
                                              and the
                                                  th» Government.
                                                      Govertttom|                                  t#m» b:
                   •EdtW                        proposals iactoie;
                                                  . • New legislation to clam®
                              :bench Home
                                                   jjnsiae grwunuo wwuw                                                                               te§&$88
                                                      calculated ,on the basis of
                                                                letcentages of the                                                                       i#fj|i


                                          Eor I ‘ should be reexamined

                                                                                                                               ■




                                                       of hooligans should                             ifckets av
            a- from all                                                                                                                             ■ ■ ■ I
                                                                                 ence
     ' Jrhe offences are those orig
                                                       abouf .them is held by the
                                                              C u w v U lW v t                ^
                                                              Government ’snouW
                                                                                                                                                isfllMilli!


                      ent is looking for the
                                                                m P
§A&mwM
     \                                                                                             iipllipiif


                                                                                 .butsteady
                                                                                                          eblood of tne game” —
     I- . ! . -                                                                                         : ■H j a   'S e x tf\f\'v 4 - •Qt'

     by t h e
     •mWority.”

          Mch                                     fwareu*                                          ^
          s ws eKr ssa r x s a                        a?’cs &          “ 4s g asrh<-
                                                                                  ss
                                                                                  me                   licence to all                                .ora
                                                                                                       1 ■ - i : 1' ■                  ■ ■■•;             miSiiM
                                                                                                         The Home Office may now
                                                                                 ments ..they
          A they say: “The                                    no perso                    r.'a s       to the report.
           - iM r m    :***«*. national
                      m y                             are
     football authorities owe it to                                                                      The Home

                                                                                                                                         (c o m m itte e ’
                                                       assess :whether the s a le ,|f
                                                                                                       consideration.                              g iiiii*
            iifioafler
      more from the police — '‘to be



                                                             ill pounds.',            'J
                            p ftpolf »;|SW?ffl#              sn attending a match at a*
      •rayior report’s recommenda- ' “dry
      tlb n s fo r a ll- s e a te r s ta d ia          stro n g s
      should be modified for the                       a van and take -their                                                                 'or m ost   of
         nMitnnny nlllhc                               bOOZe. -•         1               .;
           W e s h u ttle point in foisting       b°He believed the inquest into §”                                                                IWMtSlllltls
                                          wjnha. .«h» wiitahnrmuch deaths would ..«T h e Footb

                                                                              some
                                                                                 P(AA>

          nioro¥wii«wi.».                             mswireo'away, to drink their
                                                                                                                         mm
          •&                                           ?«« W . ? i ? e . r ? s
                      h*m may be a Blue-               suggested.            • ■ .I       v.*
                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                  ,v;v ;;.^
                                                                                                                                                              sfss#
                                                                                                                                 W tWimi.
                                                                                 By              G oow boov

s / m i p        tr. %lve T;ft>rr,f. Vihcm                           b n p r o .i ' =ru-~;<. The ir;ttjp;p                   P'S S “ jM fb P l i b b b b ' p?rbb;
ppvrt            m<      »h.'         Hi!;^b<.-r-j:>£n               IwB «f'sb'"t1ev! i'V:' b Wli! -,YW?                     fo r p f p p k sp-rtp ;.otp th-r
r i h , v ? “ ■H"' ’be areo-ch for the                               m ore *bitn £ 6 ;»         n b b o n to                 pe r if f .
'rtitvT,.' p f ' B v a v t p Kvy-lyr'i p a t j i -                   t b u v r n S 'Y r r d H ICS JbbsYStf;-                       ,1          r      ■■                         ■ ■ ■■
urns, utsPtrcby m i hi -*ws Sladiums,                                                                                        thp         Cppvr>-,f;!»              (>f jnp;:;,
         .. ■      '■■.■■..;■■■■ ■'■ ■ ;                    thl't     ■•■■toid Tayf<:.f -aid he
rry,? rPtbs              vh:>0 (liJ                                         > !tl:s TO %tt i f o i i i v i f i l t e v #     tm :; gb-r-rrpr-p Lp-rb Tn pb'-
K>              -e {.nvsifids.
     w■ ,ji the Gov?i;wne>'«
irri'Ming *baf ssb firo (to-i
w p .'e y d iv is io n v u - b a r * ; ?V>
                                                                     ff     e f sports a w l £<5TSi»tiijit|
                                                                             ities, 1-iv* If'.5“^ proyxts, i f f
                                                                                 1«J •'m CiitVi K M ; ejuljii
                                                                                 p k v b ’ i :iij ri'aTttpftS, 86-
                                                                                                                             pcb^lp-d: O U 'tb r * r p r 'r new! fKP

                                                                                                                             U.-SJ        ;rv.r.-,ei-j>;.'y         « t \p r f - t V p
                                                                                                                                                                                         The
                                                                                                                                                                                             „ !




                                     !:n ? 5 ; m                     * | f - o ! a siteb b “ T h w is bti»»                  ib-tapeft ViPr .-»                                      Tbp*
)i r - p b            L-opt b p r b > b } / e c : ■                  §1            iil»iWT              CSXMHfsi      it               trb y       <ht      ■'             ;         - ba>
;                                               d.brv %'■- MjpS4«>r<>u2b,                           »'fcfP     people        r > p ;p < v T f'-;;     ' 7; ' r p                               f.
                  b r r j,j;:r- w d                    fjftS'V        J fe            iw ttr'i          ;a;e   to    ihe     ■■v.                                                r ' P.r
CrPp, !*1J <
           -Ja>
              ,.■ :<
                   ;<b-y* y>rp;                                      f'f rn }« d         u jw -'b 1                 e 'l<i        f-     b 'b rb r ”
           ?■ 'bt •*-,«                   ■ bo >>; ;?os              # > h ' ; |'=; ,„uidb‘ he i a a t                                         ■■■:. ■ ■■                            ■
  !f\ J” mis'Vi's V
                  -•h 7'bp                                              L o rd l a v M f aci’r p i t d                                                                         . ■       ;    ■■ ■.

b     . bpol Is>k>r sahb                                             wert; p rr,‘"k'"'.'i r; b u i f d i r |                 C«r-:':           >b f        pfltnbrn                  b)cal
" T ‘ rt? h a bb >-f b i r r p r g                                   neiA- i j t l r r r r . S tWCaj'ri Cif ih f              .■,.■■■                       ..     , - . ' - . - r :.          ■ .
pOpp: (:/rvjT\:j'’A,j(':V-g, ChPO                                     .■■■■■..    ' r.   ■..                          by     -vafr- . * ‘ r v rrp - rprp-;, tbr-j
* o - !Pi -ted•.!.?.? b’, 5r‘ -fr-p                                   kKr> i iij b r .r r b c r “ A". ‘ fH "*■•(>            bp'.v    bn-r:i   Y b ir n r -p   pnb
 p-rn;'           CO?'*                   r-ugh              tiiir    Tr;eri?,           cb.br df- ' O i !u --f              prpp-; r-j-b ^ - i b i r i'J iprjpp.;--
 rnrP', ' rb          P;A;'V          Hit                    -5 t!    t h f Trior*' r" exrrn b           ’b ‘;<"5             f;t-'tr   l-r.rtp ’r ;i s h e b ; r n if
 :-r.s            f.; . o n         -SOrrr'      h e p        t.O     for b'<? * 1r* r p r u r r p I hc-pn :b;i-                               ■■■                     -
 -r>r ;> H j p b . s h                           r s -p r?     in     Jbfsnnr'b r-r'                              ;r-r>       iib ' r p i : jlP P ."                   ;
    b y . »*herp s t jp p y r Y f r  to                               f ip if o b sirp iPSP i: w ib k
                                                                                                                                   Ir r'J       T a y lo r ftfh biat gprt-                            ’
 0-hpp»-bsP'i th <o ■!:                                               pos*.b)4; r 4, r ;r:rr !Y P b to d a -
 ■' :'r '>r;g P rrp h tib Lprip.e rluO'y                              evr&if ibp :p-              :*-rPp’ h;; r,:,; ,1
                                                                                                                                              ■ r-rr.:':-.'
 r .-;. C h i d l v m bpb’i ’J.C 8r-M                                      H i Pb-f p r p r r J                ;!«!. or<      -*r--b» !;^ U e r : a lib rrjg ri -she
 Cirrs-tb             P;tP«;:P         p!«>>          Pt      tby                                     r ' * ; rp     the
                                                                                                                              int. befits if; oowi H.a m\ i1 M ta o
     •     .       -          ■■■     ’     ■                         ffiiiPiCppY P r l P r r             p       c lttr
                                                                                                                              Pfesr.ft trli-er; I.,eec« Onit.-.-d
 v'*           b,.«:      to         bfa-.i                           p'-rps            e r r je r b i : r j r'.,p s
                                                                                                                              ryp-poners i w i m f t r .M b v f d
 ppp, i r d         r p M r 'l   lA thibi                             rprq *<• p p o b ’ j for mat-:bci.
 ;pr I ..v;.-. h{.i~r ■■ r- T h t VpPpr                               lb::t€ i1. P r-r>rvprb: % «: l iff
                                                                                                                              Jit'
                                                                                                                              r K : n ^ b x '
   S ;V -r r:- V r ,e,i« 3 *b';                                       SeiY -ip *. " r P u b i r | ?b-.:rr rrp
 y_..i f.-r.i-if!              |bi: H ' " i                            f/arP r, ;-.^p p j •>,=. .-:rr r-'., ■                 I  r h e b b i d w e d re o b p ,' Vrp.
               -yb ■: ..<o           " f -r-~-y •■; '•:■;•             rb ;, ftbr r ' r p -rf b ^ r ; rv                                 p t ' n r r n r y b btat o c r t
               pr ' « !                              . i"       I       ; w p :;-:,-.rr ".f’.-'i                              p;;ptrp : h i ;           M •moran the
 ib:; PPrr-.                    --                          .i “ ■         br.-P T , r : .........r-p ; r ;> prp-n-           bc pp .T-ir L a t’ P ’'ttPop-1' v-'hsre
 "                                   pr          ■           ■ -■              . : \ ' i -- -        , r ‘i p r ' b r r -     b4 bi!--r:*rrpr: -p;J-.pp;-(yrj d ie d
 p,~t                  i V- I , '                                     f                                                            %pn' Ib p rr J P p tyrrape 5$
 py-b •                ‘ t;                ^     ■ -' r.                                       p r ;b     or, b"-f r>.p.      h f - r s y ii r A s '- .f i in to a n arpa
                                                                                                                                     *T r.vr         *
                                            -' f o e * s H i £ £           fto s -r


                                                        13    -                   -




THE poUcenian ;to overall               open once allowing some fans                  trol box, to say it was a football
charge at the -.Hllsborottgli           in s id e , b u t t h a t s itu a tio n       ground with probably 50,000
football stadium said yesterday.        a p p e a r e d to h a v e b e e n            people in it, we talk about noise,
that “the world stopped” when           retrieved, he said.             .             but to use the well-worn phrase,
he was asked to drop a tried and          Then Supt Roger Marshall                    you could hear a pin drop.
tested: operational plan and            called up on the radio from                      “The atmosphere was elec­
o p e n -g a te s le a d in g to th e   outside the ground and asked                  tric. I was asked to make that
terraces           •■                   for the gate to be opened.                    decision and it seemed as
   Ch Supt David Duckenfield               “My understanding is that he               th o u g h th e w o rld h a d
said a senior officer outside the       made one request and this                     stopped.” ,
ground told him by radio: “If           request was quite a shocking
you don’t open the gates,               experience,” . said 46-year-old                  Mr Duckenfield, who was
s o m e o n e is g o in g to g e t      Mr Duckenfield.                               promoted to his rank only 19
                                           Mr Marshall told him: “If you               days before the disaster on
killed.” -         ■         ,                                                         April 15,1989, told the inquest
   The request was a shocking           don’t open the gates, someone
                                        is going to get killed”, he said,              at Sheffield Town Hall that it
experience, he said.                                                                   was the first time he had been
   He was giving evidence on            adding: ‘‘Really, to accede to h is,
the 68th day of the inquest into        request to open the gates would                in control of such a major event
 the deaths of 95 fans who              d e fe a t e v e r y th in g we h ad           at the football stadium.
flooded into the Sheffield Wed­         planned in our Operational                       But he went on: “I was given
 nesday stadium at the start of         Order not to allow people in                   to understand that the plan­
                                        who had been drinking, or who                  ning was well laid. The team
Liverpool and Nottingham For­           might be carrying offensive                    doing it knew w hat they were
est in 1989.                            weapons.                                       doing.”
 . The,, gate had already burst            “The atmosphere in the con­                   The hearing continues.            ‘Atmosphere electric
                 i




          ^ T H E INDEPENDENT

THE POLICEMAN in overall                                                                                                                             He had earlier considered
charge at the Hillsborough foot­                                                                                                                  postponing the kick-off, he said,
ball disaster said yesterday at the                                                                                                               but he had been under the impres­
inquest into the deaths of 95 fans                                                                                                                sion the players were already go­
that “the world stopped” when he      going to get killed.” The request flooded into the Sheffield               Supt Roger Marshall then         ing on to the pitch.
was asked to drop a tried and         was “a shocking experience”, he ' Wednesday stadium at the start of     called on the radio from outside       “You can imagine, whatever
tested operational plan and open      said.                               the FA Cup semi-final between       the ground and asked for the gate   plans you might have, whatever
gates leading to the terraces.           He was giving evidence on the Uverpool and Nottingham Forest.        to be opened.                       policy you might have, if it means
   Chief Supt David Duckenfield       68th day of the inquest into the - . The gate 'had,already “barat          “My understanding is that he     saving lives and preventing inju­
said a senior officer outside the     deaths of the fans, crushed against open” once allowing some fans in­   made one request and this request   ries, you do your level best to save
ground' told Mm. by radio: “If you    safety fencing on the Leppings - side, but that situation'aglWfwt       was quite a shocking experience,”   lives, so I gave the order to open
don’t open the gates, someone is      Lane terraces by thousands who to have been retrieved, he said.         Mr Duckenfield said.                the gates,” Mr Duckenfield said.
                                        \i_N

                                        i"3> - a *             .




                                                                                    “You do your best to save li ,^ ,
                                                                                 so I gave the order to open the
A POLICE chief told yesterday                                                    gates, he told the Sheffield inquest.
how “his w orld stopped” as he                                                   A mass of supporters surged
                                                                                 through, crushing other fans to
to o k th e decision th a t has since                                            death in pens on the terraces.
been blam ed fo r causing th e
Hillsborough soccer disaster.                                                      He said the request to open the
   C hief Superintendent David                                                   Leppings Lane entrance came from
Duckenfield spoke of his “shocking                                               Superintendent Roger Marshall
experience” in the moments before                                                after a 10-minute radio breakdown.
95 fens were killed two years ago.                                                 Mr    D uckenfield,      who
   “If you don’t open the gates,
someone is going to get killed, “ a     people Inside the ground who had
colleague screamed down the radio       been drinking or who might be car­
at him as crowds built up outside       rying offensive weapons.
the Sheffield Wednesday ground.            “I was, standing there, asked to
   “The atmosphere in the control       make that decision and it seemed
box was electric,” said Mr Ducken­      the world had stopped,” added the
field.                                  father-of-two, who was breaking
   “I knew that if I acceded to his     his silence to describe the scene, “ft   opeoeu -— on Ms ordeis.
request it would defeat everything      was totally outside my police expe­
we had planned for — not to allow       rience or training.                        The tearing continues
Foiice cmet oraerea
   open ‘to save
THE POLICEMAN in overall charge at the Hillsbor­
ough football stadium said yesterday that “the world
stopped” when he was asked to drop a tried and tested
operational plan and open gates. Chief Supt David
Duckenfield said a senior officer told him: “ If you don’t
open th e gates, som eone is going to get k illed .”
   The request was “a shocking >      ----     —-----         ~
experience” , he said giving
evidence on the 68th day of the
inquest into 95 fans who died
on the Leppings Lane terraces
at the start of the FA Cup semi­
final.
   The gate had already “burst               -T H E                 ' I euE6r£A fV \
open” once allowing some fans
in sid e , b u t th a t s itu a tio n
a p p e a re d to h a v e b e e n                       I 2 b ~ =b ' ^   I   .
retrieved, he said. Then Supt
Roger Marshall called up on
the radio from outside the
ground and asked for the gate
to be opened.
   M r D u c k e n fie ld ad d e d :
 “ R eally, to accede to h is
re q u e st to open th e gates
would defeat everything we
 had planned in our Operational
Order not to allow people in
 who had been drinking, or who
 might be carrying offensive
 weapons.
    “ I stood there thinking about
 the enormity of that situation,
 thinking if I did not open the
 gates people were going to get
 killed.
    “The atmosphere in the con­
 trol box . . . to use the well-
 worn phrase, you could hear a
 pin drop. I was asked to make
 that decision and it seemed as
 th o u g h th e w o rld had
 stopped.”
    A colleague in the control
 room, Supt M urray, asked:
 “ M r D uckenfield, are you
 going to open the gates?”
    M r D uckenfield to ld th e
 inquest: “ You can imagine,
 w h atev er p lan s you m ight
 have, w h atev er policy you
 might have, if it means saving
 lives and preventing injuries,
 you do your level best to save
 lives so I gave the order to
 open the gates.”
    He said that earlier he had
 co n sid ered postpo ning th e
 kick-off but was under the
 im pression th at the players
 were going on to the pitch and
 it was too late to do so.
    M r Duckenfield, who was
 promoted to his rank only 19
 days before the disaster on
 April 15,1989, told the inquest
  at Sheffield Town Hall that it
  was the first time he had been
  in control of such a major event
  at the football stadium. He had
  inherited the operational order
  issu ed to deal w ith m ajor
  events.
    But he went on: “ I W£s given
  to understand that the plan­
  ning was well laid. The team
  doing it knew what they were
  doing. It was aftried and tested
  plan.”
     He added: “Please do not
  think I am moving any respon­
  sibility away from me, but I
  was told it was a tried and

1 to say it should not be changed
  forchange’s sake.” ^        ^
    T      -iquest wa
                     jjsfe.,,,.,,,
                     ll||?%18l
                                            «
      ,, , ••        -I              »•   , ’,   ,m>    -.
me. Where the        Regina vEmmerson                  , . •■*       the Registrar of Criminal Ap- i request as improper, and - not nave fee tapepeither siaeofv<


balancfctteiiil^                                                     fy m o w J ifs m e                       s 1reqae$^:m i^t|paw !#taw ^tertim ^thejiiryshoiildte:|l

                                    _
                         ithi4hemSoa$>r^iremeat:Atape;          with “one-armed ban- “ not entitled to take the tape to 2 If only part of the tape had
  hand, there ■was <recordings:«intememrwMch|vats”. He had been interviewed the jury room.                                - been played in open court, and.
’•est in the admin. • ’’had been, given.in evidence^. tow*- times by police a b o u t T h e tape.was the evidence...’-the jury had a transcript of the .
tiaiftfeiensiiring ' Where necessary those sBotidS w o * y mming.tern?mactanes«WheartwasproducedltBecawesfwholH'therc^was/no;Kasoa why .
o & W evidence.- be edited to renmve anypart o £ ft» bad, serviced and had made - theexhibit;There^no/feasoir3 theajuiy^houldS;aQti.take, the:: ";.
 the disclosure o f -the interview which had not aduuMmis, A t«his tnal he why the jury should: laot teke i t f whole tape. ’
 iEftfemoak€thelSbeen?«hfeairiieMdence.          •-     denied then.          ■        ■ with-them.'in.- the: same way:.asi; Slfoidypaatlhaooeenplayeaa.;:-;^1
rt of the public ’’ The Court of Appeal, Crim- ’ At the conclusion of the ' any otherexhitat. ,                         • open court and th e jw o 'h ^ no
io suchconsid- - mal Division so held in applying-; judge's summing up, counsel for . It could,not be^nght j»:axgu$;s-^s<M pw the                           .
d '^ .t aMl&stant the proviso in section 2( I) of (he's the appellant had asked that the ^A attheyM uldnothave thetape.:, etbted, so that              ®£! .
        mm             ,         Appeal. Act 1968 and a jurybeprovidedwitfcthejtapeof£■'because' .if:;had;,alreadja<been.y:Jake,any evidence .thathad.not
vas anoSrer and f rejecting. tfae«appeal.o f G eofil^Sf the^secoi^lirtem ew p*-during# played In court.             •   • ’ beengiven..   .
it/pttbliatetefest, Em m ersottsigaiostaK iSicA nvi^                      officer h a d ’ . The judge’s error was an 4 There w asB a advantage and
public mfkst in-' tion on December, 15, 1988 in ^ken-inaiiasedvoicoandhad&«ri«gulan^bttt:;%tt5te d sta p s* M m e ^ d w ta g e .tt^ M e in -
fidentialfly as be- ',u,Newcastle upon* Tyne Crown' (worn at,th e appellant, v .. v,;t 4- doubted whether it was a ma- ' bhng the court to enable the jury

f increased::when which he was s e n t e n c e d i ^ s ^ ) ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Up:,-             fa their LordsMpVview^the                                  ^
n in question had months • imprisonment sus»* t^unsei:1 ;naa
                                                           nad mamtainea
                                                                mamtamed cot^r^
                                                                            r ^ " posiuon wasaswiiuws^
                                                                                                 ***tmiftws-.-          *-      -
d by a public . pended. for two.tyears on each im ly.. that" the? tape wasSthe® l :t t :all£6&the»tapfe'hadibeen- only cause inconwmence.
uagsg.,compulsory _ count concurrently. ■■-- .. originalevidenc&'Thefudgehaa.‘t'played::ih'-open court there was       Sohcitorsr' CPS, Newcastle
numerous organs ' Mr James                  by , not agreed, describing counsel’s '" no roson why the j u ^ o u l d . upon Tyne. ^           ■

S S S Expenses allowable in                                                                                Sale effected before
       confiscation order
iments from the.
t„ It it were ,used
igency --given .-the
n it no great harm -R egina v Comiskey                               lant the benefit'of “any doubt
                                                                                                           knowledge of theft
                                                                                                      Regina ? W heeler           ’ •      j stolen property..-»The- appellant-.-*
                     rB efen t-M A -Ju stk * % t ^                                                    Befbrev' t t r f ;?!Justice-wS ttial^ told,himr.it;,was- not and.the;:
mationlobtMnedMSmith,^Mr•Justice Tuc& rand;;rtotal amount -that? hadsbeen r smith, -Mr- Justice^Tucto and * cJJstomer handed.over..the.£150,.
thfrIiilrad,Rw.,;:MrJustice:Tumer            imported a t S 2 5 O , 0 0 f c - M r Ju sfeT u m er  f                                      * ■
(S       ^   ^       S=-pUdgme n tNbWfflber291           '                                                November30]       ,
 gathered together® In determining the amount o f a / a matter of commonsense th a t'1Where* a rdefendant innocently-:, the contract for sale of the medal
e .freedom, of the® confiscation,-Korder against; a t th e ,- amount ■-•-■that.-might ••be**’'in possession; of a stolenvobject^was an., unconditional ..contract ,r--
uld tjp gravely at < m w te d .d jw |^ ^ c te ^ n d e i5 ;i realised:muse.be,less .than?-the#ha^ 9 agi^,;;sta.tsell 2 lt^to®a»|:for ttesateofspecilicgoods k a , - -
ssieriajfcprivateT                           ««          ., . . .             .            ..» — —*          « »_                        *■*'                  *
«s, ,th^ M lgeii,:ofi
i state,
tp>
tial :i              iiaEDivisii
 ublic
 n: under compul*      ......                                          Some'assistance could be       was stolen,iproperQr but dis-             Although^the:S. ^ l l a n t ;had
i-V'inviolate, and   order made:by>Judge,.Balston atw
                                                                 :   S S & fsau B lss£ . ^ S ^ S S C Z                                      r


aubHc intemts^v .^ .^ v o ^ ^ .               —-------- - ucrauusm s tuc aiuuiui V« Uic ,      , , > . .      • .
 hould be at least • imj»rtmr-and;*:twot:,;CTOnts-of|,onl^ m s .ftsie-,actoai*property#:f°“ ^ “ ^ .“ ^ ^ - P ™ ^
rotect the public -possessing cannabis. He was heid by..thfcdefendant:.or,*yvfc^K^^5^ ^ i " ^ . ,r
       from abuser.-,sentenced to three years j^rson.to-whom hehadgivenit;*.-
ttiprotectiiig£the#:iinprisonment,. with three-years.;-;:..^...There was no evidence one,               ft“ a
 in the exercise of : consecutive in . defeult,;. of. t h e , „ flYer the.other’vhe**- -'*;. •            '
                   - confiscatioaorder.           1           the'appellant har>
iterestdemanded • m , Michael B ow ’                    '          dpropeir                       w.'in
                                                                             /
                                                                                26 March                 91



Our Ref:           SIP/LPL

M r D P u rc h o n
D i r e c t o r o f E n v ir o n m e n t a l H e a l t h
Town H a l l Chambers
SHEFFIELD
SI


D e a r D a v id

I r e f e r t o o u r t e l e p h o n e c o n v e r s a t i o n o f t o d a y i n w h ic h I I n d i c a t e d
t o y o u t h a t I w o u ld l i k e L i n d a L o c k e t t , who has been rny t e m p o r a r y
s e c r e t a r y a t t h e Town H a l l c o p in g w i t h t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h p a p e r w o r k ,
t o r e t u r n f o r a f u r t h e r p e r i o d o f 2 / 3 w eeks i n May i n o r d e r t o s o r t
o u t and t i d y up e t c . t h e v e r y l a r g e v o lu m e o f c o r r e s p o n d e n c e and
o t h e r d o c u m e n ts w h ic h h a v e a c c u m m u la te d o v e r tw o y e a r s and w h ic h
a re in a t e r r i b l e s t a t e .       I f e e l i t i s e s s e n t i a l t h a t t h e p a p e rw o rk
s h o u ld b e t i d i e d p r o p e r l y , f i l e d and c r o s s - i n d e x e d so t h a t o o t o n l y
I b u t o t h e r s w i l l be a b l e t o f i n d t h e i r way a ro u n d i t a s , w h e t h e r
we l i k e i t o r n o t , t h e s e i n q u e s t s a r e l i k e l y t o o c c u p y p e o p le f o r
some t i m e t o com e.

I was p le a s e d t h a t y o u c o n f ir m e d y o u w o u ld h a v e no o b j e c t i o n       to   th e
a p p r o p r i a t e a r r a n g e m e n t s b e in g m ad e.

Y o u rs s i n c e r e l y




S L POPPER
H M C o ro n e r
26 FEBRUARY 1991


Visited ground. Jury separate, myself, Mr Beach, Lawyers and others more
or less separate groups. Viewed terraces, West Stand, Press Box.

Climbed up to Mr Mottson's vantage point, viewed Police Control Box and
Club Room, monitors were on.

Requested by Mr Isaacs if I would go and join the Kegal Representatives
in photo for their mementos. No objection taken, those present included
Mr King and therefore agreed.
                                                                          T9 February                91



O ur R e f :     S L P /L L

Your R e f:      R S /J K /Z E E 8 R U 6 6 E INQUEST


M rs J K e r n e y




D e a r J o h n n ie



T h a n k y o u v e r y much f o r s e n d in g me a c o p y o f M r J u s t i c e T u r n e r ' s
ru lin g s .    I h a v e s t a r t e d t o t r y t o d i g e s t then* b u t t h e y a r e n o t
th a t easy!

W ould y o u a l s o p l e a s e c o n v e y   v e ry s p e c ia l   th a n k s t o Mr S t u r t
f o r t h i s and a ls o f o r h is c o n t in u in g h e l p .

Y o u rs s i n c e r e l y




S L POPPER
H M C o ro n e r
                                                      19 February   91

Our Ref:   SIP/U

ClIr M Chase
Chairman
Hillsborough Working Party
Chief Executive Office
Room 5, Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
LIVERPOOL
L69 2DH

Dear Sir
Thank you for your letter dated   14   February   1991.

Apart from being somewhat surprised that I should receive a letter
from you dealing with correspondence which I had with a first of
solicitors* I do not wish to add &nyjEh1ng to what I have already
said in the early part of December 1 9 9 0 .
Yours faithfully




S L POPPER
H M Coroner
FURNIVAL HOUSE                  T E L :0742731483                 14 Feb 91          1 6 : 1 2 No. 0 0 5 P. 01

FURNIVflL H O U S E             T E L :0742731483                  14 Feb 91         1 6 : 1 9 N o . 0 0 6 P . 01
     19/02    91   09:18   FAX 0742 726247        MEDICO LGL CNTER                                          0001
                   non     F*y 07J2 72R2i7_______ MEDICO LGL CNTER                                          0001
    ______ 1                                   _________________ Hillsborough Working
                                                  .               Chief Executives Office,

     L IV E R P O O L L                                          Municipal Buildings f
                                                                  Dale street,
     Om
      i O**                Si                                    LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
     V > v f4 4                                                  Telephone: 0 5 1 -2 2 5 2334/3
         /                           *-------------               Fax: 236 2047
    ____________________                              ■           DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                                 Your ref

                                                                 Our ref

                                                                 Date 14th F e b r u a r y 1991.

       Dr. S. L. Popper,
       Coroner;"-... •  ~ "•--                            ....    ... . ..       ........
       South Yorkshire (West) District,
       Watery Street,
       SHEFFIELD
       S3 7ET.


       Dear Dr. Popper,

       This Hillsborough Working Party wishes to express its concern and dismay
       at your refusal to place the Football Supporter’s Association's written
       submission, of December 3rd 1990, before the Hillsborough jury as they
       so requested.

      That submission or ’letter' presented by the FSA remains in our view,
      a credible, considered and broadly based synthesis of legitimate
      evidence.

      That football supporters in attendance at Hillsborough remain legally
      unrepresented at the Inquests is, of course, something you have no
      influence over. But as fans giving evidence continue to appear in
      isolation the one organisation that can best reflect their experiences,
      concerns and interests has, effectively, been denied an input by
      virtue of your decision on the FSAs submission.

      As a written    submission is th'e only means of-representing the views o£_.__
      the FSA your    position on this matter is both perplexing and disturbing.
      Accordingly,    on behalf of the Working Party, I express unease at your'
      decision and    the lack of any noteworthy explanation in your reply to
      the FSA.

      Yours faithfully,




      Cllr. H. Chase,
      Chair H.W.P.




                                                                    r   N U C L E A R FREE
                                                 23 January     91


OUr Ref:        SLP/LL
Your Ref:       LML/RH


Mr L M Lomax
Sheffield City Polytechnic
Pond Street
SHEFFIELD
SI 1WB

Dear Mr Lomax
Thank you for your letter of 17 January 1991,
There are hundreds, if not thousands of pages of transcripts, and it
Is quite Impossible for me to sift through these, even if I wished
to, in order to select references to Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.
In any event it would not be practical for anyone to attempt to do
this whilst the Inquests are in progress.
Whether or not the format of the Inquest and the evidence which we
are looking at actually would help you in your research, I am
somewhat doubtful, except possibly in a very minor way, but this is
obviously a matter for you.
I am sorry I cannot help you any further at the present time.
Yours sincerely



S L POPPER
H M Coroner
                                                       '■ ”-j.-   .                                          -
                                                           - -        ■ "   ‘       ■ ■ ■ ■ . ■ ■ . '■■■ ■       -■



            7 r7 -       7 7 -7    ..---




                                                                                                                                                                                             7-"-- .
                                                                                                                                                                                           - O : ' ~

                                                                                                                                                                                             ”         7
;.
                      Our re f':                                                                                                               7-droi o F7o.ndaI         Fond Street         '
                                                   7V777H
                                                                                                                                               S o d o ? o?J 'Li>,-      Sheffield SI 1WB ' ■ '
                     ■D a t e - :
                                                                                                                                                                         IH cpkm c 0742 720911
                                                                                                                                                                         Direct Ike 0742 533728
                                                                                                                                                                         Fas 0742 533726        ^
                                                                                                                                                                         K e s 54680 SHPOLYG;;
                                                                                                                                                                         Dki-ctor
                                                                                                                                                                         K H arrm n BA

                 ■.'The-Cof.--  r ’                                                     oo
                  Medi.c o
                  Wa.tory 7';o:err
                  S h e ffie ld 7




 ..     ■
D
                     770 r S i r
      --/                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                    .

                     I      rr                                        j         '                                ■    -    .
                                                                                                                               ■   --r-i-'ie r:         -7 .i lythermic, and am
                     &7,o o 0 0 7 ; o :O o                :                                  .. . .
                                                                                                                                              -0 7 'e      dooroo i n t o ' P a s t
                     7 7 o 7 ; ; r r : .7 :       7 7 .o o :..;. 7                             oo77/; ;- ^ 7'y"                         ; ;y 57777.07 r e f e r s f o r tier. Law o f          '
                     rO to; , 1 o                   “ i ;.*e -
                                                                                                                               ' C;v:: -: :: ■ :f 7’ciit 7 o eesfo .l I f you would            r
                     irr::-;rlv r                                                                                     --
                                                                                                                                   " : : 7rr.o ;ro ;e .irfo m a -o io r regarding--7 .
                     77-, 7 7.’                        ::                                                             •:                     - ' - ' “- f s or 00.0 E l i I s borough.      '77
                 =;] ;;     5:    -^ "'                           v;'1-'--:.:-' :                       f. -i-
                                                                                                                                               : 7:o : ; i e 7:0 r e in 307 s t u d i e s . ' ,3


                 o s n i l "o;                  yes;   ..o;             3r ;                     r               o."d




            e # le u is                    rinocreor--




                 L-&?7: '‘y                 7   77-oe.v




Mr• -




                                                                                                                                                                                              ■
                                                                                                                                                                                             .•■v7
