HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST D ISTRICT )
                                                       12
      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL,         1989




                      Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B .ME D . S c i , BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                         At

                 The Town Hall,
                   Sheffield.

                         On

              4th D e c e m b e r , 1990




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J .L . H a r p h a m , L t d .,
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                               Page
   WARING Sworn

     By The Coroner
     Cross-Examined by M r . Payne             27
     Cross-Examined by M r . Isaacs            33
     Cross-Examined by M r . King              35
     Cross-Examined by M r . Catchpole         40
     Cross-Examined by Mrs . McBrien           43
     Cross-Examined by M r . Russell           51
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King        54
     Further by The Coroner                    54
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King        54
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole   55

G. McKAY Sworn

     By The Coroner                             55
     Cross-Examined    by   Mr. Payne           70
     Cross-Examined    by   Mr. King            71
     Cross-Examined    by   Mr. Catchpole       80
     Cross-Examined    by   Mrs. McBrien        83

R.W. CREASER Sworn

     By The Coroner                             86
                                                  R. WARING



                 TWELFTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                 TUESDAY,   4th DECEMBER 1990

     THE CORONER:    Can I just say one word to you, ladies
and gentlemen of the Jury? A message was given to me by
the Jury Officer as to whether or not, when you come
eventually decide on your verdict, you could have the video
for viewing.   I will tell you about that later on.   At the
moment it is probably no.   The point I want to make is not
the answer to that question.   It is very important that if
you want to communicate with me you should either do it
here, because I think it is important that everybody should
know that all communications I have with you are in public,
so to speak, and you can do it by just jotting a note.     If
you like, I do not mind it being sent through Sergeant
Griffiths but it is best if you do not ask him questions
about what the procedure of the Inquest is.    If you have
got any concerns then I can (a) either give   you an answer
or (b) think about it.   At least then we all know what is
going on.   I know no harm has been done I am sure but it is
wise I think to do it this way.

     The other thing is that I cannot remember if anybody
has told you who we are calling today but the provisional
list, and I am not saying we are going to get through it,
is Chief Inspector Roy Waring (who was dropped about ten
days ago and we did not have time but we have now caught
up), then Detective Superintendent Graham McKay, then Chief
Inspector Robert Creaser, and then bringing up the tail is
Mr. McGauley, provided we can get to him.  He is a filler,
so to speak, because he is conveniently located in this
building.  That is just so that you know the sort of order.
We will see how we go.  Obviously we want to make as much
progress as we can.

                      ROY WARING Sworn

                       Bv THE C O R O N E R :

Q. You are Chief Inspector Roy Waring? - A. That is
   right, sir.

Q. In 1989 you were a Headquarters operational man I
   think? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it right that on the 15th April 1989 you were •
   detailed for duty to the Hillsborough Football
   Ground? - A. Yes, I was.
                                                           2




                                                    R. WARING



Q. In connection with the Semi Final? - A. Yes,   sir.

Q. Between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest? - A. Yes.

Q. You were I think working in what is known in Sector 2
   of the Operational Order under Roger Marshall, is
   that right? - A. That is correct.

Q. It is Superintendent Roger Marshall? - A. Yes.

Q. There were only two sectors, were there not?  There
   was Sector 1 and Sector 2? - A. Yes, the two ends of
   the ground, sir.

Q. Sector 2 was the outside of the ground and Sector 1
   was the inside of the ground.  Is that right? - A.
   Sector 1 was the Nottingham end outside and Sector 2
   was the Liverpool end outside.

Q. Sector 2 was the Liverpool sector? - A. Outside, yes.

Q. You did not have the whole of the sector.    You only
   had a bit of it 2(a)? - A. Yes, a half.

Q. You had I think about six serials below you? - A.
   Yes.

Q. In a nutshell tell me what these serials who were
   responsible to you were designated to do? - A. There
   were two functions, sir.

Q. Can you sit forward and get the microphone
   comfortable? - A. Is that okay?

Q. Yes, that is much better? - A. There are two basic
   functions, sir.  There is a small part of the
   Leppings Lane area which is just north of the ground
   and known locally as the triangle.  It is a series of
   small residential roads and half the serials man
   barriers which are always placed at the end of the
   roads, the idea being to effect the separation of
   opposing fans to prevent ready access from Leppings
   Lane through into Penistone Road.

Q. These are the roads which we know as Vere Road,
   Bickerton Road and so on? - A. Farndale Road.

Q. That type of road? - A. Yes.  It was a long standing
   arrangement which has been done for many years to my
   knowledge.  So all those roads are barriered off and
                                                          3




                                                R. WARING



  there are two Officers at the end of each road
  manning those barriers.   That is part of the
  function.   The rest is a patrol function which is to
  ensure public order in the approaches to the ground
  and to ensure the splitting so there is no clash
  between opposing fans who are approaching the ground
  from roughly north and south.   So that is basically
  the function but it goes fairly wide out.   It is the
  full length of Leppings Lane itself and is out into
  Penistone Road, Penistone Road up towards Wadsley
  Bridge, Wardsend Road and then it is out into Catch
  Bar Lane which is sort of to the north and west of
  the ground.   Then it is right to the top of Leppings
  Lane and Middlewood Road, which is the other main
  road, down as far as Hillsborough, the precinct
  there, and as far as I think Crofton Avenue which is
  on the north side.

Q. You and these serials which you had were not
   specifically at the entrance to Leppings Lane from
   what you have described? - A. No, they are not.

Q. These are what I would call distant? - A. Yes, the
   approaches to the ground.

Q. I do not think at this stage we need to go into what
   each individual serial was deputed to do.   You
   arrived at the ground about ten o 'clock in the
   morning or thereabouts? - A. Just before that, sir,
   yes.

Q. Did you attend a briefing within the stadium? - A.
   Yes, I did, sir.

Q. Did your serials attend so far as you know? - A. Yes,
   the serials were all seated higher up in the stand.

Q. In fact there were quite a lot of people at this
   briefing? - A. Indeed there was.

Q. This finished at what time approximately? - A. Half
   past ten, something like that.

Q. I think then everybody had a bite to each, a sandwich
   or something? - A. Yes, at least a drink and then out
   on to the ground.

Q. You presumably instructed your serials to set up
   their positions? - A. More or less.  After the main
   briefing with Roger Marshall the other Chief
                                                 R- WARING



Inspector was working the other half of Serial 2,
Sector 2, and so Mr. Marshall, myself and the other
Chief Inspector, the Inspector in charge of the
serials, had a short, after main briefing, talk.

The main briefing was the briefing which was
addressed by I think among others Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield? - A. Yes, that is right,
sir.

When that was finished, are you saying then
Superintendent Marshall then had a supplemental
briefing with his sector? - A. He did indeed.

Then you had a further.... - A. No, I spoke with Mr.
Marshall and the idea there was that he would say to
the Inspectors, "Are all your men here? Are you sure
what your duties are?   Do you know the location?"
Then he would say, "Right, time for a drink or
something to eat and I want you all on the ground for
eleven o'clock".  I remember him saying that.

You then in fact did that? - A. Yes, I did just that,
sir.  I had a drink and then I went out for eleven
o'clock.

Your task was not, of course, to stand at barriers.
Your task was to supervise and check that things were
in order and apply your mind to anything that
happened to come up, is that right? - A. Yes, that is
right.




                         /Q.   Were you doing.
                                                   R. WARING



Q. Were you doing the same function in 1988 as well? -
   A. Exactly the same function.

Q. As far as you were concerned had you been given any
   different instructions between 1989 and 1988? - A. No.
   From what I could see, sir, the operation was to be
   identical.

Q. I think you had a bit of a problem in 1988 with some
   segregation of fans, is that right? - A. That s true,
   sir, after the match.

0. After the match? - A. After the match, not before.

Q. So initially when you had placed your men, or when the
   men had located themselves, you thought a little bit
   about how to deal with that problem when it arose? - A.
   If it arose later.

Q. If it arose?   - A. Yes,   indeed.

Q. I don't think we need to go into any details of that
   because unfortunately it didn't arise.^  Did you spend
   your time in the morning from eleven o'clock onward in
   the area in which your men were located, which you nave
   described, these roads? - A. Yes, I walked up and down
   the roads to make sure the men were where they were
   supposed to be.

Q. As far as you could see the position was satisfactory.    -
   A. Yes, it was.

        MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I do apologise for interrupting.
   We are very anxious to avoid any unnecessary repetition
   when we come to cross-examine the witness and I was just
   wondering whether it would be helpful for the jury to
   follow what the witness is saying by being able to look
   at a map so that he indicates whereabouts each of his
   serials was.    Certainly from our point of view - the
   Chief Constable's point of view - it would be helpful if
   he were able to tie what he is saying with the
   Operational Order to see how it worked.

        I am very content to do that, if it would be
   convenient, when I come to cross-examine.

         THE CORONER:   I thought that that is what you would
   want to do.    I think the map is a good- idea.  I was_
   expecting you to refer him to the Operational Order, in
   at least the main points, which is why I have
   deli berately...
                                                     R. WARING


          MR. PAYNE:   Quite.   I am very sorry to have
     interrupted.

          THE CORONER:   It is no problem.   I think the map
     is a jollv good idea.    With regard to the Operational
     Order, obviously it is necessary to refer to it, I quite
     understand.   The precise detail we need to refer to,
     obviously you will exercise your discretion as far as you
     are able:

Q. You have got a volume in front of you - C. 284.     The
   roads which you have referred to, which I have p u t t o
   you, Bickerton Road, Fielding...    These are all side
   roads off Leppings Lane? - A.« Those are tne ones referred
   to locally as the triangle.

0.   Your area really extended past Wadsley Bridge station, up
     Halifax Road some way, is that right? - A. Yes, as far as
     Wardsend Road towards the top of the map there, the
     traffic island can be seen quite clearly nearly in the
     centre of the map.

Q.   Is that the Herries Road roundabout? - A. Yes, it is
     Herries Road, Penistone Road, Leppings Lane.    Then along
     the front of the triangle, the Penistone Road North end
     of the triangle as far as Vere Road.    This is where the
     static points are and then on Leppings Lane I think you
     can see Leake Road, Farndale Road, Bickerton Road,_
     Fielding and Vere.   That again is where static points
     are.   The patrolmen are along Leppings Lane itself.
     Catchbar Lane just to the left and below the ground, the
     Hillsborough Ground, can be seen there.    Towards
     Parkside Road there.    This is all part of the effort to
     segregate opposing sides.    They are approaching the
     ground roughly from north and south.    The idea is to
     have the geographical area, as far as is possible,
     segregated.   You can then see Middlewood Road, the large
     road going off to the left of the map there.    Crofton
     Avenue is just above where it says "Road".    Middlewood
     and then "Rd" for road.    If you look to the left there
     is Crofton Avenue.   That is the extent.

Q. How far down did it go? - A. From Leppings Lane, if you
   go up the map and come to the shortened word "Road ' -
   "Rd", and just on the left there is Crofton Avenue.
   That is the extent.

Q. So you didn't extend into Wadsley Lane? - A. No, not
   right the way up.

Q. Then south, the bottom of the map, how far... - A. You go
   there right down as far as the traffic lights at
   Bradfield Road.
                                                                  7


                                                            R. WARING


Q. What you are saying is that you were patrolling this
   general area on foot? - A. Yes, I was.

Q. You can't say where you were at any particular moment in
   time? - A. Not really.   I remember early on walking out
   into Middlewood Road and seeing an Inspector there and
   asking him about Hillsborough.’ In fact he told me about
   it, and that was relatively early on.   I remember him
   saying it was fairly quiet down that end and I didn t
   actually walk all the way to Hillsborough Corner, which
   is quite a fair way.   It would have taken me well of-f
   the area really.

 0. At that time, between 11 and 12, were fans already
    beginning to arrive? - A. Yes, they were.   People were
    already turning up.

. Q. Did you have any particular concerns with them at that
     time? - A. Not at that time, certainly not.

 Q. Presumably some people were going to the ground and^ some
    people were not? ~ A. That is rigtit.  I remember tne
    turnstiles were opening fairly early, as I recall.    I
    think the briefing, the proper time was about twelve
    o'clock, but I recall as well that the odd turnstile
    would be open here and there from perhaps eleven for
    anyone who wanted to go in the ground particularly early.

 Q. The behaviour of the fans - we will take it up to about
    12.30 - was satisfactory? - A. Yes, indeed.

 Q. You didn't think they were inebriated, worse for wear? -
    A. Up to that time they were quite reasonable.

 Q. Then from 12.30 onwards, just describe to m e y o u r
    perception of what was going on? - A. Well, it got busier
    and busier, of course.    People were coming.           The flow
    rate increased, as you would expect.          It was quite a
    nice day and as people were coming...           Again, t o s o m e
    extent, you would expect it.    In my experience witn
    football you started getting groups who instead of going
    into the ground where clearly they pass through police
    control and they are into the g r o u n d _a n d _that s i t .
    They are left then only with the facilities inside the
    ground.    They sit on walls.   They sit about.             This is
    when I began to notice anyway that drink was corning on
    the scene.    They would be carrying it and^drinking it,
    but I stress again, there was no trouble with them.
                                    R. WARING


You mentioned the word "Police control" to get into the
ground.  Can you just describe what you mean by that? -
A. Yes, what I mean by that the.Officers who are actually
on the turnstiles.  There are certain ground regulations?
there are certain things that you can't take into the
ground for instance and that is the final point where if
you are carrying anything that you are not allowed to
take into the ground that is where you lose it.

But these Officers were not in your care, so to speak? -
A. No, they weren't.

Did you, I am talking now up to 12.30/1 o'clock, did you
have any arrangements whereby fans were vetted, if that
is the right word, for alcohol, other things, missiles,
what you wish, further out than at the turnstiles? - A.
Yes, the operation allows for that, people to be screened
as it were as they are coming in, particularly in vehicles.
If they are carrying things that they are not allowed to
take into the ground then they are told, encouraged to
leave it behind:  "You won't be allowed to take it into
the ground".  As people are actually walking towards the
ground there is a slightly different situation arises in
that there is no public area drinking ban in that area.
For instance if we are talking about alcohol and other
things.  If it is,things like a weapon then clearly there
is no problem but things like for instance if you are
carrying a four pack and simply walking down the road
then everybody knows  that these people are going to a
football match so it is a question of advising and
monitoring, telling the individual:   "You won't be allowed
to take that into the ground with you; you won't be allowed
in the ground if you are drunk" and then monitoring the
behaviour as people filter towards the ground but you
can't sort of just snatch things off people.

I see, so what you are saying is that although you may be
aware that people are actually supporters, if their
behaviour away from the ground is, I use the word impeccable,
it may be too strong a word, but if it is satisfactory,
the mere fact that they are carrying alcohol which you
think, you can't actually take it away from them or force
them to hand it over? - A. No, you can't.   They are
not allowed to enter or attempt to enter the sportsground
with it.

Yes, in other words that will be the job of the Officers
at the turnstile if they turn up with these? - A. Strictly
speaking, yes.  I mean you take what reasonable action
you can on the way to make sure that vast amounts aren't,
you know, to try and reduce the problem at the turnstiles,
shall we say.

Did, and remember the time we are talking about, we are
talking up to 1 o'clock at the moment.  I am splitting
                                                           9

                                        R. WARING



     it into times because it is easier I think to understand.
     Did you approach anybody at all who was carrying anything?
     - A. Yes, lots of people.

Q. And did you find that, in that period, that they were
   co-operative with you? - A. Well co-operative insofar as
   they appeared to accept the advice and it is relatively
   early on then, that they are going to drink what they
   have got, they are not going to attempt to take it into
   the ground.  From that point of view, yes.

Q.    In 1988, I am talking about 1988 now, a different year,
     was the same methods, techniques used with regard to uhat
     up to about that time or was it different? - A. No, it was
     not different.

Q.    It was not different, it was the same? - A. I can't remember.
     I did work on a match once which I think was a semi-final
     and we attempted to stop, when I say "we" I mean the Police
     operation, attempted to stop vehicles at a more distant
     point.   In fact the one I remember was at Birdwell near
     the Ml but it was absolutely impossible.    We ended up with
     a tailback on to the motorway and it ended up being
     dangerous so it proved impractical to try and stop people
     at a distant point and sort of carry out searches, checks for
     tickets, alcohol and that sort of thing.    It was just
     impractical.   Now it may not have been the 1988 match.

Q. You can't quite remember? — A. I can't remember whether
   it was that match or another one.

Q. You mentioned tickets? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you have a procedure in your sector, I am not talking
   about the ground, but where you were, at this time up
   to 1 o'clock for checking whether people had tickets or
   not?  Tell me about 1988 first of all and then 1989?
   - A. Not specifically, not specifically.  It was not part
   of the instruction to check people on the way to the ground
   some distance from the ground, but it is part of the advice
   when you are talking to people:  "You can't carry tnat into
   the ground.  You will not be allowed into the ground drunk.
   Have you got your tickets lads?"  That kind of thing, but
   not specifically if you know what I mean.

Q. We have heard from I think at least two witnesses who are
   talking about 1988 not 1989, who described what sounded
   like to me what I would call a loose Police cordon across
   Leppings Lane near the roundabout where fans and others
   no doubt were asked whether they had tickets.  Can you
   remember that? — A. Before the match on their way to the
   ground?

Q. Yes? - A. Definitely not.
                                                                     10


                                             R. WARING


    Q.   1988 we are talking about.   You don't remember it? - A. I
         don^* t at all.

    Q. And I take it, if we look at 1939, that it did not happen
       in 1989 either? - A. No, it didn't.
B   Q.   I think at about 1.30 or so you actually entered Leppings
         Lane.  Is that right? - A. Yes, Leppings Lane, the road?

    Q. Yes? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you come in from the Herries Road roundabout or from
       Catchbar Lane? - A. Yes, from that end, from the Herries
       Road end and I walked the full length of Leppings Lane.

    Q.   Was it busy or not at that time? - A. Yes,   it was busy,
         very busy.

    Q. And people were making their way towards the turnstiles?
       - A. Yes, they were.

    Q. At that time, at about 1.30 or thereabouts, were there
       any mounted Officers outside? - A. Yes, there were.

    Q. Can you just remember how many in round terms? - A. Not
       really.  The impression is sort of half-a-dozen, may be
       more, but certainly half-a-dozen.

    Q. There were some? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you notice what if anything they were doing?   If you
       can't remember ....   A. Well I did particularly because
       ray job at that time in the Operations Division of the
       South Yorkshire Police in fact has responsibility for our
       own mounted section, not day-to-day supervision but
       the administrative responsibility and I knew that there
       were a number of Merseyside mounted Officers there so
       I took particular notice of how they performed, for want
       of a better word, at the side of our own and I recall in
       fact being quite impressed with the way they were working.
       They weren't simply sitting there, they were on the move
       all the time encouraging people into the ground:    "If you
       have got a ticket let's have you into the ground, if you
       haven't clear off" sort of thing and they were moving
       around and they were able to move around.

    Q. I take it these Officers were relatively near the turnstiles
       on what we ....  A. Yes, to move the horses up and dov/n
       they were in fact outside, there is some blue gates across.
       At that time they were outside the blue gates sort of on
      'the approach to the sort of inner part.

    Q. You then passed them and went up towards Catchbar Lane?
       - A. Yes, I went out to the top.




H
                                                             II

                                           R. WARING



    Q. Were people coming down the hill at that ltime? - A. Yes,
       they were.  In fact large  numbers.  That is not unusual
       in that people ....

    Q. Sorry, in large numbers, did you say? - A. Yes, in large
B      numbers.  That is not unusual really because the outside
       segregation as it works people coming in from the North
       side are encouraged to park in a lot of the side roads
       off Middlewood Road to try and keep them away from the
       other side who are encouraged to park south of the ground.




c



D




E




F




                                 Q. So theywould have
                                          /




H
                                                             12



                                                    R.   WARI NG




Q. So they would have to coiae down Wadsley Lane and the
   other roads - A. Yes, they would come down Wadsley
   Lane, any of the other roads, yes, iiiddlewood Road.

Q. Indeed that was what was happening, as far as you can
   remember? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. The numbers at that tine, were they such that they were
   still on the pavements or were they spilling onto the
   road?  I don't mean the odd chap who walked on the ....
   - A. they were mainly confined to the pavement, mainly.

0. And the attitude and behaviour at that time of those
   crowds coining down? ~ A. Behaviour >&n<^ attitude, no
   problem really.   I know I chose my words carefully
   there and I have used the word boisterous, and I used
   that quite specifically.   There were no, in fact,
   throughout the whole lead up to the match, there were
   no what I would call public order problems.       There was
   not fighting in the streets; there was no damage to my
   knowledge; there was some urinating in passageways and
   gardens but quite frankly it does happen,      vie try and
   discourage it, obviously, but it does happen, but there
   were no what I would call public order problems.

Q. When you use the word boisterous what are you trying to
   convey with that? - A. What I am trying to convey is a
   group of people, mainly young men, chanting, shouting,
   clapping, waving whatever they are carrying about.  The
   sort of person, and this happened to me, as you are
   trying to advise him and say, “Look, you can't take
   that into the ground, you will not get in the ground if
   you are drunk", continues chanting in your face while
   you are talking to him, clearly at tnat time not taking
   a deal of notice of what you are saying.  That is the
   sort of thing I am trying to convey when I use the word
   boisterous, but I stress there was no fignting, no
   damage.

Q. At about 2 I think a special train came into Wadsley
   Station? - A. Yes, I knew there was a train due just
   before 2, but as I recall it was delayed slightly and
   in fact it was 2 or just after when it arrived.

Q. My recollection was it came a moment or two earlier,
   but it doesn't really matter, I am not too worried
   about that. - A. Roundabout ....

0. Yes, and we can dispose of that quite quickly, the fans
   on that train were actually escorted? - A. Yes, they
   were.

Q. And again absolutely no problems? - A. They were no
   problem, they were escorted.  The significance of that
                                                R. HARING




is that is the reason that I walked back frons where I
was at the top end back to the other end, the
roundabout end, because if you get a significant nu>nber
of people coming down, even though you are under
escort, then I felt that that is perhaps a time when
there is a possibility of a clash, if you get the same
thing happening, people cooing on coaches to the
Herries Road side who are from the opposing side, so
that's the reason I walked to the other end.

Herries Road was the Nottingham patch? - A. Yes, it
was.

So that roundabout was a potential meeting place? - A.
It is the closest point, in fact, where the two sides
coiae together, and in '88 that is where the problem
was.

In '89, in fact, there wasn't any problem there? - A.
No problem before the match, ana as you say it never
arose.

So until this had taken place everything appeared
perfectly normal and satisfactory? - A. It seemed quite
reasonable to me.  I would think that the bridge - are
people aware where the bridge is, sir?

Wnich bridge are we talking about, the one from
Catchbar Lane down ...? - A. Yes, it is on the very top
side of Leppings Lane - the river, in fact, comes round
the back of the football ground and tnere is a bridge
at Leppings Lane.  I thought that was perhaps a bit
busier, perhaps - there w e r e a lot of people sat on the
bridge parapets, but it is a question of impression.
There were a lot of people sat on the parapets which
might make it look busy, I don't know, but I got the
impression it was certainly huctming round there.

Not so much that at that point you were concerned? - A.
No, not really.  I can't say I was concerned but I did
notice it was particularly busy at that top side, I
thought.

I don't know whether you glanced towards the turnstiles
at all as you walked past? - A. Yes I did, tneywere
busy certainly but under control without a doubt. The
horses I was talking about were still there, still
doing their job.

We will take you on to about 2.30 or so, okay? - A.
Yes.

What did you see or hear - where were you at about
2.30, can you remember? - A. Yes, at 2.30 I was on that
                                                          14



                                                 R. WARING




  traffic island talking to a PC whose job it is to work
  that island, should it become necessary because of the
  density of traffic, and I particularly recall standing
  there talking to him.

Q. So you were at Herries Road, Penistone Road and
   Leppings Lane traffic island? - A. Yes, there is a
   little central reservation there.  I was standing on
   there.

Q. What happened or what did you see or hear then? - A.
   The reason I recall it is that the Officer was standing
   there and then there was the sounding of a car horn,
   and we both turned round and a car was being driven
   down from Halifax Road, from the north side there,
   being driven down, and he had driven through a group of
   people who were crossing the road, and he didn't make
   any attempt at all to slow down, he simply blasted his
   horn and drove straight through the middle of them and,
   in fact, scattered them.  The Officer, quite rightly I
   thought, stepped out and had words.

Q. With the driver? - A. Yes, with the driver, and I just
   recall it particularly because it was quite a comical
   exchange, without being silly.   It was quite a comical
   exchange between the two and when he let the driver go,
   the driver went round the island and clearly intended
   to drive into Leppings Lane.   As that was actually
   happening I recall hearing a message on the radio to
   the effect that vehicle traffic was to be stopped going
   into Leppings Lane, and in fact that particular car was
   the first one to be stopped and denied access to
   Leppings Lane, and he was sent off, in fact, the way he
   had come.

Q. Did you see it being stopped?  How was it redirected to
   go somewhere else?  What mechanise was used? - A. The
   PCs who were in Leppings Lane, who were standing on the
   end, had obviously heard the message, or the Sergeant
   had heard the message, and they simply stepped out.
   There is a pedestrian crossing there, they stepped out
   into the area of that and stop, redirect tnat way or
   round the island and find another way.

Q. Where did you go from there after this incident? - A. I
   set off to walk along Leppings Lane then, back towards
   the turnstiles. There is a reason for that, it is not
   just sort of --- the reason  I do that, and I have done
   that before, is that the operation is phased, and Phase
   1 is up to kick-off.  How, for me to know tnat Pftase 1
   is complete and that the Officers on ray sector, the
   more distant people can, not stand down but can begin
   taking meal refreshments and that kind of thing, it is
   important clearly to me to know that Phase 1 has come
                                                         15



                                                  R. WARING




  satisfactorily to an end, so the idea is that as we
  approach quarter-to-3, that kind of time, I make my way
  round there and when everybody is in and the kick-off
  is going, then I am quite sure that Phase 1 has ended
  and that my sector can them move into Phase 2, which is
  staggered mealtimes.  He still keep a presence on the
  streets but Officers start taking their meals.

Q. So in other words what you are saying is that you want
   to see that everything has come to a satisfactory
   conclusion before you say, "Off you go"? - A. Before we
   move to Phase 2, that is right.

Q. As you were walking down, or I think it is walking up
   Leppings Lane, as you were walking up Leppings Lane
   towards the ground then, from the roundabout, did you
   see anything of significance or hear anything? - A.
   Well I thought, in fact I am sure, that the percentage
   of people who I have described as being boisterous
   through drink had increased significantly.   They still
   weren t fighting, they weren't fighting each other,
   they weren t throwing stones or anything like that, but
   there were a lot of them.   There was a big garage on
   Leppings Lane, there were a load sat on the wall there,
   and they were converging on the ground.   That was the
   situation.   I was distracted for a short while at the
   top there as I left the island, there was a man came
   out who I think must live on Farnsworth Road, who was
   complaining about people urinating in a back land
   there, and he was telling me the story of how his wife
   had been upset by it all and all the rest of it, and I
   in fact took an Officer off the barrier at the end of,
   I taink it is Farnsworth ....

Q. Farndale, I think. - A. Farndala - there are two
   Officers on each barrier and I took one of thera off and
   stationed nim on the end of that lane.  The reason I
   remember that is he said, "I am supposed to be manning
   this barrier", and I said, "Well you are going to be
   all right, you are still in sight of your mate who is
   on the barrier, and in 10 or 15 minutes it will have
   gone away, the problem", so from that I deduce that
   that would be round about 20-to, quarter-to-3,
   something like that.

Q. I see, and you then continued your progress up towards
   ...? - A. Yes, I walked up along Leppings Lane.

Q. At this point I think had traffic - can you remember
   whether traffic had actually effectively been stopped,
   or was some traffic still coming through?    It is not
   terribly important and if you can't retTnember .... - A.
   I wouldn't say that Leppings Lane was absolutely
   sterile, in that people were freely walking absolutely
                                                  R.   WAR IIIG




everywhere, but I wasn't aware that traffic had been
restarted, let's put it that way.

I think you eventually got up to the sweet shop at the
corner of the ground, is tnat right? - A. Yes.

You were there looking in towards the crowd, so to
speak? - A. Yes, I came up ....

You were coming up froni behind,   in effect? - A. Yes.

You yourself, I think, were in the roadway at that
point in time? - A. Yes, I was standing on the road but
I wasn't in the middle of the road.  I was certainly on
Leppings Lane as opposed to, there is a slight down
gradient that takes you down into the Leppings Lane
end.

At that point, which I think you have timed - what time
would you say that was? - A. I would say it was round
about 10-fliinutes-to-3, something like that. Maybe a
minute or two earlier.

Could you see, from where you were at that point, could
you see the blue perimeter gates, at that time? - A.
Yes, the tops.

Yes. - A. Yes,   I could see the tops of those.

Could you actually see the turnstiles at that time,
from where you were? - A. Just about but I was very
quickly surrounded by people.  Yes, if I made an effort
I could, just about.

Yes, and what assessment if any did you make of tne
crowd at that time?  I think you said 10-to-3, didn't
you? - A. Yes.

I don't want you to give me an assessment with a
"retrospector-scope", you know.   What I want you to try
and do is to tell me how you assessed it at the time. -
A. When I came up behind that crowd it was larger than
I have ever seen before, but saying that, I have seen
fairly large crowds of people waiting to go in there at
that kind of time, and it has never ceased to amaze me
that in the last ten minutes they have gone.   They are
all in and that's it, and I have seen that happen
before.  This particular time the crowd, as I say, was
larger, significantly larger.   The strange thing is
that as I came up behind the crowd there was no
immediate impression, although it was a large crowd and
a jostly sort of crowd, there was no immediate
impression to me standing there that there was a
serious problem developing, or in fact already in
                                                                    17



                                                         R. WARIMG




         progress at the front, remembering that I was, I don't
         know, several yards anyway, at the back.  Very quickly
B        it became apparent to me that the crowd wasn't getting
         any smaller, and that the mechanism, and I don't mean
         that in a mechanical way, the actual process of people
         going in, didn't seem to be working.  The people
         weren't actually getting in the ground, so consequently
         the crowd wasn't, in fact, getting any smaller as I
         have seen it in years before, where a large number of
         people have got in, in that last few minutes - that
         didn't seem to be happening.

    Q. So that, as far as you were concerned, was an unusual
       experience then, was it? - A. Yes, it was.

    Q. And were people still joining the crowd from Leppings
       Lane? - A. Yes, they were.  Where I was,  when I first
       got there I was at the back of the crowd, I very
       quickly wasn't.  It is difficult to say how much more
       the crowd increased in the few minutes I was there.   I
D      wouldn't like to guess how much it grew.

    Q. Did you by any chance notice whether they were also
       coming down from Catch Bar Lane? - A. Yes, I am sure
       they were.

    Q.    If you don't know the answer to this, I am just
         interested, could you estimate which crowd was larger,
         the one that was coming up from Leppins»s Lane, or the
         one coming down from Catch Bar Lane? - A. Well again, I
         would have said the ones coming down were more.   I
         thought there were more people ....

    Q.    From Catch Bar Lane? - A. Yes, and if you asked me in
         hindsight do I think more people came from the t o p , .
         then the answer to that would be yes.

    0.    Can you just look at C253. That is just a picture    of,
         in fact, mainly turnstiles 1-16. - A. Yes.

    0. And there is a little shop tnere, can you see it? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. Is that the sweet shop you are talking about? - A.      fhat
       is the sweet shop, yes.

    Q.   Approximately where would you say you were - are you on
         the picture, or not? - A. I am not on the picture
         tnere.



               /Q. You are off




H
                                              R- WARING


You are off it? - A. Yes, to the left.  The traffic
cone nearest the shop, if he moves the pointer left,
it is about t h e r e .

You were not quite at Vere Road, were you? - A. No.

You were between Vere Road and   that   sweet shop is
what you are saying? - A. Yes,   yes.

I think you could see from that position obviously
Turnstiles 1 to 16 much more clearly? - A. Yes.

Than Turnstiles A to B? ~ A. That is right.

Could you see what we call Gate A? Isthat the
one? - A. Yes, I know which is Gate     A.Icould see
half of it, the right hand half.

You could not see the other two big gates which we
know as Gate B or C? - A. Not from that position.

The interesting thing is that you say from the
position where you were you could not tell what was
happening further forward? - A. No, I couldn't.  I
think in all fairness the people standing round me
would have had I think a similar...

View? - A. View.   I think so.

Obviously you cannot tell but if you had been a
supporter in that position you would not know that
there was a problem going on? - A. No, I wouldn't.

I think I am right in saying you were actually
approached by numerous supporters who could not quite
understand where to go? — A. That is right.  Lots of
people were saying, "Which is the North Stand?   Which
is the West Stand?  Where do we go for standing?
Where do we go for sitting?".  There was a lot of
that.  Now whether that was true confusion or whether
it was easier to ask me than look themselves I do not
know but certainly that did happen.

We know that the lettering above the turnstiles was
not ideal because it was A, C, B, rather A, B and C.
Could you from where you were make out the lettering?
- A. Yes, it can be seen over the top of the crowd
quite easily.

I suppose you know the lettering is there which makes
it easier than for somebody who does not? - A. Yes.
                                                          19




                                                 R. WARING



Q. What I am trying to find out is whether from that
   distance it was visible? - A. I would say it was
   visible certainly, yes.

Q. Was it sufficiently high to be seen above the heads
   of the crowds even though there were substantial
   numbers there? - A. Yes, it is well above the
   turnstiles.

Q. I think there was a bit of colour coding there? - A.
   Yes, I think there was.

Q. But it did not seem to make much difference? - A. No,
   it d i d n 1t .

Q. As far as the questioners were concerned? - A. The
   perception of people arriving.  Clearly they were in
   some confusion I think.

Q. You remained in this location virtually until kick-
   off I believe, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you approach any nearer to the ground at all? -
   A. Before Gate A was opened, no, but I was standing
   there and that is when my perception changed over the
   few minutes I was there.   It quickly became apparent
   that things weren't right.

Q. You say, "That is when my perception changed".  When
   did your perception change?  I want to put a time on
   it, that is all? - A. Right.

Q. Are you saying, "When the gate opened my perception
   changed"? - A. No, before that.

Q. You were there at ten to three? - A. Yes.

Q. It looked crowded? - A. But it could have been all
   right.

Q. Then something happened which made you think this is
   not right.  Can you put into words what it was? - A.
   I think perception-wise I realised that the crowd
   wasn't getting any smaller and there wasn't the sort
   of movement there should have been for people to be
   going in.  I have seen large crowds going in before
   and there has always been that movement at the front.
   It seemed to me that that wasn't happening.  That was
   the main thing.  The second and most obvious thing,
   of course, was the fact that the Land Rover then came
                                                              20




                                                      R. WARING


      on my left.     Whether it had just repositioned or
      whether it had been there all the time I am not 100
      per cent s u r e . Then the Land Rover appeared with an
B     Inspector with a loudhailer.

    Q. Did you know who was in the Land Rover at the time? -
       A. Yes, Inspector Ellis I think it was and PC Buxton
       I think was round it.

    Q. Can you tell me whether this Land Rover was equipped
       with loudspeaking facilities? - A. I thought the
       Inspector was using a loudhailer.  I think so.   He
       may have been using a microphone through the vehicle
       but certainly the loudspeaker was there.

    Q. What, if anything, was being broadcast? - A. It was
       saying, "This is a Police message" sort of thing.   It
       was words to that effect, "Stop pushing forward.
       Stop pushing forward.  Ease back.  Ease back".   It
       was definitely the words, "Stopping pushing forward".
       Those particular words I remember.
D
    Q. Various people have heard bits and pieces and
       everybody has given a slightly different variant but
       that is not surprising.  How close to the Land Rover
       were you? - A. I would think not much more than from
       myself to this bench.

    Q. That is about four yards,   three yards? - A. At the
       very most.

    Q. Something of that order? - A. Certainly quite close.

    Q. You were quite close? - A. Yes.    -

    Q. Was he parked right up against the perimeter gates or
       if you look at the photograph you can see the
       cones? - A. Yes.

    Q. You can see the perimeter gate? - A. He might have
       got as far as that traffic cone, the top one.  He
       might have got the front of the vehicle about there
       but he certainly wasn't any further in than that.   In
       fact he couldn't have got any further in than that.

    Q. Because of the number of people there? - A. Yes.

    Q. You heard that message.  How often was it repeated so
       far as you recollect? - A. He kept saying it over and
       over again.
                                                            21




                                                     R. WARING


Q. Did you hear any change in the message?     You may not
   recollect the words but can you remember whether
   there were other messages as well? - A. The only
   other message I recall was one which I think      and
   the reason I think that is because I recognise the
   voice - was over the ground tannoy and the PC was PC
   Ryan who I know personally.     It was his voice and he
   said something like, "This is a message for the
   Liverpool supporters.     Stop pushing".  I have no way
   of knowing;     I mean, it was clearly heard outside but
   whether it was directed outside or to something
   inside I d o n ’t know.  I know it can be zoned but how
   accurately it can be zoned I don't know but I do
   remember hearing PC Ryan's voice over the ground
   system.

Q . You were saying that when you were standing in this
    position, which is a few yards away from this sweet
    shop, you could hear the ground tannoy? - A. Yes.

Q. How   noisy was this crowd at the time? - A. Yes, they
   were certainly noisy and there was some sort of
   ambient noise from the stadium.

Q. But you could still hear the message over? - A. Yes,
   absolutely.

Q. The Police Land Rover came? - A. Yes.

Q. You   heard the message from Mr. Ellis?   - A. Yes.

Q. You   heard the tannoy? - A. Yes.

Q. Was the   tannoy before or after, at the same time, or
   can you   not say any more? - A. I would think it was
   more or   less at the same time.  During.  I mean, he
   started   first the Land Rover.

Q. The Land Rover was first? - A. I would say the Land
   Rover started first but I remember hearing Mick Ryan,
   who I know personally, and I thought, "That is Mick
   Ryan on the t a n n o y " .

 Q. According to the evidence on the video the Police
    Land Rover is presumed to be seen at 14.45 outside
    the Leppings Lane terracing? - A. Yes.

 Q. You did say he may have repositioned himself, do you
    remember? ** A. He may have.     I didn't know where he
    had come from is what I m e a n t .
                                                          22




                                                 R. WARING


Q. That is really the point I am trying to find out.
   Can you recollect whether you saw the Land Rover from
   where it appeared? — A. No, it came from behind me
   but wherever it had come from on Leppings Lane it had
   come, sort of, from up there.

Q . The reason why I ask is that if the Land Rover in
    fact was not being repositioned and if we assume just
    for the sake of this question that the 14.45 is a
    correct time? - A. Yes.

Q. That puts you in that location a little bit
   earlier? - A. Indeed it does.  Yes, I would agree
   with that.

Q. You were not timing yourself? - A. No.

Q. You were not keeping a time log of where you were at
   any particular point? ~ A. No, the nearest I can put
   a time on is the conversation I had with the Officer
   at the other end when I remember saying to him, "You
   will only be another fifteen minutes or so".

Q. That is what you are basing your calculations on? -
   A. That is right.

Q. If it were put to you that you might have been there
   in fact at 14.45 when the Land Rover drove up and
   stopped and that was it? - A. Yes.

Q. You would not be in a position to say, "No, that
   cannot possibly be right"? - A. No, I wouldn't refute
   that.  Certainly not.

Q. We are back then to what you saw and heard? - A. Yes.

Q. You heard the Land Rover? - A. Yes.

Q. You heard the tannoy? - A. Yes.

Q. You had this crowd? - A. Yes.

Q. You still could not see what was going on right in
   front? - A. Not really.  By that time I knew that
   things weren't right.

Q. Things were not moving.   You were making deductions
   in fact? - A. Indeed.

Q. What, if anything, happened then? - A. I remember
   that there was a roar from the stadium.
                                                            23




                                                     R. WARING



    Q. A roar? - A. Yes, you could hear the crowd from the
       stadium and for some reason again I thought "Well,
B      that can't be the kick-off".   I don't know why I
       thought that.   I must have had an idea what time it
       was and it seemed - I didn't think we were ready for
       kick-off and so I assumed that it was probably the
       teams coming out, that kind of thing.   There was a
       general sort of, I don't know.   I mean, it produced a
       reaction in the crowd outside which is not sort of
       unexpected really.   It struck me that if there was a
       crush, and that is how it was beginning to look to
       me, that things were not right here at all, people
       weren't going to go in, obviously there was a reason
       for not getting in, that that situation I didn't
       think could be recovered from the back by action, let
       us put it that way.   If the crowd were unwilling or
       unable to react to the tannoy messages then I didn't
       think it could be recovered from the back by direct
        Police action which puts even further pressure on a
        crowd.
D
    Q. The only thing you could have done presumably would
       have been to stop more people joining? - A. I am not
       sure that that would have affected the position right
       at the front.  I take your point.  I know what you
       mean.

    Q. What you are saying is that you did not think that
       the position at the front at that point could be
       recovered? - A. Prom the rear, no.

    Q. What you could have prevented I suppose would be an
       additional build-up? - A. More people coming up.  If
       the manpower had been readily available then the
       answer to that is yes.

    Q. My impression is that right at the back of this crowd
       there was not all that much pressure even at this
       stage? - A. That is right.

    Q. Is that right? - A. I was never squashed in there.

    Q. You were never squashed? - A. No.

    Q. Then I think you have already mentioned Gate A and so
       tell me what you saw with regard to Gate A? - A. Yes,
       I could see the right hand side of Gate A from where
       I was and it suddenly started to move.   I think I
       have described it as being tugged.   The reason I use
       that word is that it didn't open smoothly.   It didn't




H
                                                          24




                                                   R- WARING


  suddenly open.   There seemed to be this, as though it
  was being pulled every    which way, but I couldn't see
  who was pulling itWhether it was being         pulled from
  outside or inside I don't know but certainly there
  was movement in that gate.      Then it began to open and
  I thought, "If that opens you will never close it
  again" wondering why it was being opened really
  initially, let us put it that way.      Anyway, it did
  open.   The right hand side of it certainly did open
  which drew my attention.      In fact I looked and it did
  open altogether and a large number of people went
  through Gate A.   I have no idea how many but a lot.
  The amazing thing was that in fact when Gate A was
  closed - and it was closed against people, there were
  still people there,    it didn't remain open until
  everybody had gone,    it was closed against people -
  the numbers in the area there had reduced
   significantly.  They had gone down a lot.      Again at
  the time I didn't think about it but really it was
   obvious, and perhaps should have been obvious to me,
   that people had disappeared elsewhere too but whether
   other gates were opened (I mean I know they were but
   at the time I didn't know that because I couldn't see
   it from where I was) a n d ....

Q. You could not see B and C at all from where you were?
   - A. No, they are on edge to you from where I am.
   Given the crowd, obviously there were a lot of people
   down there.  I mean I could see the tops of the
   horses and the horsemen what have you which were down
   there.  There were some horsemen.   The only
   explanation was that people had gone elsewhere other
   than just through Gate A because when Gate A was
   closed eventually the numbers had reduced
   significantly there.  What I perceived was going to
   be a major problem in there seemed in fact to have
   evaporated and I thought "Strange".

Q. I have not actually asked you but I will ask you now,
   were you able to see the turnstile area for A to G
   from your position?  It is obvious that you were able
   to see 1 to 16 but were you able to see A to G as
   well? - A. Is that to the right of the blue
   corrugated thing?




                                    /Q. That's right.
                                                         25


                                                    R. WARING




0. That's right, yes.   - A. Not really.

0. Can you tell me, within the 1 to 16 turnstile area, in
   other words, within the perimeter gates, but outside the
   turnstiles, did'it appear to you there were a lot of
   people in that area? - A. A lot of people in tnere.

0. Yes.   - A. Yes.

0. Because you didn't see clearly you aren't in a position
   to make a comparison as to the advantages of that area
   with the A to G area?    If you can't, then don t...
   A. No, not to compare the two areas, no.

0. In fact as far as you were concerned, although there were
   still people left outside, the practical problem outside
   had been resolved by one means or another? - A. It seemed
   that way.   People then starting going in through the
   turnstiles.   There were quite a lot of people left.
   Not everybody had gone by any means, but the turnstiles,
   people started going through the turnstiles and very
   quickly it recovered.

Q. You then heard a message that personnel were required in
   the ground? - A. All personnel were required into the
   ground, yes.

Q. In fact at that point you spoke to Superintendent
   Marshall? - A. Yes.

0. Had you spoken to him earlier?   - A. During the morning I
   had.

0. But I mean in these critical times? - A. No.     In fact I
   don't recall seeing him.

0. I think the arrangement was that you would stay outside
   and he was going to go in with... ** A. Yes, he said,
   "I'll take most..."    When the majority of people^had
   gone you could see then the policemen.    I couldn t guess
   how many there were, but you could see several officers
   about.   lie said, "I'll take the majority of these in.
   You keep a grip of this back end."    I remember him usin®
   those words particularly, "Keep a grip of this back end.
   He took most of the officers in and he must have gone in
   through B or C.    He certainly went down the side.

0. I don't think we need to deal with it in any great
   detail, but in fact is it right you tried to arrange a
   cordon at that point to keep more fans out of the ground.
   - A. Yes.   Shortly after that there was a message I
   heard, "No more people into the ground."  "Don't allow
   any more people into the ground.1   Very quickly after
                                                             26



                                                      R. WARING


   tljat message the little blue gates on the turnstiles,
   they all snapped to, very quickly.    So using the          ^
   officers I had got, perhaps a dozen or so,   we cleared    tne
   people out of there.

Q. How many, in round terms, how many people were you             _
   excluding at that stage? - A. A hundred perhaps.

Q. It was a number but not a huge number? - A. Not a huge
   number.   We had some problem because a lot of those, of
   course, were ticket holders who had just turned up, they
   were a few minutes late and thought they were going to go
   straight in, but of course we wouldn't let them, which
   caused a bit of...

0. So they weren't very happy with you? - A. To say the
   least.    I was able to keep that then virtually sterile.

Q. I think I am right in saying that by the time you
   actually got within the ground the match had already
   stopped, is that right, or were they still on the field?
   - a . No, I think it had stopped.

0. So in that sense I am not interested in what you saw
   because you didn't actually see anything within the
   ground. - A. No.

0. Apart from rescue attempts.   - A. That's right.

Q. I will try and summarise what you have said.   You were
   in charge under Superintendent Marshall of Sector 2A,
   which was responsible for patrolling the outer reaches of
   the ground.   You deployed your men by about eleven
   o'clock in the morning, had no significant problems in
   fact at these positions? - A. Yes.

0. There were fans arriving relatively steadily, certainly
   from about one o'clock onward and because of your
   patrolling you notice they were coming down both Catch
   Bar Lane and up Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

0. They were boisterous but you had no problems with them in
   the sense of public order matters? - A. That's right.

Q. You didn't put at any time on that day, between 11.00 and
   2.30 or thereabouts, any cordons across the bottom end of
   Leppings Lane near the roundabout to try and stop, search
   and filter fans and your recollection is that that did
   not happen in 1988 either? - A. No, it didn't.

Q. That's right, is it? - A. If I may, I would say you could
   not put a cordon across the road.   You have still got
   vehicular traffic.   I would not think that is a really
   practical option - not that far away.
                                                     R. WARING


You then approached the Leppings Lane end at about
quarter to two, in round terms.   There was a large crowd
out there but from where you were initially you could not
see any particular problems and in fact you yourself
wasn't jostled.   Well, you may have been jostled but you
certainly weren't crushed? - A. No.

You realised after a while that things weren't quite
right because the crowd was getting bigger and wasn t
moving forward, which was not your normal experience? -
A . Right.

You heard a tannoy message from PC Wright, whose voice
you recognised, and you also saw a police Land Rover
arrive and you heard Inspector Ellis, who you tnought was
using a loud hailer, making announcements? - A. Yes.

Then you saw Gate A open, which was open for a relatively
short time, but for some reason once it was closed the
problem outside for all practical purposes had resolved?
- A. Yes.

There were still people there but it wasn't anytning like
it was before? - A. That's right.

Then you heard the message about people going into the
ground and you dealt with the situation outside? - A.
Yes.

Have I correctly understood what you have said? - A. Yes,
sir.

             Cross-Examined by HR. P A Y N E ;

Mr. Waring, I wonder if you would be kind enough to run
through the planning of this operation by reference to
the Operational Order? - A. I have it, sir.

First of all can  you start at page 15?   Do you see that
this allocates the senior officers' duties? - A. Yes.

If you run your eye down the page you come to "Sector Two
(Liverpool)".   That is under Superintendent Marshall.
2A is you? - A. Yes, sir.

Your serials are   listed under that?   - A. Yes,   sir.

Were you given a   copy of this Operational Order?     -A.
Yes.

Were you familiar with its contents before the operation?
- A. Yes, I was, sir.
                                                                23


                                                          R. WARING


      0. Was it broadly the same as the previous year? - A. Yes,
         it was.

      0. Now I come to your particular duties, starting at Serial
         22, page 35.   Just running through these various
B-]      serials, 22, this is part of sub-sector 10 under
         Inspector Humphries.   Allocated to Middlewood Road,
         where the duties are set out under Phase 1 tnat the
         police have to patrol in pairs on their beat to maintain
         order and prevent the clash o f _supporters   Direct _
         supporters to side street parking and maintain security
         of various premises and so on.     Right? - A. Yes.

      0. That is serial 22.   Serial 23 had got similar duties on
         Middlewood Road? - A. Yes.

      0. Over the page,   24, another Serial in Middlewood Road? -
         A. Yes.

      0. Serial 25 - now we have moved to Hillsborough Precinct, a
          slightly different area but similar duties.   Here
          particular attention is given to the Hillsborough
          Precinct.   If one looks at Serial 25, phase 1 before the
D        match:
              "PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
              Hillsborough Precinct to Bradfield Road and from
              Bradfield Road to the Old Blue Ball Public House.
              Patrols will also be required in the Hillsborough
              Precinct, paying special attention to the    ^
              supermarkets where looting could take place.

         This Operational Order is not for general publication,      is
         it?  - A. It is a confidential document.

      0. It is confidential for use within the police?   - A. Yes,
         sir.

      0. To alert the police to possible problems and to set out
         their duties? - A. Yes.

      Q. Over the page, Serial 26, Parkside Road, Catchbar Lane.
         Now 27 is the serial which has got the duties to man the
         barriers at the mouths of roads? - A. Yes.

      0. Serial 27:

              "This serial will be responsible for manning the
              barriers to be placed at the mouths of the following
              roads to prevent access by supporters.   It is
              essential that access be prevented to all but
              residents.   At similar events in the past
              considerable damage has been caused by groups of    ^
              supporters, both before, during and after tne game.




H
                                                                29

                                                          R. WARINC


      Then it gives the list of roads they have got to look
      after? - A. Yes.

    0. We have got to go on now to 33, but I think I can take it
       reasonably shortly.   At Serial 28, that serial is a ls°
B      manning barriers at the list of roads which is given? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. 29, Leppings Lane, manning barriers?   - A. Yes.

    0. 30 is at Leppings Lane roundabout, another eight police
       officers in Serial 30? - A. Yes.

    Q. Serial 31, another eight police officers at Leppings Lane
       roundabout? - A. Yes.

    0. With the particular duties which are set out there;  each
       of these serials being under a Sergeant? - A. That s
       right, sir.

    0. Serial 32, we have movad to Penistone Road North.   Now
       the duties here at phase 1 include, if one looks at tne
       instructions under phase 1:
D           "This serial will be responsible for part of
            Penistone Road North from the traffic island at the
            junction with Leppings Lane to the Travellers   Rest
            Public House.    This road will be extensively used
            by Liverpool supporters en route from Wadsley Bridge
            Stat-ion and coach parking areas in Claywheels Lane
            and Penistone Road North/Halifax Road.    They will
            maintain order and ensure that supporters do n o t .
            possess items prohibited by the ground rules...

       - A. Yes.

    0. Then one can look at the further duties under A and B.
       Serial 33, another eight police officers on Penistone
       Road North with similar duties at a point slightly
       further away from the ground? - A. Yes.

    0. So that is that batch of your responsibilities^ and then
       you were also responsible for Serial 44 - A. The mobile
       s erials.

            THE CORONER:     Can you give me the page number?

            MR. PAYNE:     Page 47, sir:

    0. Were the duties of Serial 44 under Inspector Wardle,
       under the control of Police Sergeant Hughes:

            "This serial will work in conjunction with Road
            Traffic Officers on the A.616 at Oughtibridge on the




H
                                                   R. WARING


        one-way system to check at random coaches and mini
    /   buses carrying Liverpool supporters.

        Vehicles stopped will be checked to ensure
        passengers are in possession of tickets, are not
        under the influence of alcohol or in possession of
        alcohol and are considered fit to attend this
        ev e n t ."

   - A. Yes.

Q. The jury has heard from passengers who were in fact
   stopped under these instructions? - A. Yes.

Q. Did the instructions go on:

        "Where this is not the case, or where they are in
        possession of alcohol or under its influence
        consideration should be taken regarding action under
        the appropriate legislation or returning them to the
        motorway."

   - A. Yes.

0. Then there is provision for labelling of coaches and mini
   buses to signify they have been checked? - A. Yes.

Q. That's is 44 and then you next serial is 46, at page 49,
   a mobile patrol in the Stocksbridge area? - A. Yes.

0. Serial 47, another mobile patrol and 48, another mobile
   patrol, each allocated to a particular area? - A. Yes.

0. Now, Mr. Waring, by what means were these^instructions
   conveyed to the people in each of the serials? -
   A. First of all the serial - Inspectors and Sergeants -
   get a very much cut down version of this, which relates
   to their specific duties.   Mot everybody gets this great
   tome, so they would get that.   The Inspectors would
   attend the pre-briefing, which was on Friday before the
   match and they would all attend the main oriefing which
   was on the match day.

Q. In your own personal patrolling around the ground, during
   the time you have been talking about before the match,
   were these duties in fact being carried out? - A. These
   are all mobile, which means they are all in a vehicle.

0. No, I didn't mean the mobile ones.   I mean the^ ones
   closer to the ground where you have described that you
   patrolled around.   Were the duties allocated in the
   Order in fact carried out? - A. I was quite satisfied tne
   officers were paying active attention to the crowd and
                                                                 31


                                                            R. WARING


         were carrying out those instructions, as far as is in the
         l£w and practicable.

    0. You have told the jury about your experience in the 1989
       match an you mentioned in that connection, when you were
B      talking about the size of the crowd outside the
       turnstiles, that you have seen large crowds assembling on
       previous occasions? - A. Yes, I have.

    Q. But not as big as this one? - A. Not as big as that one.

    Q. Can you please tell the jury what p r e vi ou s _occasions are
       you referring to? — A« I worked the semi- final in 1988«
       I worked the semi-final, I think it was 1987, whicn was
       Coventry and Leeds and I have worked numerous matches
       from the early eighties when I was an Inspector at the
       Division, the Hammerton Road Division that covers the
       Sheffield Wednesday ground.

    Q.    I wonder if Sergeant Griffiths would be kind enough to_
         put up 255, please?     On these occasions you are speaking
         about, including the 1988 semi-final, has there ever been
         a practice to attempt to organise queues of spectators
Q        stretching back into Leppings Lane and Catch Bar Lane?
         A. As far as that?

    0. Yes. - A. No, the queuing takes place on the turnstiles
       out - well, depending how many people are^there, beyond
       the blue gates, the queues actually form into lines there
       towards the turnstiles, but not further back.

    0.    Now on this occasion,   as you have described, there was a
         large mass of people,    as we know, outside the turnstiles.
         - A. Yes.

    Q. How can that be compared with the crowds which have
       assembled on previous occasions? - A. It was much more
       dense, without a doubt.   When you get a large crowd
       there it is difficult.   In fact it is virtually
       impossible to maintain ordered lines, but when in the^
       past I have seen large crowds there and the ordered lin es
       have gone, there has still been the capacity for people
       to move, the crowd hasn't been so densely packed to^
       prevent people going through the turnstiles, which it
       appeared had happened.

    0. When there is a large crowd assembling in a short space
       of time outside the ground at the approach to the
       turnstiles, why is it difficult to maintain ordered
       lines? - A. It is the volume of people and to some extent
       it is the type of person.   I am not being disparaging
       when I say that, but it is not easy to get people who are
       queuing to go into a football match, who are excited and
       all the rest of it, it is not easy to get them to




H
                                                     32


                                                R. WARING


maintain lines, and I am saying no more than tnat.    It
i£ not an easy process.   The use of horses and wnat have
you, it is slightly restricted in there.   It is quite a
restricted area.   It looks very large but it is not very
large.   It is not enormous when you come to start moving
horses around in there with people all over.   Horses
tend to operate in the area outside the blue gates,
moving people, keeping the crowd on the move, if you
like, making sure they are going in.   You get officers
inside there whose job it is, as far as they are able, to
maintain those lines and queues.




            0. In the period you are
                                                                 33


                                              R. WAR IJ1G


    Q. In the period you are speaking about, Mr. Waring, has there
       evef been a practice to your knowledge of attempting to hold
       up the crowd at some distance back away frora the ground up
       Leppings Lane or Catchbar Lane and let them down in batches?
       - A. No.
B
    Q. Have you ever known anything like that to happen? - A. I
       have never known that take place.

    Q. Now finally you were on duty in 1988 and 1989 and the jury
       now knows that there is a very significant difference in
       what happened during the last half-hour before the appointed
       time for the kick-off? - A. Yes.

    Q. From your observation are you able to help as to the reason
        for the large build-up in 1989 compared with the comfortable
       access in 1988? - A. I wonder if it is because a lot of
        people were familiar from 1988 what the geographical layout
        of the ground was; they knew where the best places to park
        were; they knew perhaps significantly where the major parts
        of the Police operation took place and I think there was
        perhaps a little bit of familiarity crept in, they knew
        where they were, they thought they knew exactly where they
D       were going, they could do whatever they wanted to do in the
        way of entertainment, they were passing the time before the
        match and then "We know where the ground is, off we go".

              MR. PAYNE:   Thank you very much.


                       Cross-Examined by MR. I S A A CS :

    Q. Chief Inspector, I just want to look again please at the
       position when you came back down to the ground again just
       to set the time when you were hoping to satisfy yourself
       fairly quickly thereafter that Phase 1 was complete and
       you could move your sector on to Phase 2? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You said, I want to be sure about it, that at that time
         you felt there was no problem with that crowd and that
         you expected it to get into the ground on time? - A. As I
         immediately approached it?

    Q.   Yes? - A. What I said was it was a larger crowd than   I
         have seen before but I have seen large crowds get in   in
         no t i m e .

    Q. That was around 2.45? - A. Yes,     I would agree with that.

    Q. And that it was within a matter of moments  that your
       perception of that crowd then changed? - A. Yes, it did,

    Q. But without you being able to ascertain what it was that
       was happening at the entrances to the turnstiles? - A.
       That is right, I could not exactly see what had happened




H
                                                             34

                                           R. WARING



     but there had been what I would call a sea-change between
     me Seeing that crowd at I don't know what, just after 2,
     quarter-past-2 and going to the other end.  Between then
     and coming back there had been a sea-change there, something
     you know things had changed dramatically.

Q.          THE CORONER: Excuse me, you said "quarter-past-2".
     Did you mean quarter-past-2 or did you mean quarter-to-3?
     - A. No, sorry.    I am trying to describe the two occasions
     I saw the crowd at Leppings Lane.    When I described walking
     from Middlewood Road along Leppings Lane, it was earlier
     than quarter-past-2, wasn't it, when I last saw, when I
     described things as being nicely under control, between then
     and coming back there had been a sea-change.    That is the
     only way I can describe it.

           THE CORONER:  Forgive me for interrupting you.    I
     thought it was a slip of the tongue.

Q.          M R . ISAACS: And from your position could you tell
     whether at that latter time, the quarter-to-3 time or
     the moments afterwards when your perception of the ability
     of that crowd to get in, could you tell whether there
     were people at that time actually going through the turn­
     stiles or was that view blocked to you? - A. I could not
     see anybody going through the turnstiles because I don't
     think there were.    I could see the turnstiles, narrow gate.
     I could see the top.    I could not see people actually
     filtering through as they do, I could not see that
     happening.

Q. And you have described the Police attempts both by the
   Land Rover loud speaker and the Tannoy of the ground asking
   people to not push and to ease back? — A. Yes.

Q. Putting the corollary of that to you, did you actually see
   people either pushing or jostling or attempting to move    ^
   forward in that way? - A. I would describe it as "jostling
   forward, yes.

Q. Jostling forward? - A. Certainly.

Q. Was that helpful to or not helpful in terms of getting
   people into the turnstiles? - A. It was absolutely against
   it.

Q. And just so that we completely finish the picture, having
   heard those remarks over the two sets of speakers it
   appeared to have no effect? - A. None whatsoever.

           MR.   ISAACS:   Thank you, Chief Inspector.

            THE CORONER:  Mr. King, before you begin would it
      be in order if we had a cup of coffee because otherwise
                                                                     35

                                               R. WARING



         I will have to possibly interrupt you,     I don't know.

               Chief Inspector Waring, remember you are on oath so
         don't discuss the evidence during the break.

               CHIEF INSPECTOR WARING:     Very good sir.
B
               THE CORONER:   Thank you.    We will rise.

                              (Short adjournment)


               THE CORONER!   Yes, Mr. King.

                         Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

    Q. Chief inspector, you say that the plans for 1989, the
       operational plans were virtually the same as for 1988.
       - A. Yes, they were sir.

    Q. Were you aware that in 1989 the numbers of Officers deployed
       in the sector with which you were involved, Sector 2, had
       in fact been reduced? - A. I wasn't sir, no.
D
    Q. Does that come as a surprise to you that they had been
       reduced? - A. I would not have thought they had been
       reduced by many.  I wonder if  the number of serials in
       fact had been reduced or not.  It might be that some
       serials were now eight Officers instead of ten.  That is
       possible.

    Q. Since you weren't aware I will explore that with another
       Officer but just to help you the figures I have been
       supplied with indicate they were reduced by a total of
       about 75 men? - A. Is that the whole operation?

    Q.    The whole of the Sector 2? - A. The whole of Sector 2.
         I will accept what you say sir.

    Q.    So be it. - A. But I think the number of serials     was
         probably the same.

    Q. Well as I say I will investigate that with an Officer with
       more detailed knowledge.  No criticism of you. - A. I
       accept what you say.

    Q. You gave a summary of what your operational orders were
       and they seemed to be directed to matters concerned with
       law and order.  I think that would be fair, wouldn't it?
       - A. Yes, it would sir.

    Q. Tell me:  you have spoken at about quarter-to-3 being
       where you were positioned looking at the turnstile area
       at Leppings Lane and it was obvious to you that the crowd
       was so densely packed outside the turnstile area that tney
       weren't getting through the turnstiles.  That was your
       impression, wasn't it? - A. Yes, it was.



H
                                      R. WARING


Can you help us on this:  turnstiles are obviously a good
method of slowing down people's entry into a football ground,
aren't they? - A. Yes.

And that has a purpose because you want perhaps to check
people; you want to distribute them, there might be a number
of reasons why you don't want a large group of people
entering at once? - A. Regulated entry, yes.

But of course if you do have turnstiles the consequence of
that is  that people will build up outside while waiting
to get in.  That is the natural consequence of turnstiles.
- A. It is, yes.
The numbers who can get through from a crowd waiting outside
depends in part upon the number of turnstiles, doesn t it?
- A. Yes.
And depends upon the area where the crowd have to wait, the
more narrow and constricted the area  the more densely pac e
they are likely to be outside the turnstiles.  You would
agree with that? - A. I would not disagree with that.

You may not have been aware and if so I will direct my
questions elsewhere.   Were you aware of the numbers of people
who had to use any given number of turnstiles at the Leppings
Lane end? - A. No sir.

Do you know for example the capacity of the standing terrace
at Leppings Lane? - A . As I remember each pen is 2,000 and
I knew that all the Liverpool supporters were entering from
the Leppings. Lane end, generally speaking.

 So about 10,000 people on the terrace? - A. Yes,    something
 like that sir.

 Were you aware, if someone had asked you, where the 10,000
 people with terrace   tickets, which turnstiles they had to
 use at the   Leppings Lane end? - A. I   don't think I c o u ^
 have pointed them out to you accurately, no, but I could
 have split it into North Stand, West Stand.    I might not
 have been able to say West Stand but exactly where the
 standing people were going I don't think so, no.

 Were you not in fact given that information so you could
 help fans,   no? - A. No, I mean it no  doubt would come
 out in the  briefing to other serials   but I can't remember
 it, that is what I am saying.

 You yourself said that there was  confusion with people
 with tickets who did not seem to know where to go? - A. Yes.

 How did that manifest itself.  What sort of questions were
 they asking you? - A. They simply said:  "Ticket for standing,
 Where do we go for standing?  Where is the North Stand.
                                                               37


                                           R. WARING


    Q. When they said:  "Where do we go for tickets for standing?"     -
       what would you say? - A. Right-hand turnstiles.  I know
       the rough disposition, that is what I am saying.

    Q. So you knew- that they were the right-hand turnstiles? - A.
B      Yes, yes.

    Q. If Detective Sergeant Griffiths points those out which were
       turnstiles A-G, they were seven turnstiles? - A. Yes, indeed.

    Q. For some 10,000 people? - A. Yes.

    Q. Would you agree with me that if everybody, all 10,000 arrived
       at once, I am not saying it happened on this occasion, that
       would be impossible for seven turnstiles to deal with? - A.
       Yes, of course.

    Q. If everybody arrived in gentle segments over a period of
       hours that of course would be the optimum number, 500 arriving
       in the first half-hour and so forth down the way, that would
       be optimum too? - A. Yes.

    Q. Would you agree with me that there must come a time when
D      you would have to say to yourself:  "Well these seven turn­
       stiles cannot cope with more  than a certain number of
       people"? - A. Yes, if you are aware of all that information
       you may be able to make that judgment, yes.

    Q. I mean it is an important piece of information,   isn't it?
       - A. Yes indeed.

    Q. Were you yourself aware of the numbers per hour the turnstiles
       could cope with? - A. No.

    Q. You had not been given any instructions on that, no briefing
       on that at all? - A. Not what the flow rates are, no.

    Q. You had no information about that at all? - A. No.

    Q. It looks, therefore, as if you  had no briefing at all
       directed to the question of the flow of people arriving,
       the rate at which they wera arriving or the rate at which
       they were expected to arrive? - A. Flow rates through the
       turnstiles, that is quite right, there is no information
       on that.  The information as far as people arriving was
       concerned is that we can expect people arriving from 11 a.m.
       onwards and that is a matter of history, a matter of practice
       rather.

    Q. Is the position this therefore, from your point of view
       after the briefing you weren't expecting large numbers to
       arrive in the last half-hour.   Was that the picture? - A.
       I had no reason to expect that.

    Q. Were you aware of any sort of contingency planning either
       at the briefing or in the Operational Order to deal with




H
                                    R. WARING



what one would do if too many people arrived outside a
group of turnstiles for them to be able to get in
efficiently? - A. Not specifically.  Phase 1 of course could
be extended.  Phase 1 does not have to end at 3 o'clock.




                      Q. You mean you could postpone
                                                                 39



                                                       R.   WARIi.G




     Q. You mean you could postpone the kick-off? - A. well, I
B       suppose you could do that.  I am talking about Phase 1
        itself, actual getting people in.  Officers remaining
        on tne Phase 1 points could be extended, there is no
        bar to that, clearly.

     Q. But the position which you had seen when you arrived at
        quarter-to-3 was by tnat stage the number of people who
        had got tnrougii the perimeter gates into the area
        outside the turnstiles were too many for tne number of
        turnstiles available.   That must be the case from what
        you could see? - A. From what I could see clearly they
        had stopped going in, so the answer to that must be
        yes.

     0. You yourself had no specific orders designed to control
        the numbers going into the turnstile area, did you? -
        A. i.*0•

J3   0. Can I also ask you to look at the model and see if you
        will agree with me on this, that there is a funnel
        shape at the end of Leppings Lane, where the turnstiles
        are.  Do you see what I mean by funnel shape? - A. Yes.

     0. would you agree with me? - A. You mean the whole thing?

     Q. Yes. - A. The whole thing is funnel shaped, yes.

     Q. And you have got people converging from two directions,
        that is to say from up Leppings Lane and also from over
        the bridge? - A. Yes.

     Q. They converge on the funnel? - A. Yes,   they do.

     Q. The funnel is wide at the road end, and then it gets
        narrower as it gets into the area? - A. It narrows tnen
        widens again, yes.

     Q. Just looking at it, there is clearly a potential there
        for a problem if too many people arrive at the satne
        time, isn't there? - A. I have thought that.  The
        reason I say that is those turnstiles have been there
        for years.  Yes, I know what you mean, yes there is,
        but it had never arisen before, that is what I am
        saying, that we rely on years of practice, everybody
        does, and what you say is right.

     0. I am very pleased you agree with ne but I am wondering
        why you agree with me? - A. I agree with you because
        yes, it is funnel shaped and in hindsight you could
        look at that and say yes, it's funnel saaped, you know,
        it has always been a problem, but the answer is it
        hasn't always been a problem.  The turnstiles have
        always been like that as long as I can re n enber.


H
                                                             40



                                                      R. WAGING




    Q. So be it.  So if anybody is sitting down planning in
B      advance how to control crowds entering a football
       ground, one of the things you look at is the
       configuration of the end of the around into \^hich they
       enter, that must be right, mustn t it? - A. Yes,
       indeed.

    Q. You have agreed with me you would consider the number
       of turnstiles available for the sort of crowd you would
       expect? - A. I would think so, certainly.

    0. One of the things you would want to avoid would be too
       many people in the area immediately outside tne
       turnstile to allow efficient entry.  That must be
       something you would want to avoid? - A. It certainly is
       a consideration, yes.

    Q. Two matters, you say that you became aware at 2.30 taat
       the road had been closed? - A. Yes.
D   Q. Were you aware of a problem in Leppings Lane which
       explained why that order was given? - A. Ho.

    Q. So you weren't conscious of it? - A. Not a specific
       problem, no.

    Q. You say in answer to the question, could you have
       prevented people joining the mass of people at the back
       of the whole turnstile araa, where you were watching at
       quarter-to-3. - A. Yes.

    Q. You said, "If manpower had been readily available, well
       I suppose we could have stopped people joining".  Did
       you hear any request for extra manpower at any time^
       shall we say between 2.30 and 3 o'clock? - A. I don t
       recall hearing a radio message like that, no.

    Q. Thank you very much.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPQLE

    0. Inspector, can I just show you a photograph, C305?    It
       is in the bundle in front of you. - A.  Yes, I see it.

    0. It is very helpful evidence about your  raany years of
       experience at Hillsborough, in which you have seen sorae
       large crowds assemble at the Leppings Lane end? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. And you were saying that queues fornied in lines and
       there are, in fact, as there were on tnis day, serials
       deputed to be outside those turnstiles, and one of
       their express functions is to form orderly queues? - A.
       Yes.


H
                                                             41



                                                 R.   iJ ARI WG




Q. Can you look at this photograph.  This is a scene which
   I can tell you was taken at 2.30 on the clay of the
   Hillsborough match. - A. Yes.

0. And outside turnstiles A-G do you see the Police
   Officer on the horse in the middle of that, just by the
   brick wall, you can see his helmet? - A. Yes, I can.

Q. If you go slightly to the right there is a gentleman,
   an older gentleman in a red jacket with a flat cap on.
   - A. Yes, I can see him.

Q. There is a space in between hiia and the chap in front
   as he is going through the turnstile? - A. Yes.

Q. That is quite a large crowd. Is that the sort of thing
   that normally occurs at Hillsborough when there is a
   large crowd, that sort of line extending back towards
   the perimeter gate? - A. Yes, that is fairly typical.

Q. Your evidence also was that on previous occasions when
   large crowds have assembled, they have gone through the
   turnstiles without any problem at all.  Indeed, you
   have been amazed on a number of occasions that they
   have disappeared? - A. Yes.

Q. But as far as you can remember they have only ever
   extended beyond the perimeter gates up to the roadway
   outside? - A. And into the concourse area just outside
   the gates, yes.

0. But never to a situation where that sort of scene that
   we see on that photograph couldn't be maintained by the
   Officers? - A. That's right.

Q. Of course, the difficulty with turnstiles, as Mr. King
   was just saying, is that if there is, for whatever
   reason, pressure that pushes forward, so that the scene
   we see here changes. - A. Yes.

Q. Then people can't get in through the turnstiles? - A.
   That is right, they stall.

Q. Because you have probably got more than one person
   perhaps trying to get in through the gates? - A. Yes.

Q. The turnstiles themselves operate less efficiently? -
   A. Yes.

Q. And that contributes to the build-up? - A. Yes.

Q. So the object of the exercise is to avoid that
   pressure? - A. Yes, and to maintain what you see here.
                                                            42



                                                       WARING




Q. Just to go back again, you were asked a question, had
   it ever been the practice to forsn queues going up
   Leppings Lane or going along Catch Bar Lane? - A. Yes.

Q. I want to ask that question in a slightly different
   way:  has it ever been necessary when a large crowd has
   arrived, because of the numbers of people there, to try
   and keep people going up Leppings Lane along Catch Bar
   Lane? - A. It has never been necessary.

Q. Presumably that explains the answer there was no
   practice to form those queues in that way, never in
   your experience or anyone else's experience? - A. That
   is right.  It is very much a question of custom and
   practice and that has never happened.

0. Can I just also, switching slightly to the questions
   i*jr. King was asking you, about the shape of the
   turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end. - A. Yes.

Q. We have heard frora one witness who was saying that a
   danger can occur if you have a funnel effect to the
   people at the point of the funnel.   If you are trying
   to channel a lot of people into a small area, the ones
   at the front are most likely to be subjected to
   pressure? - A. Yes.

Q. They are getting it froai all sides? - A. Yes.

Q. If you look at the plan now - I an sure you are
   familiar with the layout anyway - we can see that what,
   in fact, happens, is that there is a narrow entrance at
   the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

Q.   And then it spans out? - A. Yes.

Q.    So it is the opposite effect from having thenarrow,
     pinpoint down, you have got the wider area at the
     turnstile? - A. Yes.

Q. One final area, you were asked by the learned Coroner,
   being asked about tickets, and you were saying you
   didn t know whether it was because it was easier to ask
   you, or whether they didn't know where they were going.
   - A. Yes.

Q. But you could see the signs over the turnstiles, "A",
   "B", "C"? - A. Yes, I could see those quite clearly.

Q. And you think it is fair to say if you are not used to
   a large crowd, when you come down and you are faced in
   front of you with a large mass of people, that in
   itself can be disorientating and you don't know what
   you want to do, so you look around for help? - A. Quite
                                                          43



                                                 R. WARING




  probably, yes.  I make no more point of that than
  people were asking me and it may have been that it was
  easier to ask me than raake of it what they could.

Q. And help them out if they were suddenly faced with a
   situation they weren't expecting? - A. Yes.

Q. Thank you very much.

              Cross-Examined by ISRS. Hc3RIErf

Q. Chief Inspector, why do you think Police Officers
   bother to check football coaches a long way from the
   ground, when they don't bother to check them as they
   are coming down Leppings Lane - for alcohol, this is? -
   A. Well, the operation is designed - there is
   legislation regarding coaches and minibuses, regarding
   offences of carrying alcohol and what have you, so they
   are checked well away from the ground.  The idea is to
   try and spread the Police operation away from the
   ground a little, and then they are directed, they are
   not allowed to park willy-nilly.  Coaches were directed
   to specific coach parks on Claywheels Lane and then
   later in Halifax Road where there are other Officers.
   So it is a screening process away from the ground and
   then when they park at the ground, and the parking of
   such vehicles particularly is monitored, then there are
   further Officers there to do a similar check.

Q. Could not these fans buy alcohol after getting out of
   the coach and then carry them down to the ground? - A.
   Well, that is the whole problem.  I tried to allude to
   that.  There is legislation talking about public
   service vehicles, tne bus tnat you aire from a bus
   company; a minibus that you hire from a proper bus
   company; if as a group you hire a transit van, provided
   it is a minibus, and a minibus is defined - I think it
   is something like eight seats or more - but when you
   get people who hire things like an ordinary transit
   vans with no seats in the back, and they just all sit
   in a mass, then the legislation does not apply to that.
   So it is not quite as straigntforward as it seems.
   Public service vehicles, proper minibuses, yes.  People
   trying to enter the ground, attempting to enter or
   actually entering the ground, yes, the legislation
   covers them.  It is that in between time, where it is
   not so difficult, you are relying there on advice,
   cajoling, good Police practice, trying your best, but
   at the end of the day you can't snatch it off people
   and to do so I think would be very provocative.

Q. I just don't see the purpose of stopping them so far
   away and then allowing them to pass along down Leppings
   Lane, for instance, when it is so close to the main
entrance. - A. Yes, but coaches, if we are talking
about coaches and whatever, they are not allowed into
Leppings Lane, they are directed to parking areas ....

Mo, I mean the fans themselves who have travelled on
the coaches? - A. Yes, I think I understand ....

I think it should be a follow through, right the way
along, if that is the rule .... - A. I think I
understand what you are saying madam, and I think you
are probably right.  The problem is that there is no
power for Police Officers to confiscate away from the
ground, and I think when somebody is several hundred
yards away, or even a hundred yards away from the
ground you can't really say he is attempting to enter
at that stage.  I think you would be on unsure ground,
and to force a confrontation with people, trying to
take things off them, may be counter productive, so we
are left with what I call, I think, advice and
monitoring, advising people, "You will not be allowed
to take that into the ground.  You will not be allowed
in the ground if you are drunk", and then trying to
monitor that behaviour towards the ground.

But you are allowed to take alcohol from them if they
have been travelling on a coach? - A. Yes, you are,
because it is an offence to carry it on a coach to a
designated sporting event.

It is puzzling me, that one, because I personally would
ask them, if they were making their way to the ground,
I would advise them that they wouldn't be able to take
it in, if they were coming down Leppings Lane. - A.
Indeed, they are.  They are advised, "You will not be
allowed to take that into the ground", and indeed they
are not allowed by statute to take it into the ground,
or attempt to enter with it.

So by stopping them further away from the ground this
would have the effect of delaying  fans, and instead of
them being allowed to just travel  tnere and then be
checked later, this does delay them, doesn't it? - A.
Any sort of check of that nature is bound to have a
delaying effect.  What you find is that organised
transport tends to arrive in plenty of time.   If you
hire a coach to a football match it will normally get
you there in plenty of time.

Did you know taat the Traffic Coramissioners had advised
coach firms not to arrive at their location prior to an
hour before the kick-off? - A. Yes.
You did know? - A. Yes, I did, and they are to leave
and not stop - there are quite a few restrictions on
them, aren't there?

Yes. - A. To leave straightaway and not to stop, or
something, w i t h i n you know, to leave immediately.

Would you agree that this would have the effect of a
lot of coaches arriving near the ground round about the
same time, 2 o'clock for instance? - A. Well, that is
possible.  It need not necessarily be so.  In my
experience that doesn't happen.  There were two
designated coach areas for Liverpool people that day.
The first one was Claywheels Lane, which is fairly
close to the ground, and then once that is full people
are then directed up Halifax Road, which is the big
dual carriageway to the north of the ground, and they
just don't - whether it is just natural laws - people
just don't normally all turn up together like that.
The coaches start arriving, you get earlier ones, all
right, I accept what you say about the Traffic
Commissioner's advice, as I understand it that is what
it is, advice, but they do arrive over a steady period
and I can't recall us having trouble parking coaches,
with them all arriving at once I mean.

I do know of an incident where a coach driver was
actually fined because he arrived at a city or a town
before the advised time.

      THE CORONER:   I don't think you can put that.
This Officer doesn't know, and in fact he said as far
as he knows it is advice, but I don't think you can say
that.   He said it isn't a problem as far as his
experience is concerned.   This time, if I may say so,
you got your question quite right.   I am not
complaining about your question at all.

     HRS. Mc3RIEN:   I used your words,   sir - I made a
note of it:

Were you aware that there were parking signs saying
half a mile to the stadium, tnis is advising car
drivers, when in fact the distance was two miles to the
stadium? - A. Ho, I don't recall seeing those at all.
They were in fact two miles away from the stadium?

Yes, they were and on the posters or whatever they
were, they said, "Stadium half a mile ahead". - A. No,
I wasn't aware of that.

     THE CORONER:   Can you rephrase that?  Are you
saying that these were official Police notices, or are
you saying these were notices which people put up into
                                               R. WARING




their car park saying "Half a mile frosa the ground",
because it snakes a very big difference.

     HRS. Mc5RI£N:   Yes, I don't know who put the
signs up.  I would like to know this because a number
of people have told me that they had this problem.
They arrived late because they followed the
instructions on these signs. - A. Yes, the only thing I
would say to that is that we don't possess signs which
say it is so far to the ground, what we do possess are
signs which say something like "Sheffield
Wednesday/Hillsborough", and then there is an arrow
that you can turn, and you put those at junctions, and
it will say, "Turn right", or "Straight on", but not it
is two miles or half a mile to the stadium.  We don't
possess those.

Ho, I don't know who put there there and I would like to
know really, if it is possible.   So there were a number
of possible delays why people may have been turning up
late that day.  I get the impression that you feel
segregation is very important at football matches - do
you? - A. I wish that it weren't but yes, I think it
is, outside.

That is to keep the opposing fans separated? - A. Yes.

Do you think it would be a good idea to segregate fans
outside the stadium, I mean ticketless fans from ones
with tickets.  Would that be a good idea, do you tnink?
- A. If it can be achieved, yes, it probably is a good
idea, but obviously it is a difficult thing by looking
at somebody to tell, isn't it, from the direction he is
coming and all the rest of it, whether he has got a
ticket or not, other than by asking him directly, and
then doing something with him if the answer is no.  I
accept the principle, the practicality of it is not
quite so straightforward.

Has it been done, in your experience? - A. Yes, it has.
l/hether it has ever been done on such a large match I
am not so sure, but certainly there have been cases
where people have been left outside grounds and they
have obviously been clearly the ones witnout tickets,
and it is very, very difficult, tney hav.e been sort of
corralled.   If that is ever tested, I don't know, but
practicalities and needs must sometimes.   If it can be
achieved, then yes it has been done, and it can
sometimes be done.   Whetner it can be done on a match
this size ....

Wouldn't you think it was more important at a match of
this sort, where people may turn up without tickets
because tney have been given such a poor allocation of
                                                         47




                                                     WARIHG



    tickets, that there is a real possibility of this
B   happening? - A. I never quite understand people who do
    turn up for matches, all ticket matches, without a
    ticket, but I accept to some extent what you say.  It
    is the practicality of achieving it that is difficult.




D




E




F




                           /0. I was thinking




H
                                                       R- WARING


Q. I was thinking if the Police could be one step ahead
   and plan ahead for this eventuality?

     THE CORONER:    I do not think that this Officer can
take the matter any further.   You have put it to him and he
has said as far as he can go but he cannot really make
Police policy.   I am sure he might wish to but not in the
Inquest anyway.

Q.         MRS. M c B R I E N : You say it has been done before.
     Could you tell me how they usually do it?^“ A. It is
     usually a question of what you are left with outside-
     It is not a question of being able to identify people
     as individuals out on the street, "Have you got a
     ticket?   Yes or no?".       It is not quite as
     straightforward as that.        There are a large number of
     people who are going to keep away from Police
     Officers, aren't they?        If they haven't got a ticket
     they are going to keep away and make an attempt
     perhaps to get in covertly later on'but they will not
     be giving themselves up to be corralled.        What has
     h appened in the past is that what you have ended up
     w ith is perhaps a couple of hundred people outside
     who clearly are the ticketless ones who weren't able
     to get in.      To prevent them either climbing over or
     going on the rampage they have been corralled.         That
     has been practical policemanship but it is not easy
     to achieve.

Q. You could not have a cordon of Police across Leppings
   Lane for instance, at either end of Leppings Lane,
   checking the tickets, could you? - A. It is a
   question of balance, madam, as all things are.   A
   terrific amount of disruption and what have you is
   caused, isn't it, by football matches?  You just
   can't ensure that kind of thing 100 per cent.  The
   answer to your question is that given the amount of
   manpower, yes, you could put a cordon all the way
   across Leppings Lane.  Without being silly, you could
   put Policemen around the ground, virtually shoulder
   to shoulder, and vet everybody but it is a question
   of balance, what is necessary, what we can achieve
   within the resources we have got and what will the
   public stand.  You can only be so oppressive, if I
   can use that word.

 Q. I think you have got to be strict with people really
    for safety reasons? ~ A. Madam I am not disagreeing
    with you.
                                                          49




                                                   R. WARING
     /




Q. And segregate them? — A. I am not disagreeing with
   you.

Q. Do you know that ticketless fans are sometimes taken
   to a nearby sports ground to listen to the match on
   the radio so that they do not create a problem? - A.
   I can't recall that being done.  I can imagine, the
   corralling I have talked about before, a radio
   appearing among those people and them actually doing
   that to pass the time but I don't recall it as a
   planned tactic.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I think you have gone
quite far enough down that line, more than far enough.

Q.      MRS. M c B R I E N : If there would have been a
     filtering system and if it had been used then the
     task of the Officers near the turnstiles would have
     been made much easier, would it not? - A. If it were
     possible to carry all those checks out in the street
     before they got to the turnstiles then the answer  is
     yes but I question the practicality or even the
     legality.

Q. So the congestion could have been avoided had you
   been able to do these things further back? - A. It
   depends how quickly it can be achieved.  I mean there
   is only so much you can do, there really is.  I
   understand what you are trying to say but there
   really is only so much you can do.  Some things
   really, when it comes to the finality, you can only
   do when the person is entering or attempting to enter
   a sports ground.  That is when the crunch time comes
   for applying that legislation.  You understand what I
   mean?

Q. Yes.   - A. I know what you are getting at.

Q. I wonder if I can make this point?  There were
   barriers put at the end of the side roads to prevent
   people going down those roads? - A. That is a
   historical problem.  That has been an agreement with
   the people who live down there for many years because
   of the trouble they have suffered and, of course,
   have lived next door to a football ground all the
   time.

Q. I am wondering if the same sort of principle could
   have been used by just allowing access to the people
   who lived in Leppings Lane or who wanted to go to the
   shops.  You could ask them, "Where do you live?" and
x#                                                                   50
     A

                                                             R. WARING


              you would know straight away that they did not live
              there if they did not know the names of the roads? -
     B        A. Yes.

         Q. So it would be quite obvious that they were trying to
            get through and they should not be? - A. I don't know
            how familiar you are with that little bit of
            Sheffield but Leppings Lane is quite a main crossing
            point there.  If you close Leppings Lane then you
            have got quite a hike round really and, of course, it
            is a bus route as well.  To actually close the whole
            thing off at either end and only allow people in who
            have not got alcohol - I know what you are saying but
            I think the practicalities of it is why it has not
            been done.

         Q. Was the road not actually closed off to traffic? - A.
            Later on it was, yes.

         Q. At 2.30? - A. Yes.

         Q. I can understand that is quite a big decision for
            anyone to take to stop the traffic.   Gould the same
            thing apply to pedestrians who were not supposed to
            go down there?   Traffic was stopped from using the
            road and yet they had arrived, done nothing wrong,
            and were told, "You can't come down here"? - A. It is
            a relatively simple matter to stop traffic.   It is a
            relatively simple matter to step in the road and stop
            traffic.  To stop pedestrians in their hundreds, even
            thousands, to filter them is a different matter
            altogether.   It is easy to stop a car, isn't it, but
            to stop persons as individuals you are getting a~
            little bit more difficult?   You can only stop people,
            a Policeman can only stop a person, regulating
            traffic-wise under very strict conditions.   You can't
            just like stop anybody anywhere any time.   You can
            with a motor car;

         Q. The Police Officers are there to keep law and
            order? - A. To maintain law and order, yes, indeed.

         Q. If people come who should not be there they could
            create problems, couldn't they? - A. They could.

              THE CORONER:     Mrs. McBrien,   you must move on I am
         afraid.

         Q.      MRS. McBRIEN:   Is it the usual procedure for
              Officers to go off for a meal round about kick-off
              time? - A. Just after.




     H
                                                         R. WARING
     /



Q. Just after? - A. Yes, if phase one comes to an end
   satisfactorily - I mean the demarcation in the Order
   is kick-off time but what that is alluding to really
   is that when people are inside the ground the match
   is commenced and the problems outside the ground are
   perceived to have gone away until the end of the
   match.

Q. Do you know if about 200 Officers were allowed to go
   off duty at 2.45 that day or is that something you do
   not know about? — A. No, I mean I don't know that.   I
   can't imagine that but I mean I don't know.

Q. Do you think it would be a good idea to suggest that
   Officers only go off for a meal....

     THE CORONER:   No, no, no.  It cannot possibly have
any bearing on how anybody came to their deaths on this
occasion as to what might be a good idea in the future.  I
am sorry, but I will not allow that question.

Q.      MRS. McBRIEN:   Did you expect the game to be
     delayed considering the obvious problems that you
     could see outside?

     THE CORONER:    Say that again because I did not hear
the beginning of it.

Q.      MRS. McBRIEN:   Did you expect the game to be
     delayed considering the obvious problems that you saw
     outside the turnstiles? - A. Not necessarily, not
     necessarily.   No, it was getting very close to three
     o'clock and as I have tried to explain my initial
     view was that it was difficult to tell there was a
     serious problem.   At the time in the circumstances I
     was in I didn't give any thought to it at the time.
     So at the time I didn't expect it or didn't think
     about whether it would be delayed or not.

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. R U S S E L L :

Q. My learned friend, Mr. King, asked you whether your
   duties were concerned with law and order at the
   beginning of his cross-examination.  Can you tell me
   this; you answered that they were but was it law and
   order to the exclusion of everything else including
   safety? - A. No, of course, not.
                                               R. WARING


Indeed safety was provided for along with public
order in the stated intention of the Operational
Order, was it not? - A. Absolutely.

I wonder if you and the Jury could turn to what I
believe is the third page of the Operational Order,
third paragraph? - A. The intention?

Yes, the intention.  We can see there the phrases,
public order and safety? - A. The two paramount
objectives, yes.

Back to back? - A. Yes.

Dealing first of all with the instance of public
order, can you remember there being any incidents
affecting public order that you heard about over your
radio before the match? — A. Just one.  I recall
hearing the mobile serials directed to the Fox public
house on Fox Hill Road.  What the nature of that
disturbance was I don't know but I remember hearing
them deployed.

I think the Jury have been to the Fox public house
and that is the public house just over a mile from
the ground in Fox Lane? — A. Fox Hill Road, sir.

I am sorry? — A. It is Fox Hill Road,   sir.

Can I briefly consider the feasibility of Police
action to stop people joining the growing crowds
outside the perimeter gates which you have been
invited to consider by the Coroner, Mr. King, and
latterly Mrs. McBrien?  Your view is that it would be
theoretically possible given a sufficient amount of
manpower? - A. Yes.

And presumably horsepower? - A. All the better.

In the situation which prevailed, namely shortly
before kick-off, with a crowd of football fans the
vast majority of whom no doubt had tickets, some of
whom had been drinking and who were determined to get
into the ground as near to kick-off or before kick-
off is possible, what sort of resources do you think
would have had to have been marshalled- to provide
such a barrier to stop people joining the back of the
crowd outside the perimeter gates?   First of all, at
what location do you think such a cordon would have
been erected? - A. It would have had to be across
Leppings Lane either side of the funnel, I think it
                                                               53




                                                         R. WARING


  has been described as.   Across the road there, and I
  think a loose cordon would take 20 Officers.   A
  cordon to be effective would take twice that number
  and you want two cordons.   So that is 80 Officers to
  have I think any effect.

Q. What about horses as well? - A. Probably three or
   four at each corner, and that is eight in all.

Q. In terms of proportion of resources, for example, at
   your disposal 80 Officers would have been about ten
   serials would it? — A. Eight serials, sir.

Q. You had thirteen serials, leaving aside the mobile
   serials at Stocksbridge, Oughtibridge and at least
   one other location, Wadsley I think? - A. Yes.

Q. So it would have taken well over half your strength
   to give the matter some perspective? - A. It would
   indeed and that strength would still have been
   deployed on phase one duties.

        MR. KING:      Sir, might I ask a question arising out of
that?

        THE CORONER:     Yes, Mr. King.

               Further Cross-Examined bv MR. K I N G :

Q. In the light of that answer, Chief Inspector, are you
   saying that really it was impossible for the Police
   to cope with the sort of numbers that arrived on the
   15th April at quarter to three which you saw, in
   terms you saw, in terms of preventing them getting
   into the densely packed area?  Are you saying from a
   Police point of view it was really impossible? - A.
   The way that crowd was at that time, I think I said
   the situation was irretrievable from the back.   The
   only thing that could be done I think was to relieve
   the pressure from the front given that the appeal
   over the loudspeaker, which was relying absolutely on
   the - what is the word I am looking for - crowd
   reacting when restraint was called for and it wasn't
   forthcoming.  There was no other way I don't think.

Q. I am not challenging what you have said.  I am just
   trying to see the implication of it because it is
   important, the answer you have just given to my
   learned friend.  Is it your view as a Police Officer
   of experience that if the sort of numbers arrived at
   about quarter to three which you saw on the 15th
                                                       R. WARING


  April, in your view, from a Police point of view
  would be impossible to deal with those sort of
  numbers at the Leppings Lane end? — A. Impossible to
  get the sort of resources together to deal with that,
  yes.

                    Further bv THE C O R O N E R :

Q. I think I have to ask you about that last point
   because I want to be sure that we have got this
   right? - A. Yes.

Q. Is your answer based on the fact that the crowd did
   not appear to be moving through the turnstiles in the
   way you have described it normally moves through the
   turnstiles? - A. That is when the problem became
   evident to me, that they weren't moving through the
   tu r n st il es .

Q. Because that is another variable, is it not? - A.
   Yes, because, as has been pointed out by one of the
   gentlemen, when the density comes to a critical level
   then that movement in fact is slowed and stopped.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. King, did you want to say anything
further?

     MR. KING:      I was busy writing,     sir.

     THE CORONER:      I am sorry.

             Further Cross-Examined bv MR. K I N G :

Q. Did I hear you say, Chief Inspector, that when you
   get to a critical level beyond that the crowd just
   stops and they cannot get through? - A. It slows and
   st o p s .

Q. What is the critical level? What does that mean? -
   A. When it gets to a certain density.  How you
   quantify that I don't know but it does get to a
   density where the movement that we have all talked
   about stops.

Q. In other words, there is a critical level in density
   beyond which you should not have the crowd? - A. That
   movement seems to stop but what that level is and how
   you judge it is another matter but nevertheless I
   agree that that is the situation.
                                                                 55




                                                                G. MHgfr


Q. You agree with the proposition that looking at the
   situation you have to consider what is the critical
   level? - A. Indeed.

           Further Cross-Examined bv MR. C ATCHPOLE:

Q. The object is to avoid getting to that critical level
   in the first place? - A. Yes, of course.

     THE CORONER:   Chief Inspector, thank you very much
for coming here this morning.  I know you were here on a
previous occasion when we never got round to you.  I am
sorry about that but it is quite difficult to get the
timing right.  Thank you for being here this morning.

                        GRAHAM MCKAY Sworn

                          Bv THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, my name is Graham McKay,        Detective
Superintendent with the South Yorkshire Police.

Q.        THE   CORONER:   You were at the matches    both in
     1988 and   1989? - A. Yes.

Q. You may well have been at other matches         as well in
   fact but the one we are mainly concerned         with is
   1989? - A. Sir, can I say I haven't been         at many
   other matches.  In fact, I have been at         only three
   matches in five or six years..

Q. Your experience of big matches is relatively limited
   compared with some of your colleagues? - A.
   Absolutely, yes.

Q. I think your brief, because you are a Detective
   Superintendent, was more the detection of crime than
   the actual management? - A. That is correct, sir,
   yes.

Q.   Than of the operation, so      to speak? - A. I had
     nothing at all to do with      the public order situation.
     My brief there on that day      was to deal solely with
     crime, committed crime and      preventing crime.

Q.   The reason why I have asked you to come is that you
     were an observer over a particular period? - A. Yes.

Q. If I turn to 1988 first of all, that is the year
   before the tragedy occurred, you were doing the same
   task I believe? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                            55




                                                          G, M



Q. Can you remember being in the Leppings Lane area at
   twenty to three or thereabouts? - A. Yes.

0. Can you just describe in your own words what the
   position was like in 1988 as far as you remember
       - a . Yes, I took up a position at the blue g a t e s -

Q. The perimeter gates? — A. That is right.

Q. Shall we put the picture up for you?  Do you know
   whether they were outside Turnstiles A to G or the
   other ones? - A. They were outside the Turnstiles A
   to G.




                                         /Q. A to G
                                                           G. McKAY



    0. A to G? - A. I can just check that,    sir,

B   0    We will put the picture up.   It is 258.   Can you see
         the picture can't take them all in.   Those are ttie
         perimeter gates outside turnstiles A to G and then tne
         ones to the left of the picture are the ones... - A.
         That's right, sir.   I was standing near the gates, near
         to the bridge.

    0. By the river end? - A. By the river.
                                                  He is pointing
    0. Just look where the officer is pointing,
       at the railing there, near the gate. - A. In that area,
       yes  sir,

    0. So that is where you were in 1938? - A. Yes, I took up
       that position in order that I may look at the crowd.   My
       interest there was in relation to pickpocket activity and
       I remained at that particular location throughout in
       1988.   I was in no way jostled by the crowd.   In fact I
D      was able to stand well back and observe them pretty well.

         On my arrival there at twenty to three there were, as you
         would expect, large numbers of people flowing through the
         turnstiles and there were always people waiting at the
         turnstiles behind that barrier to get in, but the
         turnstiles operated relatively freely and people,
         everyone who attended, did in fact get in.

         Prior to three, some time before three o'clock, several
         minutes before three o'clock, a lot of people started    _
         arriving who were quite obviously tne worse for drins, in
         Large numbers, and they began to flow througn the
         turnstiles with others as well.    At one time there was
         something of a backlog at the turnstiles and my
         recollection of it is that that backlog lasted after
         three o'clock.   In fact I don't think I left that area
         until about ten past three.   Nevertheless the turnstiles
         coped and everyone got into the ground.    The match on
         that day was a huge success.    There were very few
         arrests.   There was very little violent crime.     In fact
         only one violent crime that I can remember, but we took a
         bit of pasting with pickpockets and thefts from motor
         vehicles and thefts of motor vehicles.    As I say, that
         was my concern.   I am not particularly a football fan.

    0,   I assume there was there a bit of pushing and shoving
         even in 1988 in this crowd which you were observing? - A.
         Yes.   They had come there to see the match and obviously
         everybody would like to walk straight in.    Tnere is an
         excitement, a little bit of frustration about not being
         able to walk s traight in, but nevertheless relatively
                                                                58



                                                            G. McKAY


          good natured, although I have to say there were large
          numbers of people who were tne worse for drin< arriving*

B   q   . vie aretalking about 1988? - A. 1988 , yes.   Arriving in
          such numbers that excluding them would have been right
          out of the question.   You wouldn't have had^ the manpower
          to deal with those numbers.   Nevertheless they went in
          and there was no problem.

    0. Now on the 15th of April, 1989, you were assigned to the
       same task, so to speak? - A. Yes.

    0. As far as you were concerned it was a duplicate, if I can
       use that word, of the 1988 situation? - A. Yes, that s
       true.   It made sense to use exactly the same tactics
       that had worked so well the year before.   Everything
       appeared to be the same.  There were no perceived
       problems that could arise and where there were problems
       you made refinements which would adjust to those
       problems.   Certainly my approach to my particular area
       was changed because we had had so many crimes in relation
D      to pickpockets and thefts of motor vehicles.

    Q. So you upgraded your attention to that particular
       problem, is that what you are saying? - A. I certainly
       didn't have more men but I changed the way I used them.

    Q. Just so we can be absolutely clear about it, these men
       were there for a specific task, nothing to do with^
       control and in fact were presumably dressed in ordinary
       clothing, not in police clothing? - A. That's right.
       Eight of the men were forming pickpocket squads.

    0. We have no need to go into how they did it. - A. I
       mention that because they were my reason for going back
       to that area.   My experience of the previous year had^
       tended to show that   that was the area where we were going
       to get pickpockets in, if at all, and it made sense for
       me to go back to that area at that particular time.

    0. You went to the briefing, I presume,     like everybody else
       at eleven o'clock? - A. Yes.

    Q. Then you set about combing the area, but we are not too
       concerned about that because you had a very specific
       task.   I think I am right in saying that eventually you
       finished up at the Police Club and had some lunch? -
       No, I didn t finish up at the Police Club for lunch.

    Q. I realise that, but you went on from_there. - A. There
       was a reason for me   to go to the Police Club.   I stayed
       there a few minutes  and then went for some lunch in tae
       gymnasium.




H
I see.   In fact you went to the gymnasium for your meal
at about 1.50? - A. Yes.

Yes, I was just trying to bring you forward. _ It wasn't
a criticism.    I know there was a reason but it is not ^
relevant.    You left there at about quarter past two, tne
gymnasium? - A. Yes.

Was it then you decided you would go^ back to Leppings
Lane because that is where you thought... - A. It had
always been my intention to spend tnat part of tne matcn
in that area.

Can you remember about what time you arrived in Leppings
Lane in 1989? - A. I would have thought it would have
been twenty past to twenty-five past two.

Somewhat earlier than the previous year? - A. Yes.

Getting there at that time what was your initial
impression of the situation?   First of all, did you take
up a static position like you had done in 1988, or did
you roam about? - A. I took up a position near to a
barrier, a light barrier that had been set up on a
service road at the side of the turnstiles there.

You can't see it on this picture,   can you? - A. No.

Can we have the overview on?   Do you know the name of
the road, by chance? - A. The name of the road?

Yes, where that light barrier was. - A. I am not sure it
has a name.   It is just a little service road that runs
down the side, by the turnstiles, inside the perimeter of
the ground.

Oh, I see, I am with you now.    Can you put up the
overhead?   Can you orientate yourself on that? - A. Yes.
If one goes through the iron gates and then down the
outside of that light barrier towards the turnstiles,
there is a gate.   I am not sure whether it is marked
"Gate C".   Would that be right?

Yes, there is a Gate C there. - A. The gate which was
eventually opened.   There was a light portable barrier
there which made the rest of that service road a sterile
area.

That is the service road which eventually would lead to
the Directors' entrance? - A. That's right.   I spent
from that time until that gate was opened, in that area,
with brief occasions walking down the service area to
talk to other officers down there.
                                                            G. McKAY


    Q. Further away?     Away from Leppings Lane? - A. Away from
       Leppings Lane.

B             HR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, could I interrupt very
         briefly?   If may be helpful if the witness sees 301.
         think it refers to the barrier.

              THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mr. Catchpole:

    0.   Can you see those barriers with the line of police
         officers?   Is that more or less where you took up your
         position? - A. That's the area.

    0.   The gates are on your right hand   side? - A. That is   the
         area.

    Q. So this was about twenty-five past two, correct?     - A.
       Yes.

    0. Just tell me what you saw.    Don't look at that picture
       as far as the crowd scene is concerned because we were
D      •just trying to locate the barriers.   What was it like at
       that time? - A. It seemed to me to be busier at that time
       than at any time I had seen it the previous year, bearing
       in mind I had not been there at that time the previous
       year.    Nevertheless as the minutes progressed the crowd
       swelled quite considerably until we reached the situation
       where the crowd was so swollen it reached out of my sight
       down Leppings Lane and across the bridge.
                                                      or busier
    0. When you first got there you said it was busy,
       m fact than you remembered it from 1988. - A.  Yes.

    0. Presumably you could not see the turnstiles because they
                             ' ora you? - A. Oh, no, I could see
       were round the corner f
       the turnstiles.
                                          that people were
    Q. Did it appear to you at that point - A. Even at that
       actually progressing through them?
         point it seemed that the turnstile s weren't operating as
         efficiently as they should be doin       There was a large
         number of people behind that barri er  which holds them in
         towards the turnstiles.   Even at  that  stage,  although it
         got even more dense later, even at  that  stage  they did
         not seem to be operating as freely  as  they might   have
         been.  That was my perception of i t.    There  again,  it
         might well be that the same number  of  people  were  going
         in but you just could not see them because the crowd was
         so dense.

    0. Did you see uniformed police officers near the turnstiles
       at that time?  - A. Yes, there were uniformed police
       officers in that area under the control of Inspector
       Purdy.   My recollection now is that as time progressed




H
                                                               G. McKAY


       they became trapped in the crowd and I think some of tnem
       went through the turnstiles because they could not fight
       their way out of the crowd.
B
    0. They retreated? - A. They went back through tne
       turnstiles to escape from the crush, yes.

    0. Watching the situation, in fact you then went down the
       service road towards another serial whose task was away
       from Leppings Lane, is that right? - A. That s right.    I
       walked down there.   There was a Sergeant Hodgett and I
       went down there to tell him that the situation was^that
       the crowds were building up and that it mignt be ii. he
       could spare some men that they may well be required in
       that area.   As time progressed it was apparent that men
       on foot were going to be absolutely no use whatsoever.

    0. This was really outside your brief, but you w e r s j u s t ^
       alerting somebody to the possibility that help might be       c
       needed? - A. That's right.

D   Q. Based on your observation?     - A. Yes.

    0. You then returned, I take it, to this location?    A. I
       returned to the same area.    It was relatively
       comfortable.   There were plenty of people there but there
       wasn't the huge mass of people who were by now going back
       from the turnstiles and through the gate out into
       Leppings Lane.

    0. Did you notice were people calm, or angry or what? - A.
       It is very difficult to assess.    Initially, of course,
       there is a mood of exhilaration and there is the
       frustration of having to wait, but nevertheless the keen
       anticipation of seeing the game.    Of course as time
       progressed and little progress was being made, tnen that
       mood imperceptibly changed to impatience and one of
       frustration, perhaps.    Of course everyone wno had come
       there, with or without a ticket, had come there with one
       common purpose - to go in.    This wasn't a crowd to be
       told to wait round the corner.    That sort of policing
       was out of the question.    The only place tnat crowd was
       ever going to go was inside that ground.

            THE CORONER:   We are going to stop.  We will carry
       on after lunch.   We will start again at two o'clock.
       You are still on oath.   If you would be good enough not
       to discuss anything about the matter.

                          (Luncheon adjourn me nt )
                                    G. McKAY



Noy I think we left it at the point when you were describing'
that the mood had changed a little bit and you don't have
to repeat that but that is about right, isn't it? - A. The
mood definitely changed.

I think you saw Inspector Purdy who is a man you actually
know personally, don't you? - A. Yes.

He was not a stranger to you.   At about this time, do you
know approximately what time this was, I don't think I
asked you that? — A. I would imagine we are talking about
20-to-3.   The situation then was it had deteriorated to
the extent where I was beginning to get apprehensive
certainly.   I had not experienced those sort of crowds
before.  Whether or not the other Officers on duty had I
am unable to comment but certainly I didn't like it.    I
didn't like being there.

You weren't actually in the crowd were you? - A. I was a
part of the crowd inasmuch as I was on its periphery and
certainly there were plenty of people around me which
was quite different to being on the other side of that
barrier in the area going up to and through the gates.
Now at one stage I did venture into the area of the gates
and became so apprehensive and felt so hemmed in and crushed
that I came straight back out again.

When you say "the area within the gates" you mean the area
between those barriers which we have described and the
front perimeter gates you are talking about? - A. Where
they went through the wrought iron gates the main thrust
of the crowd as it were were then to get behind the
barrier, the chest high barrier, which led up to the
turnstiles. No one was really interested in coming down
towards the service road except perhaps as an area to
get a breather away from that or to wait for a friend
or perhaps one or two opportunist people without tickets
and that is the area I spent most of my time in, able to
move about reasonably freely but nevertheless certainly
involved in the crowd.

That is an interesting comment that you made.  You are
saying that when the people came through the outer
perimeter gates, however they managed that, we won't
worry about that, they aimed for the turnstiles as opposed
to just generally speaking coming down towards you? -
A. That is right.  There was never any severe pressure
in the area where I was standing.  There was no need for
lines of Police Officers to be thrusting them back and
when you think about it that is quite understandable
because the only way that they were going to get into
the ground was going to be through those turnstiles.

Yes, that is right.  They didn't press up at that point
against the blue concertina gate which you could see on
your right-hand side? - A. No.
                                                            63

                                        G. McKAY



Q. We are talking 20-to-3 now,   that is right isn't it? - A.
   That sort of time, yes.

Q. I don't know whether you can remember.  Do you recollect
   by chance whether the perimeter gates were open or shut,
   the blue perimeter gates? - A. At one stage, and I think
   it was a little bit later than that, the gates were
   deliberately shut in order to get some breathing space.
   Obviously if those gates could have been kept shut for
   some period of time then the turnstiles would have reduced
   the pressure inside and perhaps the flow of people into
   the turnstiles could have been monitored.   I was not up
   near those gates at that time and they were under
   tremendous pressure.  There were a number of Police horses
   in that area at this time completely engulfed in the crowd.
   Missiles were being thrown and the mood of the crowd had
   become quite different.  The atmosphere was completely
   different.

Q. May I ask:  are you saying this from your own personal
   observation at the time or in retrospect and what people
   have told you? - A. No, any evidence that I give to this
   Court today will be my evidence.  I am aware of the fact
   that some of what I say might not necessarily be what
   my colleagues would agree with, but nevertheless anything
   I tell this Court today is my evidence.

Q. That is what I am interested in.       I know you are a
   Detective SuperintHTdart and therefore a very experienced
   witness but I want to be quite sure like other witnesses
   you don't fall into an easy trap of making assumptions
   or drawing conclusions from facts and that is all I was
   trying to say.     I was not in any sense criticising you.
   - A. In fact the evidence I can give in relation to that
   situation is quite localised.       I could not, for instance,
   give any evidence regarding what happened on the other
   side of the blue gates. The crowd was too dense for me to
   see.  The crowd stretched out of sight down Leppings Lane
   and up Leppings Lane.       I am aware of what other Officers
   have said in respect of the crowd there.       The only
   evidence I can give is in relation to the people who
   were up against the turnstile and in my immediate vicinity.

Q. You did say that the blue perimeter gates were shut at
   one poin£ but they were under pressure? - A. Tremendous
   pressure, yes.

Q. How were you able to assess that pressure from the position
   that you were in or at? - A. The gates were shut.   Now how
   long they remained shut-I can't accurately assess.   It
   must only have been for a couple of minutes because
   certainly no respite, no apparent respite was gained and
   then there was a great surge and the gates gave and it was
   apparent that the gates had not held.
                                                         b4

                                      G. McKAY



Q. Now/this is an important point because you say "the gates
   gave" but of course they might have been opened as well.
   Did you see them give or did you see them open or are you
   only able to say that there was a surge through the gates?
   - A. I certainly saw that the gates were shut.  I could
   see that.  I could also see that there were mounted Officers
   in that area on my side of the gates in a position where
   I would have thought would have been able to put quite
   a tremendous amount of pressure against the gates.  Tnere
   was a surge and the gates were open and the pressure was
   resumed.  I, in my capacity later, I ran the Incident Room
   for a week until West Midlands were able to take over.   I
   did in fact go back up and look at those gates and in fact
   saw that there was damage to the bolt on one of them and
   a huge gouge mark in the ground in the asphalt where the
   bolt had been torn through.

Q. Did you see the horses or the mounted Officers, you say
   you saw them on your side of the gate, did you see any
   on the far side of the gate, of the perimeter gate? - A.
   Yes, there must have been at one time as many as eight
   mounted Officers in that area some o£ whom I recognised
   as being colleagues of South Yorkshire, others who were
   quite apparently Officers from Merseyside who were speaking
   and shouting at the crowd.  It was at that stage quite a
   tumult, a cauldron.

Q. Did you hear any announcements being made? - A. Yes.   I
   know that announcements were made from a Range Rover but
   I don't recollect those.  Certainly the announcements I
   heard were a P.C. coming over a loud hailer asking the
   crowd to go back, to fall back, that the people at the
   front were in danger of being crushed, but that had no
   effect at all and that sort of announcement was repeated
   continuously.

Q. Can you tell me whether that announcement appeared to
   come from close by where you were near this blue concertina
   gate or from further in, further out rather would be better?
   - A. I got the impression that it was coming from a loud
   speaker or speakers mounted somewhere in the area of tne
   turnstiles but whether that is right or not I don't know.

Q. Did it sound to you as if  it was a hand-held instrument?
   - A. No, I recognised the voice of the P.C. who was
   broadcasting, whose name escapes me now.

Q. Was it Ryan? - A. Yes, P.C. Ryan.  I knew that his regular
   duty would be in the Police Control Box.

Q. And you clearly heard that announcement repeated several
   times? - A. Yes.

Q. Apart from that did you hear any or see any other attempts
   or announcements to communicate with the crowd? - A.
                                     G. McKAY



Inspector Purdy at one time climbed up on to the barrier,
the chest high barrier which contained the crowds going
towards the turnstiles and he put his back against the
wall to stop himself falling off and he was certainly
trying to direct the crowd  from there but it was absolutely
futile.  He was beginning to look quite frightened and I
am not at all surprised.

      Other Officers in that area by this time as we got
nearer to 3 o'clock kept shouting into their personal
radios, you could hear them, and at one stage I was near
enough to hear Mr. Purdy request of Superintendent Marshall
that the gates should be opened.   I would have thought that
was quite early, somewhere in the region of 20— to, quarter— to.
Mr. Marshall, I don't know what his response was but he
certainly went into the crowd and I didn't see him again
although I now find out he was only yards from me all the
time but the crowd was that dense.

I think that you saw on several occasions people being
taken in through Gate C who seemed to be distressed,
children mainly and young people.  Is that right? - A. Yes
there was one particular occasion a child was taken in.
Immediately before that I had seen a child try and climb
the wall near to the turnstiles and in fact did scale the
walls and I found that quite disturbing that there were
in fact children of that age in that crush.  One has to
say that the vast majority of the people who were there
v/ere strong young men. I suppose the back of the goals
attracts in the main that type of person.

I just want to go back to the loud speaker.  You did
not hear any announcements made about postponement of
kick-off did you.  I just want to be sure about that? -
A. I didn't hear an announcement made about postponement
of kick-off.  I did hear a Police Officer remark to another
one that the kick-off had been postponed and I assumed he
had heard that over his personal radio which was on a
different channel to mine.  I don't know where he had got
that information from.  Certainly I didn't hear it myself.

You never heard a public announcement about that anyway?
- A. No.

Did you see Gate C opened eventually? - A. Gate C eventually
opened shortly before 3 o'clock.  I heard an announcement
over a nearby Police Officer's radio "Open the gate" and
almost immediately that gate opened, the concertina gate.
The crowd did not immediately respond and in fact the
initial people going through that gate was a trickle which
eventually increased in flow and intensity and I stayed
there just a few more minutes until I was satisfied that
that particular crisis was over.  My feeling at that stage
was one of relief that this intense pressure at the turnstiles
                                                                  66


                                             G. McKAY



          had been lifted, but as they were going in there was a
          roar from inside the ground and I don't know now whether
          the players had emerged or whether it was kick-off.
         Nevertheless the attitude of the people going in through
B        the gates changed immediately.   There was an urgency to
          get in.

    Q. In fact shortly thereafter you left the scene? - A. Yes,
       walked down away from that area down the service road.

    Q.   Because in fact you felt the problem had been resolved
         basically by the opening of that gate? - A. Yes.

    Q. And then I know you were very actively involved with
       various activities relating to the rescue but you weren't
       actually involved on the pitch as such? - A. No sir.

    Q. We don't need to go into that. - A. Thank you.

    Q.    You have already described the crowd in 1988.  You told
          us quite clearly that the late time when you were there
          at least some of them seemed to you to have been the
D        worse for drink.  In 1988 we are talking about now not
          1989? - A. Can I explain my perception of drunkenness
          when I talk about this?

    Q. Yes, that is important. - A. When I talk about drunkenness
       here I am not talking about people who were falling around,
       staggering around, I am talking about those people who
       have taken drink to such an extent that their general
       standards of behaviour deteriorate.   They become loud
       mouthed, arrogant, utterly selfish and physical, not
       necessarily falling down drunk.

    Q. Thank you, that helps, but what I am interested in is
       exclude the fact that there were obviously more people
       in 1989.  I think I have understood you correctly to
       say that that aspect of the matter was more or less the
       same in 1988 and 1989.  Would that be right? - A. No, I
       don't think I could possibly compare the situations in
       1988 and 1989.  The people who arrived in 1988 must have
       arrived over a much longer period.  There was a good
       steady flow through the turnstiles and certainly they
       were never present in such numbers as they were in 1989.
       Now when you talk about the crowd in 1989 it not only
       included the latecomers but it included a larger percentage
       of those people who by my perception had been there since
       perhaps half-past and I think it is fair-to say that many
       of those people, the vast majority of those people were
       just ordinary people who were unfortunately there at that
       time.  That is not to say that there weren't large numbers
       of other people who were there and the worse for drink.

                                  Q. In the way you defined.1




H
A
                                                        G. McXAY




     0. In the way you defined worse for drink? - A. In the way
JJ      I defined worse for drink.  I have heard someone
        estimate that there must have been in the region of
        between 4%-5,000 people in that area.   I can t judge
        that, I can't estimate crowds to that extent, but if
        one in five persons were the worse for drink we are
        talking about 1,000 people in that area, in that small
        area.  If you look round this room perhaps there are
        100 people here.  If you multiply that number by 10,
        and then put all those people as these rowdy elements
        of drunk in amongst 4,000 others, and compress thera
        into an area not much larger than this room, then you
        begin to have some understanding of what it was like
        then, together with all the Police norses and what have
        you, and the only way that crowd, the only place that
        crowd was going to go was inside.   That was, to ray
        simplistic mind perhaps, the probleaa that faced us.

     Q. Hay I just ask you this?  You   were standing behind
        those barriers which you have   described .... - A. Ho,
        not behind the barriers, near   to the barriers and
        occasionally moving backwards   and forwards.

     Q. Near to the barriers, but there were some barriers
        there and there were some Police Officers thare? - A.
        Yes.

     Q. For at least part of the ti-ne. Would I be right in
        saying that that was never under any pressure?   Did
        those Officers have a task to prevent people spilling
        down towards the South Stand? - A. Not in ray view.
        How, there were occasions when I wasn't there.

     Q. I ana just talking about when you were there.  What I
        would like to do is just to summarise what I think you
        have told me and I would like you to listen and if you
        feel I have got it wrong correct it. - A. Yes.

     Q. Because I want to be sure that I aave understood your
        evidence.  Your remit was to deal with crime
        prevention, and you have told sue that you are not an
        expert on crowd control. - A. Yes.

     Q. And indeed had notning whatever to do with the public
        order side of things, either in 1933, or '89. - A.
        True, sir.

     Q. It happens that you were in the vicinity of the
        Leppings Lane turnstile in 1983 at about 20-to-3 and
        you stayed there at least for 10 or 15 minutes.  There
        were substantial crowds in 1983 and indeed contained
        within that crowd there was an element of people wno
        exhibited drunkenness in the form in which you have



H
defined it, namely some inhibition and, I think you
used tne words they became physical. - A. Yes.

But the turnstiles in fact coped with the people. - A.
Yes.

And everybody got through, maybe a few minutes lata but
with no particular problems. - A. $o.

The only problems that you had in 1988 was that you had
some failures with the pick-up rate on the pick­
pocketing side and you therefore decided in 1989 you
would try and direct more attention from your Officers
into that field, which we are not concerned with at
all.  In 1989 you again went to Leppings Lana end, and
in fact you went twice, you went at about 2.15 and at
that tirae there were substantial numbers of people
there, but .... - A. Did I say 2.15, sir?

I thought you said 2.15, did you not? - A. I said I
left the gymnasium about 2.15, arriving there five or
ten minutes later, sir.

I beg your pardon, yes,    thank you.

     HR. RUSSELL:   Sir,    the note I had was between
2.20 and 2.25.

     THE CORONER:   It is ray fault. That is the reason
why I am doing it, because it is helpful for sue to get
it right:

So you arrived at Leppings Lane at 2.20, 2.25, in fact,
I said you were there twice. I think you then stayed,
didn't you, apart from going down towards the south,
along the service road? - A. Yes.

At the initial stage there were substantial cro'.vds
there and I think the turnstiles, I think you said were
coping, but not that well. - A. That is right.

Even at that stage you thought the through-put was
rather slower than you recollected, and in fact what
happened, the crowds swelled and became larger? - A.
That was ray perception, yes.

Over a period of time.  You remained, as I say, at this
location for anything up to 30 minutes or thereabouts.
- A. Yes.

Apart from a short break when you went down along the
south and spoke to another Officer, and alerted hiia to
tne possibility that aelp eight be needed, and this I
think you said would have been about 20-to-3 or
                                                               69



                                                      G. McKAY




       thereabouts? - A. Yes, I would think earlier than 20-
B      to-
    Q. The situation, if anything, becarae more desperate but
       your impression was that the people were being
       compressed, I think was the word you used, in the area
       outside which led to the turnstiles A-G. - A. Yes.

    Q. And the area where you were standing, although crowded,
       was certainly not that overcrowded, and I think you
       also told me that the line of Police Officers
       protecting that sterile area were at no tirae whilst you
       were there under any pressure. - A. Mo.

    Q. Nobody attempted to go down that way in any meaningful
       sort of way. - A. So.

    Q. You could observe from your location the perimeter
       gates, and you recollected at one point they were shut
       but your impression was that they were under tremendous
       pressure, and you also thought that you could see
       Police horses, or laounted Officers, on your side of the
       perimeter gates, which you felt might be adding support
       to them.  You also thought that there might he a total
       of about eight mounted Officers in that area at some
       point. - A. Yes.

    0. Nevertheless, those gates even tually opened and you
       felt that they burst open, par tly because of what you
       had observed in the crowd, and also because
       subsequently you inspected the site and you noticed
       that the big bolt on the gate was bent and that there
       was a big gouge mark in the as phalt, I think you said,
       You heard PC Ryan address the crowd through
       loudspeakers, asking them to s top pushing, I think
       those were your words, weren't they? - A. Yes.

    Q. You didn't hear any announcement from the landrover,
       and in fact you never saw it? - A. No.

    Q. And you also saw Inspector Purdy against the turnstile
       wall attempting to comnunicate wita the crowds? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. You heard Him request Superintendent Marshall to
       organise tne opening of the gates? - A. Yes.

    0. Or gate, I think you said, and in due course you heard
       that order being given and tne gate was opened.
       Initially the crowd compacted by the turnstiles didn't
       immediately coma through the turnstiles but eventually
       they moved, and you then heard a loud road from within
       the stadium, though whether that was kick-off or not
       you couldn't say, but your impression was that the


H
                                                          70



                                                   G. McKAY




  crowd moved faster and more purposefully into the
  stadium when that sound was heard? - A. Yes.

0. with regard to the behaviour of the crowd, you felt
   that there was a substantial element of people who were
   drunk in tiie terms in which you defined it, but that
   there was also a very large number of people who were
   perfectly respectable and wao just happened to be there
   with everybody else. - A. Yes.

Q. Once the gate was opened you withdrew because it
   appeared to you that the situation had resolved, you
   were relieved, you thought it was the right decision,
   and then you made your way to other activities which we
   are not concerned with.  Have I got your evidence raore
   or less encapsulated? - A. Yes, sir.

               Cross-Examined by MR. PAY^E

Q. You have given evidence about your experience as an
   observer from approximately the same place at the 1988
   and 1989 games? - A. No, it wasn't the same place.  In
   1989 at no time could I have stood at that same place
   as an observer.

Q. Okay fine. - A. But not far away, I do agree.

Q. Right, I am just drawing your attention to that part of
   your evidence which deals with first the 1983 match and
   then the 1989 one? - A. Yes.

Q. And you have given evidence at some length about that
   and I want to see if it comes down to this, and don't
   be led by me if this is wrong but if this is correct
   then I would be grateful if we could have it absolutely
   clear, that during the period between about 2.30 and 3
   o'clock on the two separate occasions, from your point
   of view no useful comparison can be made between the
   beiiaviour of the crowd and the numbers of the crowd in
   1988, with the same corresponding crowd in 1 9 8 y ? - A.
   That is absolutely right, and I found it so bewildering
   wnen I arrived there in 1939, knowing that we had the
   same people coming to virtually the same match, and we
   had had this blueprint which had gone so well the year
   before, with no perceived problems at all, and here we
   had an entirely different situation with, to my mind at
   that particular time, no reason.

Q. iiight, thank you very much, and one supplementary
   question to that:   naving observed tne events in 1988,
   as you did, and having observed what you have described
   without going over it again, did it occur to you that
   there needed to be any change in Police planning for
   the crowd control in 1939? - A. No, everything had
                                                               71

A
                                                      G. McKAY




      worked very well.  Towards the end when the latecomers
g     arrived, the men in drink, certainly there was a build
      up once again at the turnstiles,'but that build up was
      contained behind the barrier which one presumes was put
      there for exactly that purpose.

                    Cross-Examined by HR. KIIjG

    Q. May I deal with the situation wnen you first arrived,
       which was about, you say, 20, 25-past-2? - A. Yes.

    Q. At that stage that was not late, was it? The people
       who were there at that stage, you wouldn't say they
       were latecomers at that stage? - A. No.

    Q. At that stage your perception was of that area in front
       of the turnstiles front where you were standing, that it
       was tightly packed even then, wasn't it? - A. That area
       was not so tightly packed as it became.   That area was
       certainly more tightly packed than at any time I had
       seen it in the previous year.




E




                         /Q.   It was certainly




H
                                                              72




                                                      G. MCKAY


    Q- It was certainly so packed that your impression was
       that the people were pressed up against the
B      turnstiles at that stage, was it not? - A. Certainly
       I got the impression that there were so many people
       there that the turnstiles were not working
       efficiently, yes, but the situation did become worse.

    Q- I know it became worse but I want to deal with the
       situation at twenty, twenty-five past two.  I
       appreciate it became worse.  Was it not the case from
       your observations at that stage that people were
       pressed up against the turnstiles? - A. I think you
       are trying to put words into my mouth.  That really
       wasn't my perception.  It might well have been that
       people were pressed up against the turnstiles,
       people were packed into that area to the extent that
       the turnstiles did not seem to be operating so
       efficiently.  Certainly later that area was so
       densely packed that I do agree that those turnstiles,
       I did not know how people were able to manoeuvre
D      themselves into those tiny booths.

    Q. At that stage at twenty past to twenty five past two
       there was no question, was there, of any orderly
       queues being possible at that stage? - A. I am not
       sure what you mean by orderly queues.  Certainly
       people were in the area they were supposed to be,
       behind the barriers.  My experience of these matters
       is confined to these two games and I have to say I
       haven't seen an orderly queue at either of them.

    Q. It was a great mass of people in the turnstile area
       at twenty past to twenty five past two, was it not? -
       A . I agree.

    Q. It was such that at   time you got the impression, as
       you have indicated,   that the turnstiles were not
       operating properly?   - A. It appeared to me that that
       could be the reason   for the build-up.

    Q. Before you saw the gates, the perimeter gates, being
       deliberately shut, as you put it, to get a breathing
       space, before that time you had been there I suspect
       for about at least fifteen minutes, perhaps twenty
       minutes? - A. Perhaps so.

    Q. Because you got there at twenty, twenty-five past.  I
       will not put words into your mouth.  When do you
       think it was roughly when you saw the perimeter gates
       being closed? - A. I am estimating twenty to or
                                                              73




                                                     G. McKAY


      quarter to but that now, eighteen months later, does
      not necessarily mean it was that.
B
    Q. Of course, but it would fit in with your evidence
       because the picture you gave was, "A little later the
       gates were being deliberately shut"? - A. Yes.

    Q. Before those gates were deliberately shut you, it
       appeared, had ventured into the area outside the
       turnstiles and at that stage it was so crushed that
       you wanted to get out as quickly as possible? - A.
       True.

    Q. Before the time that you saw the gates being shut it
       was so densely packed then there was no question of
       Officers being of any use, it would appear, in that
       particular area as it was so dense? - A. I am not
        sure that that is true.  Officers were in that area.
       Officers were behind the barrier where the turnstiles
_      were.   I don't precisely know what their role in
D      there was, whether they do assist people into their
       booths or whatever but certainly there were Officers
        in there trying to help.   There did come a stage
       where by my perception Officers on foot were no
        earthly use at all.

    Q. You wo uld agree with me that if you h a d an area
        outside turnstiles where people have to wait, and I
        am now talking about an area in between the perimeter
        gates and the turnstiles, if too many people get into
        that area they become so densely packed that there is
        no way either the crowd can efficiently get through
        the turnstiles or indeed Officers can be of much
        assistance to the crowd?   You would agree with that,
        would you not? - A. Officers on foot, yes.

    Q. That picture had arrived, it would appear, before
        they tried to shut the gates?  That would appear to
        be the case? - A. That was the reason for trying to
        shut the gates quite obviously, yes.

    Q. The situation after that when they tried to shut the
       gates was, of course, that there does not seem to
       have h ad any effect bar a few minutes because of the
       pressure outside the gates? - A. Yes.

    Q. The learned Coroner put to you in his summary that
       your recollection of the announcement over the
       loudspeaker was for asking for people to fall back.
       I am sorry, not to push.  My note was you did not say
       that but the announcement was asking for people to




H
                                                    ft. McKAY


     fall back? - A. The announcement was directed to the
     people, at the back who were pushing, asking them to
     stop pushing.

Q. It may be I have got the note wrong, and I would be
   happy to be put right, but my note when you gave
   evidence before was that the announcement was asking
   people to fall back as the people at the front were
   being crushed? - A. I might well have said that.    If
   I did say that then I was wrong.   The announcement
   was certainly to stop people from pushing.   To tell
   them that they were crushing people at the front and
   it was not a single announcement.   It was a series of
   announcement by the same man continuously over a
   period of minutes.

Q. I do not want to speculate why it was.  I am
   interested for the moment in what the words were.
   Can I just clarify one thing.  My note might be
   wrong.

     MR. KING:   Sir, could my note be checked as to
whether it is right or wrong.

     THE CORONER:   The trouble is,   I suspect,   that the
wrong shorthand writer is here now.

     MR. MANNING:   If I can help my learned friend, my
note is asking the crowd to go back, not push.

     THE WITNESS:   Can I say now that if you are asking i
to recall accurately the content of that message then I
cannot but the text of it was exhorting the people at the
back of the crowd not to push as the people at the front
were being crushed.

Q.          MR. KING:     The reason I ask is this; that
     announcement was coming from a loudspeaker, from your
     perception, near the turnstiles? - A. I think so but
     I d o n 't k n o w .

Q. You w ou ld agree with me that the people at the front
   near the turnstiles, they could not move back even if
   they wanted to because of the pressure b e hi nd them? -
   A. Quite.

 Q. So in order for the people at the front to move back
    you have got to be able to go all the way through
    that crowd until you get to the very, very back of
    it, have you not? - A. I am not sure what you are
    suggesting.  Are you suggesting because the
fA.U




                                                               G. McKAY


                loudspeaker was at the front the people at the back
                c o u l d n 't hear?
       B
           Q. What I am suggesting is that if it is possible to
              relieve the pressure from the very back? - A. Not
              necessarily.  It could be done through the middle
              with the gates as was tried but certainly under those
              circumstances if you are talking about physically
              going to the back of that crowd and moving people one
              by one in order to relieve the pressure then that
              just is not on at all.

           Q. Why was that not on? - A. Because we only have a
              certain number of Police Officers.   If you are
              talking in terms of, shall we say, 4,000 in that
              crowd with two Officers to manhandle one.   They are
              not just going to park him and ask him to stay there.
              As soon as they let go he is going to be back into
              the throng.   They have to stay with him and virtually
              arrest him.   You are talking then of 8,000 Police
              Officers.   It is just total nonsense.

           Q.    When you get a crowd of between 4,000 to 5,000
                people, which is the estimate you say you had heard
                of the numbers outside? - A. Yes.

           Q.    Are you saying that the situation is such that you
                cannot effectively relieve the pressure at the
                back? - A. I am saying it cannot be done without
                force certainly.    If you wanted to start charging the
                crowd with Police horses, using riot shields and
                equip Police Officers it might well be you would
                break up such a crowd and fragment it.    That wasn't
                the situation.    We are dealing here with people who
                had come to watch a football match with one desire,
                to get into the ground.    You can't take them away and
                say, "Wait there". They weren't for     being moved.

           Q.   When I say the back of the crowd, I am not now
                referring to the perimeter gates because from your
                perception the crowd extended beyond the perimeter
                gates? - A. Yes, it did.

           Q. You could not see how far? - A. No.

           Q. The perimeter gates would be, perhaps from your
              perception, in the middle of this throng? - A. Yes.

           Q.   So that the closing of the perimeter   gates was in
                effect to put pressure on the people immediately
                be hind them because they were being pressurised from




       H
                                                  G. McKAY


  the back? - A. In effect it would p ut pressure on the
  people there but on a much broader front than the
  people were suffering at the t u r n st ile s-

Q. I understand that.   I do understand that? - A. Right.

Q. You would agree with me that we were not dealing here
   with a parade ground, we were not dealing with a
   regiment or army of soldiers who were going to obey
   orders in unison, as if there was a Sergeant Major
   there.  We were not dealing with that situation, were
   we? - A. No, not at all.

Q. We were dealing with a situation that when you
   arrived at twenty, twenty-five past two, the area in
   front of the turnstiles before the gates were shut
   was already densely packed and getting more so? - A.
   Yes.

Q. A nd the situation where beyond the perimeter gates
   the crowd was getting larger and larger? - A. Yes.

Q. Can I just ask about your perception of drink? As I
   understood your evidence you have very fairly said
   that the vast majority of people in 1989 - and those
   were your words - were the ordinary people who were
   just trying to go into the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. You said, "That isn't to say there weren't others
   worse for drink"? - A. Yes.

Q. That was your expression? - A. Yes.

Q. You did not, I do not think, offer to the learned
   Coroner the suggestion that there was a substantial
   number of people worse for drink.  It was merely your
   fear rising that if one in five were the worse for
   drink then that was going to cause a problem?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I am not sure that that is right.
I am sure it is an abbreviated note but the note of his
evidence that I took was that the vast majority were
ordinary people but also there were large numbers there who
were worse for drink.  He then went on to postulate about
the one in five.

     MR. KING:   Sir, the exact note I have is that it was
done in the negative.  It was that the vast majority were
just ordinary people who were there at that time.  That is
not to say there not large numbers there who were worse for
drink.  That is how it was put.
                                                             77
A

                                                     G. McKAY



    Q. What I want to ask you about is that your perception
B      of the people were those immediately adjacent to you?
       Those were the people who you could see clearly? - A.
       Yes, the ones who had been there for some
       considerable time at the turnstiles?

    Q. Yes? - A. I could see other people of course who were
       coming, swarming through, pushing their way through
       and thrusting.

    Q. I can understand that. That is at the far back.   I
       was also mingling with people who were working in
       that area. There was plenty of evidence of drink and
       drunkenness. The point I was making is that it
       wouldn't be fair to categorise all those people who
       were waiting there as people who had either taken
       drink or who were the worse for it.

    Q. That was merely the people who had been drinking an
D      element who had exacerbated the situation? - A. The
       people who were the worse for drink, yes.

    Q. An element which exacerbated the situation? - A. The
       people who were the worse for drink, yes.

    Q. They exacerbated a situation which was already there
       namely a densely packed group of people outside the
       turnstiles? - A. I don't know whether they
       exacerbated it or caused it.

    Q. One thing you do know is that in 1988, although it is
       said to you it has no relationship to 1988, you did
       have an experience of a huge number of people
       arriving shortly before the kick-off and your words I
       think would be huge, would it not? - A. Large numbers
       of people.   If I said huge, large.  I find it very
       difficult now after eighteen months to be p icked up
       on o dd words given in evidence.  My recollection
       wou ld have been far more accurate two or three weeks
       afterwards.   I find it quite frustrating having odd
       words of my evidence picked out and used against me.

    Q. That is a fair comment and I do not want to be unfair
       to you.  If I have been I am sorry for that.  Was
       your perception in 1988 of a large number of people
       arriving shortly before the kick-off? - A. No, my
       perception was of numbers of people who began
       arriving perhaps around ten to and who increased and
       a steady flow of such people who past through the
       turnstiles and at one time collected in the turnstile




H
                                              G. McKAY


area whilst waiting to go through into a sizeable
queue.
That was something that stuck in your mind as f
problem, although it was short-lived, which existed
in 1988? - A. A problem, an opportunity that lent
itself to pickpockets, nothing more and nothing less




                                      /Q.Be fair
Be fair, it was something which had happened which caused
you to think there was a problem of getting them a l l i n t o
the ground before kick-off, because they didn t get^ into
the ground before kick-off, did they? - A. All of them
didn t arrive at the ground before kick-off.^ ^ They were
certainly arriving in that condition after kic k - o f f .
Can I quality that?   I didn't know that that wasn t
occurring at every other entrance in the ground.

No, but your perception was at around ten to three in
1988 there seemed to be a sudden build-up of people? -A.
Yes.

After the main crowd had gone in? - A. Yes.   They didn t
all arrive at once.   They started increasing in
frequency and certainly reached a crescendo around about
ten to three.

The effect of that crescendo was a lot of people pushing
and shoving and trying to get into the-ground? - A. Yes.

The result of that crescendo was how many people - how
packed was it in 1988 with that group of people?   What
was the ultimate?   How far did it stretch back? - A. It
certainly didn't stretch back anything like towards tne
end of the barrier.

How far did it stretch? - A. Perhaps half to three-
q u a r t e r s of the way back towards the barrier, tne barriei.
end.

They all had a sense of urgency and all wanted to get
into the ground? - A. Yes.

That group of people didn't all get into the ground by
three o'clock, that's for certain? - A. They hadn't all
arrived then.   As people were going tcirough the
turnstiles they were still arriving.

That group    of people didn't all   get in before three
o'clock? -    A. No.

The pressure, albeit for a short time, of that group of
people was   on the turnstiles in a way which was similar,
for a short period of time, to what you saw in 1988, as
far as the turnstiles were concerned?    • I am not talking
about the distance back.     I am talking about the
pressure on the turnstiles? - A. No, I cannot in all
honesty say that.

They were two entirely different situations.^  f.was ^■e ^t
with the impression that this was the sort of thing that
happened at such matches.   Certainly none of my
                                                            G. McKAY


  colleagues seemed to take the matter too s e r i o u s l y s p y
  uniformed colleagues.   I got the impression that t m s
  was the done thing at this type of match.

0. What was the done thing? - A. This arriving late in
   drink.

0. I ara sorry, you got the impression... - A. There was a
   build-up of people arriving late in drink.    They took
   some time to clear through the turnstiles.    I left tne
   turnstiles about five or ten minutes past.     They were
   all in then and there were no others coming.     Throughout
   that time, from ten to until perhaps five^ or ten minutes
   past, people were arriving all the time the worse for
   drink.    Certainly there was a period when there was a
   backlog of people waiting to go through the turnstiles.
   There was certainly no emergency.

0. No, I understand that, but I want to investigate if I
   may, your saying that the impression you got was it w a s
   the done thing. ' What was the impression you got?    What
   was the done thing? - A. That people would arrive late at
   football matches under these circumstances and not be
   there on time and arrive in drink.

               Cross-Examined by MR. C A T C H P O L E :

Q. Detective Superintendent, could I just follow up on that
   just to see whether I have understood your evidence.
   May I try and summarise the evidence I think you have
   given in relation to 1988.   Please correct me if I am
   wrong or stop me if you want to amplity anything. _ Was
   it your impression that a number of sup porters _arrived at
   about ten to three through to probably about five past
   three, or thereabouts, at the Lappings Lane end in 1988?
   - A. Yes.

0. Your impression of them was that they had all been
   drinking, or at least a sizable majority of them had been
   drinking? - A. A lot of them had, yes.

0. I want you to answer this:  did the numbers that arrived
   at that time in 1988 compare in any way to the numbers
   you saw outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles in 1989? -
   A. No.

0. When you said they went half to three-quarters of the way
   back up the barrier, were you referring to the barrier
   that runs down Leppings Lane service road and the
   turnstiles leading up to A to G? - A. The barrier
   presumably has been placed there to contain the people
   waiting to go through the turnstiles.
                                                              Bl



                                                       G. McKAY


0. Perhaps if you could bear with me very briefly so we can
   *et an accurate picture of this, if you look at C . J 4 in
   front of you.   You see a white van by a blue barrier. -
   A. Yes.

0.   Is that the barrier you are referring to? - A. Yes.

0.   So it is about half way to two-thirds of the way along
     there? - A. Yes.

0. Your impression was that from the off i c e r s _around you
   that they expected a number of fans to arrive who had
   been in the pub having a few drinks and those fans were
   probably going to arrive at the very last minute? - A.
   Yes.

0.   That gave them no cause for concern other than to make
     sure it was an orderly  feed through, and weed out any
     ones who were too drunk to go into the ground? - A. Yes.

0. Can I just turn to other matters?   You very fairly sa^
   that you are not an expert on policing large crowds and I
   shouldn't imagine you are an expert on flow rates througn
   turnstiles, are you? - A. No.

0. Presumably you are aware that turnstiles do not operate
   efficiently under pressure? - A. It certainly wasn t
   something I had addressed my mind to prior to this, but
   certainly that became apparent after this.

0. Mavbe I can put it in'a different way.   Was it your
   impression that the reason the turnstiles over a period
   began to operate less efficiently was because they were
   under increasing amounts of pressure? - A. Yes.

0. That pressure built up as time went on in the period you
   were standing there? - A. Yes.

0. One of the objects you would assume of trying to form^_
   queues outside a turnstiles is to prevent that sort of
   pressure from building up, precisely because it has taat
   effect?   That would make sense, wouldn t it? - A. Yes.

Q. When you formed queues, did you know there were serials
   outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles who were actually
   positioned to form queues? - A. I was aware Liiere W 61.9
   plenty of serials in that area, yes.

0. Have you ever seen police horses being used to walk along
   the lines of the perimeter gates down towards tfte
   turnstiles and back again to keep people in line?: - A. I
   have seen police horses used in that manner, yes.
                                                                     dz




                                                               G. McKAY


                                           o far it sounds to me
    0 . From the evidence you have given s
         that when you arrived that people weren't in those sort
         of lines, they were not as densely packed as they became,
B        but they got out of line and there had been a build up of
         pressure at the front, is tnat fai r? - A. That's fair,
         There were certainly no lines beni nd that barr i e r . _
         That barrier was...   There were n o recognisable lines in
         that area.   Of course, there were people arriving all
         the time from the back and it quickly built up.

    Q. Can we take it from that you didn't see any police norses
       operating, forming lines, going up and down, from tne^
       turnstiles, up the perimeter gates, and bacs down again.
       - A. There were certainly plenty of activity witn the
       police horses.

    Q. I am just asking about the lines?   - A. No.

    0.   The lines had gone, had they? - A. There     were certainly
         no police horses behind that barrier.
D   0. I wonder if you could look at photograph C.305?       Before
       we go into this I will tell you that this photograph was
       taken on the day at 2.30.    I am n o t _suggesting to you m
       any way that the evidence you have given is incorrect.
       What I am going to suggest to you is that you might, as
       anyone can be, be slightly out on the time that you
       arrived at the Leppings Lane end.

    0.   Do you see the police officer with tnehelmet     on   the
         other side of the barrier? - A. Yes.

    0. Facing towards the turnstile? - A. Yes.




                     0. Now it looks, as far.




H
                                                         83

                                         G. tfcKAY



Q. Now' it looks, as far as one can tell from a photograph
   of static, that he is doing the operation you have seen
   before as I have just described of going up and forming
   lines? - A. Yes.

Q. And if you look to the right of that there is a gentleman
   right by the blue barrier at the front, elderly gentleman
   with a red coat and a flat cap and he is standing there
   and there is a gap between him and the person in front
   of him, quite a sizeable gap in fact? - A. Yes.

Q. And there is a turnstile? - A. Yes.

Q. Now that does not sound like the scene you saw when you
   arrived? - A. I agree.

Q. Is that fair?  Does it follow from that, and this is no
   criticism because I am sure you have taken enough statements
   in your time to know people very rarely recollect exactly
   the time that they arrived at places, does it follow from
   that that you probably arrived later than the time that
   this photograph was taken, albeit a short time later?
   - A. Either that or my recollection is wrong.

Q. That is a very fair answer.  The point I am getting at
   Mr. King was focussing a lot of questions, quite rightly,
   on the time you arrived and emphasising 14.20, 14.25?
   - A. Yes.

Q. But this photograph taken at 14.30 was taken, you would
   think, before the scenes that you were describing when
   you first arrived at that end of the ground? - A. Yes.

         MR. CATCHPOLE:   Thank you very much.


                Cross-Examined by MRS. M c B R I E N :

Q. Detective Superintendent, did you detect a lot of pick­
   pockets that day.  That was your main task? - A. I didn't
   detect any.   It did not lend itself to it.  The crowd
   was too densely packed.

Q. So you didn't find any you say? - A. No.

Q. You said there was crushing at the turnstiles at one point
   and the Police Officers there moved out of that area away
   from just by the turnstiles.  Is that correct? - A. There
   were Officers in with the crowd and at some stage at least
   one, probably more, came out of the crowd and the only way
   they could get out was to go through the turnstiles.  I
   presumed  that they came out because they were no longer
   effective in there.

Q. Do you think the Police Officers were concerned about the
                                     G. McKAY



safety of the people who were still there in the crush?
- a . Yes, most definitely. Mr. Purdy and Mr. Marshall,
definitely.

Did  they ever consider moving the people who were being
crushed out of that area and taking them to the sterile
area beyond Gate C? - A. I don't think that would have
had much popularity with the people who were being
crushed.  The only place that any of those people wanted
to be were in the ground.  They were in that position
through choice and wanted urgently to go through the
turnstiles.  They would not have thanked us for taking
them out and making them wait having achieved some degree
of priority in the queue.

I don't know if I will be allowed to say this, sir, but
my own son was in that position at 2.4 5 and he moved out
of that area and went to stand in the sterile area
outside Gate C for safety reasons and there were other
people doing a similar thing at that time? - A. I would
accept that, yes.

Do you think queues could have been formed in the area
by the turnstiles if people would have been moved away
to the sterile area? - A. I am afraid that you are asking
me questions that really I am not qualified to answer.
My perception of it was that no one really wanted to
form orderly queues.  If everyone had have formed orderly
queues we would never have had a problem and without
co-operation with people in forming queues then you just
can't make any progress.

Do you think the people who were being crushed would
prefer to be somewhere safe rather than stay there
just to get in to see the match?

        THE CORONER:      I know what you are trying to ask.
It is very hard because I know what you are trying to
ask but you are asking him to put himself into the minds
of 1 , 000/ 2 ,000/ 3 ,000 , however many people were there
and then say what they would have done.         How can he do
it?   You can ask him whether he would have been happier
to have been in a crush or not and he has actually told
us that answer already because he said he went in and
got scared and came straight out again but you can't
ask him what the others were doing because he can only
say what I saw, what I heard or what I noticed they
were doing.      Do you see the point I am making?

      MRS. M c B R I E N :   Yes.

      THE CORONER:   Take your time because I distract you
when I interrupt you.   I know that.  Just compose yoursel
and find your place.
                                                           85

                                        G. McKAY



Q.      ,  MRS. McBRIEN:  What I am trying to say is if
     people would have been moved away and made to go through
     turnstiles instead of an open gate, you know could queues
     have still been formed to carry on in that way, to use
     that procedure? - A. I don't know.   The difficulty with
     this situation is we have all got 20/20 hindsight.
     The problems that we were faced with on that day had
     never been perceived by anyone.  Certainly after the
     match in 1988 no one came to us to say:   "You have got
     it all wrong and this is how you should approach it
     next year".   Unfortunately since it went wrong everyone
     has come to us and told us exactly what we should have
     done and how we should have done it.

           Looking back on that day I don't know how you could
     have formed those  people into orderly queues and asked
     them to remain in orderly queues without their
     co-operation.

Q. But would you say it was right to stop people who had
   been drinking too much from going into the ground? - A.
   Yes, it would be right to stop people who had been
   drinking too much from going into the ground but^the
   difficulty is, of course, when you stop someone from
   going into the ground becausa he has had too much to
   drink you have to take him somewhere otherwise there
   is no point in stopping him from going into the ground?
   then you have to take him somewhere with two Police ^
   Officers because you are saying:   "This man is drunk"
   and he is not going to be very      pleased if you are
   excluding him from the ground, so you have got to
   find somewhere to put him.

           Now if you are talking in terms of 20 or 30,
     which is quite a large number, then that can conceivaoly
     be done but bear in mind that you have removed 60
     Police Officers.   If you are talking in terms of hundreds
     then that just is not possible, it just is not practicable.
     You just can't walk away and say:   "Will you please open
     a new box of bobbies we have run out of some , you have
     to make do with what you have got and you have to use
     your resources on that day as best you can to deal with
     the situation.   Now the numbers arriving in drink were
     far too many to exclude.

 Q. Couldn't they have been filtered out previously before
    the turnstile area? - A. The same problem arises, what
    do you do with them?  Do you ask them politely to go
    away and as soon as you turn your back they just turn
    round and come back?  Do you lock them up, in which
    case for every one you lock up you have taken two
    Police Officers out of the game, or do you just thrust
    them somewhere not under arrest but allow them to wander
    around and vent their spleen where they will.   It just
    is not a practical proposition to start screening people
                                                                          86

                                                    G. McKAY



            irf that fashion away from the ground. The turnstiles
            are placed there as a natural screen and that would be
            the job of the turnstiles.

B                 As I say with hindsight we c_an all think of various
            ways of doing the job better. -

    Q. Is it normally done, is it the normal procedure to keep
       out people without tickets and people who are drunk?  Is
       that what usually happens? - A. I don't know.

                   THE CORONER:  This Officer has already said that
            he has no experience and that he had nothing whatever to
            do v;ich organisation so don't press him on that.  He
            could give you an answer but it would not be worth the
            paper it is written on.

    Q.            MRS. McBRIEN:  Would you say that congestion outside
            the turnstile area should always be avoided, that that
            is one of the things in the Green Guide that if you see
            congestion arising then something must be done about it?

D                 THE CORONER:  You have got the wrong man.  I am
            sure there will be somebody to whom you can address that
            question but not him.  Remember it because I am sure there
            will be opportunity to ask that question at some point
            of someone.

    q   .         M R S • McBRIEN: Just one last question please.  Did
            you see a dog van in the area of the turnstiles?    It does
            say in the Operational Orders that there should have been
            one dog van there? - A. I can't remember seeing a dog
            van.  There may have been one but I can't remember seeing
            one.

                  MRS. McBRIEN:   All right.       Thank you very much.

                  THE CORONER:  Detective Superintendent McKay,
            thank you very much indeed for being here today and
            giving your evidence.  We very much appreciate it.

                  DET. SUPT. McKAY:    Thank you sir.

                  THE CORONER:  We will start with Mr. Creaser but
            we obviously won't finish today with him.  That means,
            of course, that we won't be getting to Mr. McGauley.
            It is obvious, isn't it.


                           ROBERT WALLACE CREASER Sworn

                                  Bv THE C O R O N E R :

    Q. You are Robert Wallace Creaser.               Is that right? - A. Yes,




H
                                         R.W. CREASER

You are Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police.
Is 'that right? - A. Yes sir.

I think you are actually in the Communications and Computer
Department as your main activity? - A. That is right.

Which is a Head Office  appointment, headquarters I think
is the term? — A. Yes sir.

Despite that you have had considerable experience
policing football matches.  I think that is right,           isn
it? - A. I have, yes sir.

Over 20 years.     That is right? - A. Yes sir.

Including several matches at Sheffield Wednesday ground
at Hillsborough? - A. That is right, yes sir.

In fact it goes back to about 1977 your experience I see?
- A . 1 9 7 7 was the first s e r a i - f i n a l match that I worked
at Hillsborough.

In fact you may have had previous experience but that
was a s.emi-final? - A. Yes.




                         Q. Were you
                                                   C3EASER




0. i/ere you there in 1938? - A. I was.

Q. tfhat was your responsibility in 1989? - A. In 1989 I
   was the Sector Commander with responsibilities for the
   Norta Stand, the West Stand, the Leppings Lane
   terracing, the rear enclosure, aan the Leppings Lane
   turnstiles.

0. So what is the number of that sector, Sector 2A was it
   or can't you remember now?- A. I think it was 1-
   something.  The numbers are irrelevant.

0. I think you complemented the activities of the witness
   we have just heard because he was dealing with — - Mr.
   Waring was dealing with the outer reaches and you were
   dealing with tne inner? - A. Hy responsibilities were
   almost exclusively inside the ground, and immediately
   outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.  I believe his
   responsibilities were exclusively outside the ground,
   sir.

Q. Yes - not McKay, it was Inspector Waring I was thinking
   of.  Who did you report to?  What was your chain of
   command? - A. In relation to those responsibilities
   inside the stadium that would be to Superintendent
   Greenwood, and in relation to those duties outside it
   would be to Superintendent Marshall.

Q. I know this is a trivial point in a way but I just want
   to clear it, are you saying that the turnstile area was
   deemed outside rather than inside? - A. Hy impression
   had been that the turnstiles were part of the ground
   and that the outside, so to speak, began at tne road,
   rather than at the brick wall.  Can you remember that?
   Do you see what I am saying? - A. Hy responsibility was
   for the turnstiles both inside and outside the ground.

Q. You reported for duty at about half-past-9, 10 o'clock,
   and you attended the briefing, is that right? - A. I
   did, yes, sir.

Q. And we know and we have heard that it was addressed by
   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and I tnink several
   other people as well? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

Q. Having listened to the briefing what happened then as
   far as you were concerned? - A. Having heard the
   briefing I nad informal briefings with Inspectors to
   wnora I had immediate responsibility for.  I gave them
   certain printed information about certain criminal
   elements who were travelling from Liverpool, in tne
   form of written documentation.   I briefed then
   informally as to their responsibilities.   I have to say
   that most of them were very experienced Inspectors who,
not all of thera but tha majority of them, would
regularly work the duties they had been allocated on
that day at 'other football snatches that take place at
Hillsborougn, so they would be familiar and would be
al;nost, or as expert as I was in the procedures.

u e don't need to list tnera all, but Inspector White was
the terraces and what we call the concourse area, is
that right? - A. Yes.   I would call it the rear
enclosure, at the rear of the West Stand between the
West Stand and the turnstiles.

Yes, and that is what I call the concourse area, and
Inspectors Sykes and Purdy were at the turnstiles? - A.
They would be on the outside of the turnstiles, yes.

And they reported to you and then you reported up the
line, as necessary? - A. Yes.

Having been briefed and having done your supplemental,
what did you actually tell - you said you gave them
intelligence.  I don't want a blow by blow account, but
in two sentences what sort of information would you
have passed on to the Inspectors? - A. The kind of
detail would be perhaps details of criminals known to
travel with the Liverpool supporters, pickpockets - and
I aa not trying to exaggerate tnis, there are a small
minority who are known to travel with Liverpool who are
pickpockets.  There were possibly some people who were
subject to exclusion orders who were not allowed to
enter football grounds, that sort of information.

So these were neither specific - you might have said,
"Watch out for somebody with blue eyes" .... - A. There
would be photographs of known - of people who had been
convicted of that kind of behaviour, from Liverpool.

 Yes, just to get it absolutely clear, you have already
 made it clear but just to get it absolutely clear, tnis
 would have been perfectly normal at any football match
 or large event, this sort of briefing? - A. Certainly,
' yes.

 Indeed you would expect people who have a propensity
 for pickpocketing, for example, to coae .wnere there is
 a large number of people because it is a golden
 opportunity? — A. Well, I think Mr. McKay was perhaps
 the best witness to give evidence on tuat, but I tnink
 there is a hard core of pickpockets who operate fro:a
 Liverpool, and it is not exclusive to Liverpool but
 Liverpool is notorious for it.
                                                                90




                                                      R.   CREASER




    Q. Just to get it right, you are not saying that everybody
B      who comes from Liverpool is a pickpocket or anything
       like that? - A. I am certainly not saying that, no.

    Q. It is so easy to misunderstand.   - A. Yes.

    Q. I knew you hadn't said that but I just wanted to rub it
       in, so to speak, and make sure .... - A. Yes, that is
       why a Detective Superintendent was on duty to observe
       for these people.

    Q. Nothing niuch happened, I think, as far as you were
       concerned until about 2 p.m., is that right? - A. Tnat
       is right.   I walked the ground as it were, there was
       what I would describe as the special magic in the air
       of a semi-final, people arriving in anticipation of
       what was, the press had built up, and what was
       anticipated to be a very good, entertaining game of
       football.
D   Q. Perhaps if you just refresh ray saeiaory if you are able,
       but if not we will get it from some of the other
       Officers, initially ani I right in thinking that the
       intention was to have Officers outside the turnstiles
       and inside the turnstiles, in order to search the fans?
       - A. Yes, the normal procedure would be that it is
       impossible to search everyone entering the ground.     If
       that procedure happened then it would slow down the
       rate and the ground would take an eternity to fill, so
       the Officers using their discretion would select people
       for searching, to frisk them down.     As time progressed,
       nearer and nearer kick-off, it is snore difficult to
       search the people entering, because they are coning at
       a greater rate.  There would be, and it is obviously
       unfortunate for the individuals, some people who would
       be searcned twice.  They would be searched outside and
       then inside.  The Officers, both outside and inside,
       would have been briefed by the Inspectors I had
       briefed, and be in possession of the photograpas I have
       mentioned, would be looking for the people known to
       have convictions, or who had been excluded frora the
       ground, that sort of person.

    0. So fron a practical point of view the fewer people wno
       were arriving with you, tne raore likely .it is you might
       be selected to be searched? - A. That is quite right.
       Probably everyone that arrived at 1 o'clock, almost
       exclusively, would be searched entering the turnstiles.

    0. And then as the crowds build up you become more and
       more selective because you just can't physically do
       everybody, is that what you are saying? - A. It would
       frustrate the purpose of getting people tnrough the
       turnstiles.


H
                                                               91



                                                    R.   CREASER




    Q. Up to about 2 o'clock did you get to Leppings Lane end
B      to see what the position was outside the turnstiles? -
       A. Yes, I observed it several times between 12 noon and
       perhaps 2 p.m., and from - and I can't be precise - but
       fro:n shortly after 2 p.m., 2 p.m. onwards, I regained
       outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.

    Q. But after 2 p.m. everything seemed to be perfectly
       satisfactory? - A. It was quite normal and the
       operation was going, everything had been anticipated,
       the level of arrivals was the same as in the previous
       year, and there were no foreseen problems.

    Q. That, in fact, was my next question but you have
       answered it.  Up to 2 o'clock are you saying that, in
       fact, the rate of flow into the stadium was, as far as
       you can remember, comparable to say 1988? - A. I can
       answer it in this way, tnat I didn't notice any
       discernible difference, no sir.

    Q. And I think you have already said it, but the people
       wno were coming in at that time were all in good
       spirits and happy and you had no concern about tne
       people as such? - A. None whatsoever, no sir.

    Q. Then no doubt you went and did another tour, and what
       time did you return to Leppings Lane and then remain
       outside the turnstiles? - A. I would think 2 p.m. or
       shortly afterwards.

    0. I think shortly after that you spoke to Inspector
       Sykes, is that right? - A. I did, yes, sir.

    Q. U7as this because you had noticed some people on the
       bridge or somewhere? - A. I had noticed a crowd of
       people on the opposite side of Leppings Lane to the
       football ground, who were congregating, and we
       discussed tne possibility of encouraging those people
       into the ground at that point.

    Q. When you say crowd of people, I am interested to know
       how large this crowd would have been, in very round
       terras? Is it 50, 100, 200, 1,000? - A. I would put the
       number at approximately, very approximately, 50, 50-
       plus, so it was not an enormous crowd it was just that
       • • • •



    Q. This roomful, in fact? - A. Yes, I would think there is
       perhaps 60 or 70 people in this room now.

    Q. That is very accurate, you are right.  They weren't
       actually causing any problems, it was just that you
       noticed them across ....



H
                                                            92



                                                  R.   CREASER




Q. That is right, and they decided that they weren't
   causing any trouble and perhaps it would antagonise
   them trying to move tnem on at that stage.

Q. I assume that you had sufficient people coning through,
   that it wasn't that the turnstiles were empty at that
   point, they were being used? - A. They were making a
   good, steady progress, yes.

Q. You have used the word "antagonised".  Is this one of
   the problems that one has in policing this sort of
   match, or indeed any event? - A. I have been present in
   your Court this morning, or for part of this morning
   and this afternoon, and I have heard suggestions of,
   could cordons be put up, and could people be stopped at
   different parts, different locations away froia the
   ground.  The Police have to exercise a balance between
   the rights of individuals to pass and re-pass along the
   highway, and ensuring tnat a crowd gets to a football
   ground.  Now, some people away from the ground will
   take offence at being stopped and questioned by Police
   Officers wnen they are going about their normal
   business, or walking to a football ground in quite an
   orderly manner, and so it is a matter for the Police to
   draw a balance between what is desirable for the
   community at large and what is likely to reduce any
   problems.

Q. where had you positioned yourself when you were outside
   the .... - A. I wasn't static.  I was wandering around,
   talking, giving words of encouragement to the Police
   Officers wno were on duty.

Q. Can I just ask you this, were you mainly witnin the
   perimeter gates or mainly outside the perimeter gates,
   or is it an impossible question for you to answer? - A.
   Mo, I would be reasonably constantly moving, perhaps
   pausing for a minute or two observing the situation,
   between the turnstiles and Leppings Lane, the actual
   road surface of Leppings Lane.

Q. When we are talking about the turnstiles, of course, we
   know, as I am sure you do, that in fact there are two
   sets of turnstiles and they are physically separated? -
   A. That is right, yes, sir.

Q. Did you   tend to stay at one set more than tne ot;ier, or
   did you   distribute yourself insofar as you were able,
   equally   between these two areas? - A. I didn't remain
   static,   I was walking around all the turnstiles.

Q. Say you were near turnstiles A-G, if you then wanted to
   get to the others, 1-16, you would have had to go out
   through the blue perimeter gates and back in, is that
                                                               93



                                                       GREASER




      right? - A. There would be two ways, but the most
D     direct way would be to walk towards Leppings Lane and
      then walk in towards the turnstiles.   Of course, I had
      the key to the concertina gates.   I could have gone in
      through Gate C, or I could have knocked on the door of
      Gate C and a steward would have given me access, and I
      then could have gone round the concourse.

    Q. Did you use both methods or      - A. Yes, certainly.

    Q. You have told us everything was fine until 2 and at
       2.15, or perhaps shortly after 2 I think you said,
       rather than 2.15, you talked to Inspector Sykas, you
       saw this group, you didn't intervene. - A. No, sir.

    Q. You had sufficient number coming through.  Can you then
       tell me what happened next as far as you were
       concerned? - A. Yes, again I would not like to be tied
       down on times, because in this situation one doesn't
       look at one's watch and say it is now 20-past -2 and the
       situation is ....




E




F




                          /0. I understand that




H
                                           R. W. CREASER
/




I understand that. — A. So between, shall we say,
2.30 and 3, if I can describe that situation.

Yes? - A. I noticed that the build-up of fans was not
as quick, not as rapid, as it had been in the
previous y e a r s . X obviously knew that it was a sell­
out or that all the tickets had been sold.      So we
iifQEQ expecting 24,000 Liverpool fans.    Obviously not
all going in those turnstiles.      The build-up was
slowly getting larger and they then reached the time,
and again X wouldn't want to be sort of five minutes
either side but I would estimate it, something like a
quarter to three it seemed that a lot of people were
 arriving at once.     At another venue I have described
 it as it was like a "leaving" crowd arriving.     It was
 almost as if everyone had delayed the time they were
 coming to the ground and all decided to come later.

When you say the build-up, you mean the build-up
outside the turnstiles? - A. Yes, in what I have
heard described as the funnel, particularly outside
Turnstiles A to G I think it was.
So what you are telling me is that your impression —
and I am obviously interested in your impression and
what you saw — is that at least up to 2.30 to 2.45,
at least up to 2.30, is that there was a steady flow
of people in but nothing extraordinary, so to
speak? - A. That is right.

Then between 2.30 and quarter to three, if anything,
you thought the numbers in that area were rather
smaller than you would have anticipated? - A.
Smaller, yes. They were increasing all the time but
the rate of increase did not seem as rapid as the
previous year.
At quarter to three the term you have used is a
"leaving" crowd arriving, so to speak? - A. Yes.

Just put it in your words so that I do not put it in
mine. How did that "leaving" crowd present itself to
you? - A. I am sorry?

How did this crowd at quarter to three present
itself? - A. It obviously wasn't like a tap that one
minute was turned on and one minute was turned off.
It was over a much shorter period of time than     I
would have expected.  The proportion of people     who
arrived, who had been drinking, was increasing     and
started to increase rapidly at this time but I     think
                                           R- W. CREASER
  /




 this must be taken in context.  I wouldn't like to
 say it was one in five or one in ten or whatever but
 certainly there were a lot of sober people arriving.
 There were a lot of people of what X would call,
 wouldn't secure a conviction for drunk and
 disorderly, and I can't say this as I can only guess,
 who had had two or three pints of beer.  We are
 talking typically of 17, 18 up to 22 or 23 year olds
 who were, what I would call, fighting drunk.  Some of
 them when approached by Police Officers who would
 say, "You have come here to enjoy yourselves.   Cool
 it" would quieten down.  The proportion of those
 people increased as time progressed.  Again I
 wouldn't like to put a time on it.

       Again what I can say is that I consider myself
 a very experienced Police Officer in dealing with
 football matches and I have never seen so many people
 in drink at a football match before.  I would not
 like to create the impression to this Court that
 everyone had been drinking because they w e r e n 't .
 What I can say with absolute confidence is that the
 numbers who had been drinking was a far larger
 percentage than I had ever witnessed before.

. I do not want to spend too much time on this but was
  it that it appeared to you like that because you had
  such a huge mass - I will use your term the "leaving"
  crowd - and therefore it had a bigger impact on you
  than it would otherwise have done?      In other words,
  if this same crowd who came at quarter to three
  instead of coming more or less together had spread
  themselves over three-quarters of an hour, would the
  number of people who you have now described have
  impinged themselves in the same way upon your
  consciousness?  Do you understand the question? - A.
  Yes.  What I can say is that it is quite possible for
  people, when a crowd is arriving and every now and
  again if somebody is becoming too noisy, upsetting
  those around him and a Police Officer has to go,
  "Look, be quiet" or if they are noisy, your
  attraction is drawn to them, whilst your attraction
  is drawn to them then there are people passing you
  who are in no way at all affected by drink.      What I
  can say is that those proportion of people or those
  groups of people who went past me at the time we are
  talking about, perhaps approaching ten to three,
  quarter to, twenty to, ten to three, the proportion
  of those people is greater in my experience of some
  twenty years of policing was that there were a
  greater proportion of those in a l c o h o l .
                                                                 96




                                                     R. W. CREASER



    0       You had a dual effect is what you are saying.   You
            had a greater proportion from your experience and you
            also had a greater number at one time? - A. Yes, if
B           one was making a comparison with the carbon copy    __
            football match the previous year then the two glaring
            differences were that a very large number of peop e
            arrived nearer to the kick-off time than in the
            previous year and more of those people showed signs
            of having consumed alcohol.

    (v It necessarily follows from that that more people in
       1988 must have come earlier? - A. That is right, yes.

    Q. Your comparison of the flow rates initially was
       mistaken unless the increase in 1988 was between 2
       and 2.30 which is not the period we have covered.   We
       cannot have the same numbers arriving until about
       2.30 and then having more people there in the last
       half hour? - A. That is right.   Mathematically,
       whatever the figure, there was approximately 25,000
       Liverpool fans who arrived to watch the football
       match and they were all there by three o'clock.   What
       I am saying is that a larger proportion of that
        20,000 arrived between 2.30, 2.40 and three o clock
       than had done the previous year.

        0   At some point I think that you asked Inspector Sykes
            to stop the traffic, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

        0   You may not be able to remember but can you remember
            when that was? - A. I believe it was at approximately
            2.30 p.m.

        0. Which end did he stop it at or did he stop it at both
           ends? - A. I think both ends.  He didn't stop it
           himself.  He directed Officers to the Leppings Lane
           roundabout and to the traffic lights in Leppings Lane
           and Catch Bar Lane.

        0 . We heard I think from Sergeant Lomas who was up at
             the Catch Bar Lane end who said that he, on his own
             initiative, decided to stop the traffic at about that
             time so far as I r e m e m b e r . I take it you knew
             nothing of that at the time when you gave the
             instruction? - A. I discussed with Inspector Sykes
             that we should consider stopping traffic and we
             agreed that we should.        As to which individual
             Officers or if simultaneously another Officer decided
             that that ought to be done I do not know, but we




H
                                                            97




                                               R . W. CREASER


     discussed it and shortly after having discussed it
     and agreed to it, it then happened.

Q. Why did you decide to*do it at about 2.30? ~ A.
   Because there were larger number of foot passengers,
   pedestrians, than usual at that time.

Q. Was that the normal thing to do? - A. No,    it was an
   unusual thing to do.

Q . You did it because you thought - I had better not say
     what you thought.  What was the reason?  You have
     told me that there were many foot passengers but why
     did you feel it necessary to cause the traffic to
     stop? - A. The objective was to get all those people
     inside the stadium and that would be facilitated
   ' better if we could stop the traffic flowing in the
     road outside.  There would be a possibility of
     accidents or people walking on cars, bonnets of cars,
     like I have seen at that sort of thing.

Q. Obviously many of the fans, in fact probably the vast
   majority, had tickets because it was an all ticket
   affair? - A. It was an all ticket match, yes, sir.

Q.   Did you notice ticketless fans? - A. Yes, I did and I
     have heard and read in the press of estimates of the
     numbers.  I can tell you what I saw.

Q.   Obviously that is what I am interested in.    I am not
     interested in anything else? - A. Obviously   they were
     never all stood together at once.

Q. No, of course, not? - A. When I have previously given
   evidence at the Public Inquiry I estimated the number
   to be approximately 200.  It was difficult to
   estimate because I certainly told some individuals,
   and I told them in strong terms, to leave the area
   because they were even approaching Police Officers
   and asking them if they had what they called
   "spares".  They were told to leave the area, that
   there were no tickets on sale and they were likely to
   be getting in the way.

Q. It has been suggested that that activity should have
   taken place at a distance from the ground than in the
   vicinity where you were? - A. I heard the suggestion
   made earlier today in this Court, sir.  I would pose
   the question, what legal right have Police Officers
   to ask somebody in Leppings Lane away from a stadium,
   or in Penistone Road or wherever, have you got a
                                         R- W- CREASER


ticket to go and watch a football match?  They have
no right whatsoever and if they had to ask that
question, the capacity of the ground is 54,000, then
54,000 questions would have to be asked wherever it
was asked.  The place for asking people if they have
a ticket is as they go through and present it at the
turnstile.  The Police had expended considerable
effort in the local press and the local newspapers.
When I say local I mean local to Liverpool as well as
Sheffield.  There had been local television, again
local in both cities, local radio talk-ins, and the
message was continuously hammered home, "If you do
not have a ticket do not come to this match".

Would you now describe to me how you saw this
turnstile area at about this time that we are talking
about between two and three o'clock? - A. Yes.

Take it in whatever steps is your recollection? - A.
The crowd outside the turnstiles, if I say from 2.30
onwards, was enlarging because up to that time in my
view it was reasonably normal.  From 2.30 onwards the
crowd was getting bigger outside the turnstiles.
There came a time when it was apparent that there was
a possibility of people becoming injured against the
exterior walls of the ground adjacent to the
tu r n s t i l e s .

     I saw a young child, when I say young ten or
twelve perhaps, a boy, being passed over the head of
the crowd.   He had apparently fainted.  I think some
Police Officers in fact thought he was dead, had been
killed in the crush, but I saw movement in him.   He
was past over the heads of supporters, presumably to
the sides.   It became apparent to me that we must do
something to stop that crowd getting bigger.   Again I
can't give you a precise time but I anticipate at
approximately quarter to three I attempted to form a
cordon of Police Officers and Police horses from a
point of what I would call the bridge parapet to the
corner shop.   I can perhaps indicate them on a plan.

Put a plan up.  It is much easier to see on the plan.
It is the plan of the ground? - A. Would you like me
to indicate on that plan, sir?




                               /Q. Yes please.
                                                                     99



                                                             W.   CREASER




    0. Yes, please. - A. The parapet of the bridge is there.
       These premises here, are a small sweet shop.^  I
       attempted at this time to form a cordon consisting of
B      police horses across there, perhaps five or six horses.
       In between the horses there were gaps, I was attempting
       to put police officers to fill all those gaps.

    0 . I don't know if you can remember, but do you recollect
         whether the perimeter gates, which would, ol course, be
         this side of that, were shut or open at tnat time/ - A.
         At that time they would be open, sir.   They had been
         closed in an attempt to stop the pressure m there.     At
         the time of this - again possibly twenty to three - and
         there were two or three officers behind those gates.
         The gates were in fact locked into the ground by means of
         a sliding stanchion - a bolt - which fitted into a nole
         in the tarmac and there were police officers^ also holding
         it but the pressure of the crowd became such that it was
         no longer possible to hold it, so that gate became open I
         would think about 2.40 pm.

D   0. Are we talking about the gates outside turnstiles A to G?
       Just point to the perimeter °ates.   That is the yard we
       are talking about? - A. That s right, sir.

    Q. In fact there are three gates there.      We can show you a
         picture of it, 254 and 258.   These are tne gates we are
         talking about? - A. That's right, sir.     The^ gates at
         the extreme right hand side were closed and tne gates
         either side of'the sign that says, "No through road -
         10 mph." would have been open, sir.    That is a bit of a
         fence rather than a gate, actually.

    Q.   Those two gates...   - A. Would have been opened.

    0.   The one that eventually noticed is the one nearest tne
         river, is that right? - A. That's right.

    Q. The middle one and the far left one, do you recollect
       whether those were shut at any point? - A. No, I believe
       they were open all the time, sir.

    0. As far as you remember? - A. Yes,     sir.

    0. You formed your line across?    - A. Yes,    sir.

              MR. KING:   Sir, before the witness continues, I
         know I couldn't and I am sure others didn't catch the
         timing which the officer gave a few moments ago before ne
         started to explain the gates.   I couldn't hear him.

              THE CORONER:   You are asking for the time when iie
         attempted to form the cordon, Hr. King?
                                                                i 00


                                                    R . W.   CREASER


        MR. KING:   Yes, sir, and then he continued. ^ You
   asked him questions about the gates and when they nad
   been shut and when they had been opened.

0.._     THE CORONER:     Let's try again? - A. At
    approximately - and I say approximately, and there could
   be an error of d I u s or minus five minutes - at
    approximately quarter to three, perhaps a shade later, I
    attempted to form a cordon of police horsas and police
    officers, the function of which was to stop more people
    ioining the rear of the crowd and the consequent crush
    waiting at the turnstiles.     Then I think you asked me,
    sir, in relation to the gates and the evidence I can give
    is that the right hand gates were closed.      They were _ ^
    physically closed by the locking mechanism on them, whicn
    was a bolt into the tarmac and in addition police
    officers were holding it.     The crowd outside were
    pushing against that and eventually they had to give way
    to the pressure.

Q. When you say they were closed, and      I think tnis is tne
   point   that Mr. King is after, were    they closed before you
   tried   to form the cordon or after?    -    A. Yes.   Those
   gates   would have been pushed open,    I    would estimate,
   perhaps 2.35/2.40-ish.    I tried to    form the cordon at
   2.45/2.50-ish.

0 . If we then get the sequence and let me just put it to you
    and see if I have understood it:  all the gates were open
    initially.   Then the gate at the right hand side was
    shut at about 2.40-ish? - A. I think it was shut earlier
    than that.   That was the time it was forced open, if I
    can use that expression.

0. What time would you say it was shut then? - A. I think it
   was shut for most of the time between 2.00 pm and 2.40.

0. Then at about 2.40-ish because of the pressure of the
   crowd it opened, that is what you are saying? - A. Yes.

Q. It was as a consequence of that you attempted to form the
   cordon with the horses? - A. Mo, sir, the matters were
   not connected whatsoever.

0. Was there any reason why an attempt was not made to re­
   shut the gate once it was opened? - A. Well, yes.           The
   lock, or the bolt, was broken from it and it was, I would
   guess, three-quarter inch square steel or wrougnt iron or
   whatever.   The pressure of the crowd had forced that to
   break so we would need equal force at the g r o u n d s i d e as
   there was on the outside of the ground to close it.           It
   just couldn't be done.
                                                                         IGI


                                                              R. W.   GREASER



    0 . YOu say forming the cordon had nothing whatever to do
       with the gates.   what precipitated your endeavour to
       build the cordon? - A. I could see that there were people
       joining the rear of the crowd of people waiting to enter
B      the turnstiles.   There was considerable pushing and
       jostling, not fighting but more than trifling social
       contact, if I can put it that way - pushing.    I wanted
       to stop more people joining that crowd.   There were
       people there urging these people to stop pushing^ and I
       thought that perhaps one way would be to stop others
       joining on to the back of that crowd to exacerbate the
       situation.

    0. When you said people were urging people to stop, wno were
       these who were doing the urging? - A. Well, it was
       certainly all the police officers present.              I can _
       remember in particular Inspector Purdy who at one time
       if I can refer to the photograph p r e s e n t l y _v i s i b l e , sir,
       where the two white vans are, there is a single railing
       which goes from the gates to the turnstiles.               Mr. Purdy
       was stood on that and gesticulating to the crowd,
       attempting to get them to go back.      There were police
D      officers on those turnstiles until - I would not like to
       put a time on it, but perhaps again twenty to three^- who
       were there for the purpose of searching people.                  They
       were obviously urging people not to push.

       There were one, perhaps two, police horses between that
       single railing and the larger railings to the left of
       them, that is' in front of turnstiles A to G , w h o were
       constantly urging the crowd not to p u s h . _ They were
       walking to and fro with their horses trying to break up
       and stop pushing.    I could see that a situation was
       developing there where there was a possibility of crusn
       injuries and so with a view to stopping the problem
       getting any bigger, that is when I attempted to form this
       cordon and in fact did form the cordon.

    0. How successful was it? - A. for a very snort space of ^
       time it was very successful, but people did breach it m
       that they would aim for the gaps between the horses and
       later I was to plug those with police officers.    I even
       saw one individual and I had great difficulty even
       believing what I saw, but I saw an individual go
       underneath a police horse, to quite deliberately g o u n d e r
       a police horse to breach the cordon, but it was having an
       effect.   Clearly the people behind the cordon were^
       concerned that they were being refused access to join tne
       throng to the turnstiles.   However, the tactic seemed to
       be working for a short period of time and when tae
       cordons were what I would call properly in place, shortly
       after that some of the concertina gates were opened, the
       pressure on the crowd outside the turnstiles eased and
       the need for the cordon had disappeared.   There was no




H
                                                                   102


                                                        R. V.   GREASER


      need to hold people back at that point because there was
      now no pressure on the turnstiles because the concertina
      gates had been opened.

B   o. So you then relaxed it, in fact? - A. I did in fact, yes.

    0. It is fair to say that although there were people dodging
       in between the cordon and you have mentioned somebody
       going under the horse, in fact the removal of it was a
       decision because the area had cleared as a result o~ ti
       concertina gate... - A. That's right, even tnougn_tnere
       were one or two individuals - and it would be a minority
       of people - who breached the cordon, it certainly acted
       as a sieve and slowed the rate of advancement to^ tne
       turnstiles, but once the gates had been opened tne need
       for a cordon was removed.

    0. I am just going to ask a couple more questions and then
       we will finish this evening.   I am g o i n g o a c k on myself
       at the moment.   You mentioned people trying to
       communicate with the crowd? - A. Yes.

       You mentioned you noticed people like Inspector Purdy and
    Q. police officers trying to communicate witn the crowd, did
       you see a police Land Rover? - A. I certainly did.     I
       can tell you the number of it, NHL 183 X.     It was driven
       by Police Constable Buxton and he was parked in tne area
       where the cordon was nearer to the sweet shop than tne
       bridge.   His particular    vehicle is fitted with a public
       address system.   He was    standing adjacent to, or ^
       standing inside, leaning out of this Land Rover venicle,
       holding the microphone, which is the micropnone to be
       used for the public address system and he was urging
       people not to push forward.

    o. You can't, I presume, remember     his words?    If you can
       remember tell me, but if   you     can't... - A. I would    be
       guessing.   I knew the gist of     what he was   saying,    ^((
        Please stop pushing forward.      There is plenty of time,
       that sort of thing.




                       0. I don't want you to give,




H
                                                                  103

                                           R.W. CREASER


    O. I don't want you to give me a quotation unless you are
       absblutely certain? - A. The gist or the context of what
       he was saying was asking people not to push.

    Q.   Do you remember by chance whether he or somebody else^
B        from that position called for the mounted Inspector au
         any point? — A. I don't recall that, no sir.

    Q. Can you remember whether you heard any announcements
       either from him or elsewhere, it does not matter where,
       about the possibility of postponement of the match?
       - A. Well the reason that I can be so precise about
       the Officer who was making these announcements was that
       I approached him.   I had some sort of fault on my personal
       radio in that it was receiving messages from the Control
       Room but I apparently could not transmit on it.           PT?Y
       to P.C. Buxton - my radio was a Phillips radio, Phillips Pi X.
       I knew that he would have a model called a Motorola HD600E.
       I knew that as a Community Constable it would be a personal
       issue one that he would ensure was in working order rather
       than one drawn from stock.   He would use it daily and would
       ensure it was in working order, so I approached him and
       asked him to radio to control with the suggestion that the
       kick-off or delay of the kick-off be considered.   I can t
        give this evidence but I know that certain events happened
        just on receipt of that message, the teams came out I have
        been subsequently told but I can't give that evidence.

    Q. No, you weren't in there so you don't know but you actually
       requested it? - A. Yes.

    Q. This was after you formed the cordon or before? - A. It
       was whilst the cordon was in place and he was^ behind the
       cordon.  As I say I have since been told at that point
       the teams came out so it might help the Court in thau
       that request would perhaps have been made at lQ-to-3 if
       that is the time the teams came out.

     Q. The teams came out a bit later than that,   6-minutes-to-3.
        - A. Well that is the time sir.

     Q. Or thereabouts, I think.   Did you hear any other loud
        speaker announcements? - A. Yes, Constable Ryan was using
        the public address system.

     Q. You heard? - A. I heard, again I can't quote the words
        he used and I have got to say that in the particular
        location outside Leppings Lane when there is a crowd,
        when there are people shouting, a small proportion or
        a proportion of whom have been drinking, half—a—dozen
        Police horses clomping away, that it would be very difficult
        to hear that.  The public address system used by Police
        Constable Buxton was louder and clearer than the one used
        by Police Constable Ryan who I could hear as a background
        noise.
                                                                104


                                            R.W. CREASER


    Q. So/in other words what you are saying is although you
       could hear him did you recognise his voice? - A. I could
       recognise the voice of P.C. Ryan.  He would be using the
       Sheffield Wednesday public address system.
B   Q. Would it be fair to say that you, because you recognised
       his voice were able to distinguish him, but strangers
       perhaps might not have heard him? - A. Yes, he has a
       fairly neutral accent.  It is not particularly broad
       Yorkshire or Sheffield or whatever.

    Q. In other words you are saying it is possible to understand
       him? - A. I think so, yes.

    Q. But you could not distinguish what he was saying, could you?
       - A* In fairness I probably was not listening*   I probably
       made a mental - I don't know - but I probably made a mental
       note:  "Oh good, somebody is doing something about that
       and then could put to the back of my mind what he was doing.

    Q. You heard him when you were in the vicinity of the Land
       Rover.  I am just trying to place you in relation to the
       loud speakers? - A. Yes, I can't say when I heard him.

    Q. But you were this side of the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.
       If I have created the impression that it was a sort of
       fairly sedate situation when you could comfortably listen
       to what was being said on loud speakers that was not the
       case.

    Q. No, you have not created that impression, not with me
       anyway.  What I am trying to ascertain is where you were
       when you heard P.C. Ryan's voice? - A. I was to-ing and
       fro-ing getting this cordon formed.

    Q. But were you within the perimeter gates or out of the
       perimeter gates? - A . I would be at that time between
       where the cordon was and tne turnstiles.

    Q. But you can't say whether you had actually crossed into
       the perimeter gate area? - A. I would not like to say,
       no sir.

             THE CORONER:  I think we will stop.  I am afraid
       we have got to carry on tomorrow.  Can you remember you
       remain on oath and if you would be good enough not to
       talk about the evidence.  I am sure you know.

              CHIEF INSP. CREASER:   Yes.

                 (The Inquest was adjourned until 10 a . m .
                          the following morning)




H
